Monthly Report
May 2014
Vol 66 
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 60431 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Postal address 
Postfach 10 06 02 60006 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) 
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 16 May 2014.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for  selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
 
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Labour market developments in the United States and the United Kingdom in the context 
of their central banks’ forward guidance strategy ...............................................................  17
Changes in nominal wages in the euro area in the light of macroeconomic adjustment 
processes ............................................................................................................................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  27
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................  28
Financing environment of small and medium- sized  enterprises in the euro area – concept 
and results of the SAFE survey ............................................................................................  38
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  42
Discrepancy between changes in net foreign assets and the cumulated financial account: 
an unsuitable indicator of wealth losses .............................................................................  48
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  53
The impact of weather conditions on gross domestic  product in the latter part of 2013 
and early part of 2014 ........................................................................................................  54
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  66
Fiscal developments in the euro area ..................................................................................  68Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................  16 •
Banks ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany .................................................................................................  56 •
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................  63 •
External sector ....................................................................................................................  70 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  79 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisionalpe Partly estimated
r Revised… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
4

The current economic situation 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
5

Overview
Upturn in Germany  
is broadening
Following a strengthening of global activity in 
2013, worldwide economic output appears to 
have expanded at a somewhat more subdued 
pace in the first quarter of 2014, with advanced 
economies and emerging markets alike experi-encing flattening growth rates. Significant fac-
tors dragging on emerging market growth in -
clude the Chinese economy’s sputtering start 
to the year and Russia’s economic woes, which were made distinctly worse by the Ukraine cri-
sis. Developments in the group of industrial 
countries were driven by various opposite spe-
cial factors. While an unusually harsh winter partly hampered production in the United 
States, substantial frontloading  effects in Japan 
ahead of the VAT hike on 1 April 2014 gave a 
big boost to domestic demand, and thus real gross domestic product (GDP). Growth in the 
euro area remained sluggish. The global econ-
omy looks set to at least maintain its modest rate of expansion during the current quarter, 
with the special factors in the industrial coun -
tries likely to reverse to a certain degree. In the United States, monthly indicators at the current end already point to a sharp upturn in growth. 
In Japan, by contrast, household demand is 
likely to contract substantially in a natural coun-
terswing to the frontloading surge and might 
even cause GDP to contract.
The financial markets were relatively robust in 
the first quarter of 2014 despite a raft of nega-
tive factors. Although the geopolitical tension 
surrounding the Ukraine crisis triggered volatile 
price movements in response to the daily news 
reports, there was nothing to suggest that the 
financial market as a whole had been gripped 
by heightened risk aversion, with the heavy 
price losses that this normally entails. Even the 
fresh bout of financial market turbulence which hit a number of emerging markets early in the year tailed off quite quickly. A batch of cyclical indicators which mostly delivered a downside 
shock up to the end of March likewise had only 
a muted impact on the markets. The financial 
markets appeared to be partly shielded from these shocks by the perception of a relatively robust underlying pace of global economic growth and by the persisting expansionary 
monetary policy stance of the major industrial 
countries (notwithstanding the US Federal Re -
serve’s gradual tapering of its asset purchases). 
Moreover, sentiment has brightened again of 
late. This tended to push down bond yields 
worldwide, while equity markets – with the 
 exception of Japan – posted gains. Govern -
ment bonds of European periphery countries, 
in particular, saw their yields narrow substan -
tially. Funding conditions for European enter -
prises in the capital market likewise improved further, which is underpinning the cyclical re
-
covery in the euro area. The strengthening euro exchange rate – which was particularly evident between  autumn 2012 and the end of 2013 – 
should therefore also be seen against the back-
drop of capital inflows in euro- area portfolio 
investment, which themselves contributed to the shrinking yields. All in all, the aggregate stimulus effect for the periphery countries is clearly positive. It would be short- sighted to 
focus solely on the euro’s exchange rate level 
as such an approach disregards other key fac -
tors. The euro’s position has otherwise even 
lost a little ground (-½%) on a weighted aver -
age since the beginning of the year.
In view of the modest economic recovery and 
expectations that the ongoing improvement 
will gradually nudge inflation rates higher, the 
ECB Governing Council has taken no further policy action so far this year. Hence, interest 
rates for the marginal lending facility and main 
refinancing operations have stood at 0.75% and 0.25% respectively since mid- November 
2013, while the interest rate on the deposit 
 facility has been 0.00% since mid-  July 2012.Global economy
Financial 
 marketsMonetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
6

Given capacity reserves, despite discernible 
signs of a recovery, and subdued monetary and 
credit dynamics, the ECB Governing Council 
underscored its intention to hold the key inter -
est rates at their present or lower levels for an 
extended period of time. The ongoing decline 
in inflationary pressure also prompted the 
Council at the beginning of April to signal its readiness to use unconventional instruments 
within its mandate in order to effectively coun-
ter potential risks arising from a protracted 
period of low inflation.
Economic activity in Germany has remained on 
a clear upward path since the start of 2014. 
The positive trajectory which domestic activity 
has been showing for some time was boosted 
of late by the fact that investment in machinery 
and equipment is now also picking up again following a prolonged phase of stagnation. These broadly based demand- side dynamics 
have been complemented over the past year by moderate but steady external impulses. So far, 
disruptive factors stemming from the inter -
national setting have not noticeably affected the upbeat sentiment of enterprises and con
-
sumers in Germany; instead, the upward mo -
mentum in the euro area has probably helped 
to improve the climate for investment, which was dogged for a long time by uncertainty. However, the quarter- on- quarter real GDP 
growth rate reported for the first quarter of 
2014, at 0.8% after seasonal and calendar ad-
justment, perceptibly exceeds the underlying cyclical thrust. The unusually warm and dry winter gave an extra boost, since it allowed outdoor economic activity to continue largely 
unabated.
Construction investment rose steeply overall, 
fuelled mainly by housing construction. Enter -
prises likewise increased their investment budgets. Investment in machinery and equip
-
ment typically picks up in the wake of an im -
proving economic outlook. This is especially 
true if aggregate capacity utilisation has already 
reached a normal level, as at the current end. 
Private consumption remained a major pillar of the cyclical upturn in the first three months of this year.
This is in keeping with the fact that banks’ lending to households increased distinctly in the reporting quarter. In addition to acceler
-
ated growth in consumer credit, loans to 
households (and therefore also to the domestic 
private sector as a whole) were again mainly 
driven by lending for residential construction, 
which benefited from the mild winter weather 
and ongoing favourable financing conditions. 
The dip in lending business with domestic non- 
financial corporations in the quarter under 
 review is likely to have been caused by several 
factors. First, there is much to suggest that, in 
light of firms’ past investment restraint, they 
have increasingly been using their earnings to 
pay down outstanding liabilities. Second, the 
importance of bank borrowing as a source of 
corporate financing has been experiencing a trend decline for years, while other forms of financing (especially internal financing) have gained ground. Third, there is likely to be a 
short time- lag before the pick- up in investment 
is reflected in higher credit demand.
Foreign trade has been pointing upwards for a 
year again now. It is, above all, the import side that has gained in dynamism recently, whereas German firms’ export activities – given moder -
ate global economic growth – are expanding at 
a subdued pace at present. The volume of goods exports and imports implies a funda
-
mentally dampening effect on the foreign trade surplus. To date, however, this has been coun-tered by perceptible gains in the terms of trade 
due to clearly declining prices for internation -
ally traded commodities and semi- finished 
products. Even so, in seasonally adjusted terms, 
both the trade balance and the current account 
balance decreased substantially in the first 
three months of 2014 compared with their 
heightened levels at the end of last year.
The economic upturn significantly boosted the 
labour market in the first part of 2014. Added 
to this were the positive effects of the mild German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
7

winter on sectors of the economy in which em-
ployment is usually subdued at this time of 
year. The rise in the number of people em -
ployed was chiefly attributable to additional 
regular jobs subject to social security contribu-
tions. Registered unemployment fell markedly 
on a seasonally adjusted basis during the first 
three months after showing a slight upward 
tendency in the previous two years. The fall in 
joblessness related both to short- term un -
employment covered by the statutory insur -
ance system and the longer-  term recipients of 
social welfare payments. Given low unemploy-
ment, the growing demand for labour in Ger -
many is encouraging people who were not pre-
viously available for work to join the labour 
market and is leading to continuing large- scale 
immigration, especially from EU countries. Re -
cruitment in trade and industry and business-  
related services is initially likely to remain as ex-
pansionary as it was in the first few months of this year.
Negotiated rates of pay rose much more 
sharply in the first three months of 2014 than 
in the previous quarter. This was due mainly to 
the retroactive component of the negotiated pay rise in the retail sector being paid at the 
beginning of this year as a lump sum in many 
cases. Judging by the wage bargaining out -
comes so far, the 2014 pay round is continuing 
last year’s robust rising trend. Taking account 
of industry- specific differences, the annualised 
agreed increase in negotiated pay averaged roughly 3%. At the beginning of April 2014, the Federal Cabinet adopted the draft Act  Reinforcing Collective Bargaining Autonomy 
(Tarif autonomiestärkungsgesetz) which pro
-
vides, inter alia, for the introduction of a gen-
eral statutory minimum wage of €8.50 an hour from January 2015. Very few groups of workers are exempt from this minimum wage.
Price trends in Germany are currently subject to 
opposing forces. While prices that are more 
sensitive to external influences are falling, 
prices that are determined to a greater extent 
by domestic factors are showing a marked in -crease. At the upstream stages of the economy, seasonally adjusted prices decreased further on the previous period, but to varying degrees. In terms of domestic producer prices, the decline was focused on the energy component and, to a lesser extent, on intermediate goods, whereas 
prices for capital goods remained unchanged and consumer goods prices rose markedly.  Although construction activity was extremely 
buoyant, prices for construction work con
-
tinued to expand only moderately. Consumer prices picked up again noticeably in the first 
quarter of 2014. Energy prices declined percep-tibly due to falling crude oil prices, the appreci-ation of the euro and the mild winter weather, 
albeit less sharply than in the final quarter of 
2013. Over the course of the quarter, there was 
a countermovement to the prior- year sharp 
food price increases, which had likewise been 
caused by weather conditions. By contrast, prices for services, in particular, went up per
-
ceptibly even though Easter fell in the second 
quarter this year, and the increase in rent levels accelerated. The prices of industrial goods also 
rose slightly more sharply than in the previous 
quarter despite the euro’s appreciation. The 
upswing in prices accelerated in April, with the 
falling of Easter in that month contributing to 
the year- on- year growth rate of 1.3% as meas-
ured by the consumer price index.
In the coming months, the economic upturn in 
Germany will be driven mainly by domestic 
growth. External impulses, by contrast, are 
likely to play a smaller role. In addition, the po-
tential for external disruptions has recently in -
creased significantly owing to the greater per -
ception of economic risks in a number of emer -
ging markets and the considerable geopolitical 
uncertainties in eastern Europe. Unless major 
unforeseen events unfold from this, the eco -
nomic upturn is nonetheless expected to con -
tinue. However, because the positive effect of 
the mild winter in the first quarter will statistic-
ally dampen the seasonally adjusted growth 
rate in the second quarter, GDP growth is likely to be comparatively low in the second quarter 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. Yet Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
8

this should not be interpreted as a slowdown 
in the underlying economic momentum.
Looking at Germany’s public finances, a roughly 
balanced general government budget and a 
perceptible drop in the debt ratio remain likely 
in the current year. In structural terms, too, the 
budget should be roughly balanced. On the one hand, the fiscal stance was slackened by 
various spending programmes agreed after the 
parliamentary elections. On the other hand, the positive economic setting, the ongoing 
 favourable financing conditions and the higher 
Bundesbank profit are, besides other factors, 
noticeably easing the pressure on public fi -
nances. The receding debt ratio is largely attrib-
utable to higher nominal GDP growth in the 
ratio’s denominator. In addition, government-  
owned bad banks are likely to continue to re -
duce their liabilities as financial assets are real-
ised. Despite distinct risks in the international 
environment, developments in public finances 
could be similar next year, although the new 
spending programmes will raise outgoings.
According to Germany’s updated stability pro -
gramme, the budget should be balanced or 
even slightly in surplus by 2018. With the Ger -
man government expecting cyclical factors to 
exert a negative impact until 2017, the struc -
tural surplus is put at ½% of GDP . The debt 
ratio is expected to drop to 65% by 2018. The deficit and debt targets look manageable, and 
it is to be welcomed that they are well within 
the European fiscal framework. The public fi -
nance situation in Germany is thus relatively 
good by international standards.
However, the fiscal policy stance is far from ambitious. The German government has no
-
ticeably relaxed its spending policy as com -
pared to previous plans. Although some of the 
envisaged higher spending will go into invest -
ment, education, childcare as well as research 
and development, the bulk of the extra ex -
penditure will be allocated to pensions. Thus 
the German government has promised to 
spend, on average, an additional sum of around €3½ billion a year on investment, education, 
childcare and on research and development in 
the current legislative period – in part to ease 
the burden on other levels of government. 
Spending on pensions, by contrast, is to be 
raised by around €8 billion a year in net terms (from mid-2014). This contrasts with the course pursued in Germany in recent years, as well as in other countries, which aims, first, to limit the 
foreseeable pressure on spending and social contribution rates as a result of demographic trends and, second, to promote labour force 
participation over early retirement. The overall 
loosening of German fiscal policy as outlined in 
the stability programme is currently enjoying uplift from an improving economic situation, 
the still favourable financing conditions and the relief brought about by the decline in the high 
debt ratio. The additional revenue automatic -
ally generated by bracket creep in income tax-ation between 2014 and 2018 is to be used to massage the budgetary situation, largely with-out compensating cutbacks.
Given the buoyant and unclouded macroeco -
nomic outlook, the persistently high level of government debt and the foreseeable demo
-
graphic challenges, more ambitious targets for the fiscal balance would certainly be appropri-
ate. The estimated structural surpluses of around ½% of GDP outlined in the stability 
programme may be questioned given that cyc-lical factors are actually unlikely to place undue strain on public finances in the current year. In fact, all the recent macroeconomic data in Ger -
many suggest that the cyclical situation is actu-
ally not unfavourable for public finances. The 
unadjusted fiscal development for the coming 
years outlined in the stability programme, 
showing a balanced budget or slight surpluses, 
would thus partly reflect favourable cyclical fac-
tors, and the structural budget position would, 
in fact, be balanced or slightly negative.
With a view to the national budget rules, too, 
it would be advisable to use the expected posi-
tive developments in the economy as a whole 
to rapidly bring down the remaining deficits at Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
9

all levels of government and to establish size-
able safety margins below the long- term deficit 
ceilings. In good times, this requires sizeable 
surpluses, and it would be imprudent to focus 
solely on achieving an unadjusted balanced 
budget. Safety margins are particularly import-
ant in view of the strict deficit ceilings that 
were enshrined in the German constitution to 
help ensure sound public finances. Past experi-
ence has shown that estimates of the structural budget position are subject to major uncer -
tainty and that negative macroeconomic shocks 
often trigger a fundamental reassessment of 
the growth outlook and an upward revision of 
structural deficits. The need for procyclical con-solidation in phases of economic weakness can 
be avoided by taking this uncertainty into ac -
count by factoring safety margins into the 
budget plans.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Following a strengthening of global activity in 
2013, growth in world economic output in the 
quarter ended has been fairly muted. For in -
stance, global industrial output in January-  
February was up by ¾% after seasonal adjust-
ment from the fourth quarter, in which it had 
grown by 1¼%. The volume of global trade 
even contracted slightly in these first two 
months. Decelerating overall growth was to be 
seen among the advanced economies and emerging markets alike. Significant factors 
dragging on emerging market growth notably 
include the Chinese economy’s bumpy start to 
the year and Russia’s economic problems, which have been clearly aggravated by the Ukraine crisis. Aggregate real gross domestic 
product (GDP) across the United States, Japan, the United Kingdom and the euro area rose by 
¼% after seasonal adjustment on the period following growth of just under ½% a period 
earlier. Their combined year- on- year growth re-
mained at 2%. Developments in the industrial 
countries as a group were driven by a number of countervailing one- off factors. For instance, 
the exceptionally harsh winter in the United States hampered production in some places, 
whereas substantial frontloading effects ahead of the VAT hike on 1 April 2014 sent domestic 
demand, and thus real GDP , sharply higher in 
Japan. Euro- area growth remained subdued.
These one- off factors are likely, in a sense, to 
switch directions during the current quarter. Monthly indicators at the current end are al
-
ready suggesting that the US economy is pick-
ing up considerably. By contrast, in Japan 
household demand is likely to plummet in re -
sponse to the frontloading effects and might even cause GDP to contract. However, eco
-
nomic developments in the major industrial countries are expected to be increasingly dic
-
tated by the underlying forces of economic 
growth in the second half of 2014. The cyclical recovery could gain strength in the euro area, 
in particular, as the year progresses. That would 
also benefit the global economy. In the short run, the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) for manufacturing and services available until April, with values well over the expansion 
threshold, are pointing to a continuation of the current growth path.
In its April World Economic Outlook (WEO), the 
IMF staff revised its global growth forecast 
down slightly from the January projection, 
to 3.6% in 2014 and 3.9% in 2015. The down-
ward revision is due to a somewhat less favour -
able outlook for the group of emerging market 
economies (EMEs). The projection for the Rus -
sian economy, for instance, was corrected. In 
the light of the Ukraine crisis, at the end of April 
the IMF staff revised its forecast for Russia 
downward again by a considerable margin. The WEO kept its estimate for China at +7.5% des-
pite the difficult start to the year; growth of 
+7.3% is expected for 2015. Among the indus-trialised countries, Japan’s GDP growth rate for 
2014 was subjected to a marked downward correction, whereas UK GDP growth was re
-
vised upwards considerably and, at 2.9%, now tops the G7 countries. The forecast for the euro area was also raised slightly, to +1.2%. Although real world trade will, according to the IMF, rise considerably more strongly in this year (+4.3%) 
and the next (+5.3%) than in 2013, its growth 
rates will still remain far below the (in some cases, double- digit) pre- crisis figures. The IMF 
continues to see several potentially growth-  
dampening factors as risks to its forecast. Given 
low rates of inflation in the advanced econ -
omies, especially the euro area, the Fund is em-phasising the risk of sliding into deflation if eco-
nomic performance falls short of expectations. 
One of the risks mentioned in connection with 
the EMEs is that of renewed turbulence in the 
financial markets. The Fund also noted that the 
Ukraine conflict had recently driven up geopol-
itical risks.Global growth 
fairly muted in winter 2014
One- off factors 
likely to reverse in springIMF global growth forecast reduced slightlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
11

Prices in the international commodity markets 
moved in different directions during the report-
ing period. Averaged during the winter months, the HWWI commodity price index for industrial 
countries (excluding energy), which is meas -
ured in US dollars, trod water at around its pre-
vious quarter’s level. However, the aggregate 
view obscures sharp rises in the prices of spe -
cific foodstuffs for which the harvest outlook 
has become gloomier under the impact of poor 
weather conditions. By contrast, however, in -
dustrial commodities became perceptibly 
cheaper, which is to be seen in connection with the fact that global manufacturing activity was 
not very buoyant at the start of the year. In April, commodity prices began to rise across the board. During the reporting period, the 
spot price of a barrel of Brent crude fluctuated 
mostly below the US$110 mark, largely con -
tinuing to move sideways. Concerns about a 
possible escalation of the geopolitical situation 
in eastern Europe had to be weighed against the prospect of expanded oil deliveries from Libya. As this report went to press, the spot 
price for a barrel of Brent was US$109½. In the 
light of the current geopolitical tensions, dis -
counts on oil futures widened somewhat as 
this report went to press.
In the absence of any stimuli, specifically from 
the crude oil market, consumer prices in the industrial countries only inched upward in the 
winter months. The year- on- year change in a 
relevant index narrowed from +1.3% in De -
cember 2013 to +1.1% in March. If energy and 
food are removed from the underlying basket 
of goods, consumer prices are continuing to 
tend upward slowly; core inflation based on this definition held steady at +1.3%. In the 
spring months, inflation could rebound some-
what more strongly, not least owing to the VAT hike in Japan but also to the rather low energy 
prices over the 2013 reference period. As be -
fore, no deflationary tendencies are evident in 
the group of advanced economies overall.
Selected emerging market 
economies
Economic activity in China flagged somewhat 
at the beginning of the year. According to an 
estimate presented by the National Bureau of 
Statistics of China, real year- on- year GDP 
growth was 7½% in the first quarter of the 
year, as against +7¾% in the final quarter of 
2013. The seasonally adjusted quarterly growth 
rate likewise slowed down. Less buoyant ex -
port business and waning investment growth appear to be the main reasons for the more moderate aggregate growth. In the past few weeks, the Chinese government has an
-
nounced several measures intended – in add -
ition to their primary purposes – to stimulate 
economic growth. These include a programme 
to create and renovate residential space for 
those previously living in shabby housing. These additional orders are likely to be coming not a 
moment too soon for the construction indus -
try, as the private housing market in China 
seems to be increasingly cooling markedly. The 
path of monetary policy has remained largely 
unchanged in the past few months; however, 
the central bank has permitted a moderate de-
preciation of the renminbi against the US dol -
lar. Consumer price movements stayed calm at 
the beginning of the year. Inflation averaged 
2.2% over the first four months of the year, 
slightly lower than for 2013 as a whole.Mixed price ten-
dencies in com-modity marketsConsumer price inflation in  industrial coun-tries remains 
subdued
China’s growth 
flaggingIndicators of global activity
12963036912
––––++++Year-on-year percentage change, seasonally adjusted
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
1 Weighted  average  of  81  selected  industrial  countries  and 
emerging  market  economies.  Source:  Centraal  Planbureau. 
2 Data from 48 industrial countries and emerging market eco-
nomies aggregated by the Bundesbank on the basis of  market 
exchange rates.
Deutsche BundesbankReal GDP 2Industrial output1
Jan-
FebDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
12

India’s economy does not appear to have 
picked up any steam at all in the reporting period. Real gross value added – India’s pre
-
ferred indicator of aggregate output – was up 
by 4¾% on the year in the fourth quarter of 2013, the last quarter for which quarterly  national accounts data are available. India’s 
economy has remained on this growth path, 
which is fairly flat by historical standards, since 
spring 2012. It is striking that investment has 
more or less stagnated since that quarter. One of the most pressing tasks facing the new gov-ernment to be formed following the parliamen-
tary elections in April and May will therefore 
probably be to improve the country’s invest -
ment  climate and initiate needed public invest-
ment projects, especially in infrastructure. Al -
though inflation in India has come down some-
what since the end of 2013, it is still high, at 
8.6% at last report.
There are no GDP figures yet for the quarter 
ended for Brazil, either. However, indicators seem to be suggesting that economic output 
has remained on a moderate growth path. In 
this connection, it is, at first glance, astonishing that the favourable labour market development persisted throughout the reporting period, with urban unemployment down to an all- time low 
of 5.2% on average over the 12 months lead-
ing up to March 2014. However, this is partly 
because the number of workers available to 
the Brazilian labour market is no longer grow-ing. Consumer price inflation remained at quite a high level at the beginning of the year. Aver -
age first- quarter inflation stood at 5.8%, well 
above the monetary policy target of 4.5%. The 
Brazilian central bank responded by incremen -
tally increasing its policy rate to 11% at the end of the reporting period.
Russia’s economy is currently exposed to strong 
headwinds. According to an initial report by 
the Russian Federal Statistics Service, year- on- 
year real GDP growth slowed considerably 
to 1% in the winter quarter. Although these re-
sults are not in yet, seasonally adjusted eco -
nomic output is even likely to have declined perceptibly from the last quarter of 2013; the 
current quarter seems to be showing a con -
tinuation of the recessionary tendencies. Ac -
cording to the indicators, the economy had al-
ready had a relatively weak start to the new 
year. The intensification of tensions in eastern 
Europe proved an important additional disrup-tive factor; it caused a considerable loss of con-
fidence in Russia among domestic and inter -
national investors. In addition, the central bank was compelled to raise its policy rate sharply in 
order to ease the downward pressure on the 
rouble. Despite these strains, which are likely to be weighing particularly on private  investment, 
Russia’s imports have so far hardly gone down. 
Even a relatively sharp decline in domestic de -
mand would probably have limited negative ripple effects on other economies, specifically the euro area (see page 20). Consumer price 
inflation increased markedly as of late, particu-
larly owing to the weak rouble. The inflation 
rate stood at 7.3% in April, 0.8 percentage 
point above its level at the end of 2013.India’s economy 
still on flat growth path
Real GDP in 
 Brazil pointing moderately  upwards
Ukraine conflict 
weighing heavily 
on Russian 
economyWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and sugar
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
9 May or 1 to 14 May 2014 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201460708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beveragesand sugarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
13

United States
The US economic recovery began to sputter at 
the beginning of the year. The stagnation of 
seasonally and price- adjusted GDP is seen by 
many observers as being connected with the exceptionally cold weather over much of the 
United States. However, one- off factors which 
have helped boost activity have been observed, 
too. The winter weather, for instance, acted as 
a partial economic stimulus through higher real 
expenditure on heating. In addition, the health-
care reform had a perceptible impact on the national accounts by increasing household spending on the relevant services. Despite weak goods consumption, household con
-
sumption growth overall was therefore on a 
par with the appreciable growth of the previ -
ous quarter. However, private gross fixed cap -
ital formation was reduced perceptibly. The re-
newed reduction in residential housing con -
struction investment is probably due not just to 
inclement weather; the preceding increases in 
long- term interest rates might also still have 
had after- effects. In addition, government de -
mand was reduced slightly  although the return 
of government activity to normal following the 
temporary federal government shutdown in 
the autumn probably had a marginally positive 
effect. In particular, though, foreign trade and 
inventory movements weighed heavily on ag -
gregate growth. These components had pro -
vided a considerable boost to GDP growth in the two preceding quarters. The poor eco
-
nomic performance in the winter therefore also 
needs to be seen against the backdrop of the 
favourable developments in the second half of last year. Since mid-2013, economic output has 
grown by an annualised average of 2¼%, 
which is also the median growth rate since the 
beginning of the upswing in the summer of 2009. The continuing improvement in the la
-
bour market is another indication that the re -
covery is fundamentally intact. The unemploy -
ment rate dropped to 6.3% in April, after hav-
ing been as high as 6.7% at end-2013. In the 
same month, CPI inflation climbed to 2.0%; 
excluding energy and food, it stood at 1.8%.One- off factors 
causing aggre-gate recovery  
to take a breakAggregate output in industrial countries*
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * The United States, euro area, United Kingdom and Ja-
pan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014100102104106108
100102104106108110112
102104106108
100102104106108
96981001021041062005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
JapanIndustrial countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
14

Japan
After rising only sluggishly in the second half of 
2013, Japan’s aggregate output in the first 
quarter of 2014 jumped strongly on the period 
(+1½%) after seasonal adjustment. This was 
due mainly to a considerable revival of domes-
tic demand in the run-  up to the VAT hike on 
1 April 2014. Against this background, house -
holds in particular expanded their real con -
sumer expenditure by a large margin. In add -
ition, private residential investment, which had 
already benefited from anticipatory demand in the previous quarters, surged even further. The 
sharp increase in enterprises’ expenditure on 
new machinery and equipment and construc -
tion could be a sign that the economy’s under -
lying growth path is likely to remain intact des-
pite the expected temporary drop in demand in  the spring. By contrast, public investment dropped considerably in the winter months; 
the government’s avowed intention is to help 
stabilise domestic demand by steering its ex -
penditure. Imports soared in the face of ex -
tremely lively domestic activity. However, since 
exports rose nearly as quickly, net trade only minimally curbed aggregate growth. The fact 
that enterprises passed most of the tax increase 
on to consumers is shown by the acceleration 
of consumer price inflation in the Tokyo metro-
politan area from 1.3% in March to 2.9% in 
April; no such national figures are available yet. 
Headline inflation in Japan stood at 1.6% in 
March, as it had in December 2013. In February and March the unemployment rate slid to 3.6%, 
matching the lowest level in the preceding 
business cycle.
United Kingdom
The UK economic upswing continued unabated in the winter quarter. As in the preceding quar -
ters, seasonally and price- adjusted GDP was up 
¾% from the preceding three- month period, 
resulting in year- on- year growth of just over 
3%. At the current rate of expansion, aggre -
gate output should return in spring to its peak of the first quarter of 2008. Excluding oil and 
gas production, which are in the midst of a 
trend decline, aggregate output has already 
reached its pre- crisis level; services output, 
which accounts for nearly four- fifths of total 
nominal gross value added, has even exceeded 
its previous cyclical peak by 2%. However, in -
dustry output (excluding construction) also 
continued to climb considerably in the first quarter, whereas construction output grew comparatively weakly. Inclement weather at the beginning of the year may have been a 
negative factor here. Looking at real retail sales, 
on the expenditure side household consump -
tion has probably remained a key engine of 
GDP growth. A role may have been played by 
the fact that price increases eroded consumers’ 
purchasing power less than before, with infla-
tion as measured by the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) dropping from 2.0% in 
December to 1.6% in March. The labour mar -
ket continued to show a positive development, too. The average unemployment rate over the 
January- March period was down to 6.8% fol -
lowing 7.2% over the preceding three- month 
period. It therefore dropped below the previ -
ous threshold of 7.0% that the Bank of England had for some time stressed in its forward guid-
ance on monetary policy. All in all, the experi -
ence gathered by the UK and US central banks 
demonstrates the difficulties inherent in fore -
casting the ups and downs of the unemploy -
ment rate (see box on pages 17 to 20).
New EU member states
In the new EU countries (EU-71) as a whole, the 
cyclical upturn continued apace in the first 
quarter of 2014. In four of the six EU-7 coun -
tries which have presented initial seasonally  adjusted GDP growth figures to date, period-  
on- period aggregate output has risen markedly 
to considerably, stagnating only in the Czech Economic 
 output up very 
sharply in run- up to VAT hike
Cyclical upswing 
stabilisedRecovery  making good progress
1 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
15

Republic and Romania. Industrial output, which 
was likewise pointing distinctly upwards in 
many countries, is likely to have once again 
 received positive stimulus from the euro area. 
The situation on the labour markets has tended 
to improve further. In this group of countries as a whole, the unemployment rate stood at 9.1% 
in the reporting period after seasonal adjust -
ment, compared with 10.0% a year earlier. The 
latest decline in aggregate EU-7 unemployment 
is attributable in particular measure to a strong 
revival of the Hungarian labour market, a large 
portion of which, however, is due to a public 
work programme. Aggregate EU-7 HICP infla -
tion, which had already reached an all- time low 
in the fourth quarter, fell further to 0.5% in the 
quarter ended. The figures for March ranged 
from -2.0% in Bulgaria and +0.6% in Poland to +1.3% in Romania.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Euro- area growth remained muted in the win-
ter months of 2014. According to initial esti -
mates, seasonally adjusted real GDP was ¼% 
higher than a period earlier, in which it had grown by the same rate. Aggregate output was up by 1% on the year, compared with +½% in autumn 2013. The significant annual 
output growth is due at least in part to a posi-
tive weather effect since the last winter was relatively mild following an extraordinarily 
harsh winter in 2013, which had led to above- average output losses in some member states.
In a region- by- region perspective, growth dif -
ferentials opened up again in the first quarter, 
with one- off factors playing a key role. Of the 
13 euro- area member states which have so far 
published initial seasonally adjusted GDP 
growth figures, six recorded an increase in GDP , 
one reported a stagnation of aggregate out -
put, and six countries saw contraction. The fastest growth was recorded by Germany 
(+¾%), with the favourable weather playing a 
role. France’s GDP growth held steady at its end-2013 level, with a considerable weather-  
related decline in energy production also hav -
ing been a factor.2 The Netherlands’ poor per -
formance (-1½%) is due in great measure to 
extremely weak domestic consumption and ex-ports of natural gas as a result of the mild tem-peratures. Among the periphery countries, only Spain saw positive growth (+½% after seasonal 
adjustment). Portuguese GDP fell by ¾%, and 
Italy’s economy contracted minimally. Cyprus 
remained in recession. Greece is not publishing 
any seasonally adjusted data until further no -
tice; real GDP contracted by 1% on the year 
following -2¼% in autumn 2013.
The latest leading indicators suggest that the 
euro- area recovery will continue in the spring. 
In the January- February period, new orders re-
ceived by industry, excluding large orders, were 
up by a seasonally adjusted 1% in nominal 
terms from the fourth quarter. Member states’ domestic orders (+1½%) rose faster than orders 
from abroad (+½%), as in the fourth quarter 
already. The industrial confidence indicator has 
been hovering above its long- term average 
since back at end-2013. The composite PMI, 
which reflects manufacturing and services out-
put, again rose strongly in April, indicating a 
good start to the second quarter of the year. In 
addition, consumer confidence has tended to improve perceptibly in the past few months,  finally surpassing its multi- year average again 
for the first time in quite a while.
The conflict in Ukraine and the sanctions im -
posed on Russia have not yet had any percep-
tible macroeconomic impact on the euro area. 
However, this could change if the conflict 
worsens significantly and further, tough sanc -Growth still 
muted in first quarter of 2014
Very mixed 
 picture among countriesUnderlying 
 cyclical tendency 
still pointing up-wards in spring
Cyclical risks 
owing to Ukraine crisis
2 The impact of the weather on energy production in 
France is particularly prominent in the statistics because many households use electricity for heating, the produc
-
tion of which is easier to pinpoint in terms of time than the 
use of fossil fuels for heating which is prevalent in other 
countries. It is also noteworthy in this context that energy production in France has relatively high value added owing 
to the high percentage of nuclear power; a decline will 
therefore have a greater impact on aggregate output than 
in other countries which use a larger percentage of im -
ported energy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
16

Labour market developments in the United States and 
the United Kingdom in the context of their central banks’ forward guidance strategy
With nominal short- term interest rates ap-
proaching the zero lower bound, both the 
US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England 
sought last year to steer investors’ short- 
term interest rate expectations, and thus 
also longer- term interest rates, by outlining the circumstances under which they would 
maintain their policy rates. As part of this 
state- contingent forward guidance strategy, 
both central banks stated that the normal-
isation of their interest rate policies would 
be conditional mainly on unemployment 
rate developments as an indicator of labour market slack. Both central banks announced specifi  c thresholds to which the unemploy-
ment rate would have to fall before they 
would raise their policy rates again.1 At the 
time, according to projections carried out 
by both central banks, unemployment was 
only supposed to reach these benchmarks over the medium term, keeping interest 
rate expectations low.
In December 2012, the Federal Open Mar-
ket Committee (FOMC) announced a spe-
cifi  c threshold of 6.5% which, according to 
the committee members’ projections, would be reached in the course of 2015.
2 
However, the unemployment rate slipped 
to 6.3% in April 2014, earlier than expected. 
The Bank of England announced a similar 
threshold of 7.0% in August 2013. At that 
time, its Monetary Policy Committee thought it unlikely that unemployment 
would fall to this level before 2016.3 How-
ever, the unemployment rate actually al-ready dropped below the 7% mark in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2014.
This highlights how diffi   cult it can be to ac-
curately predict the unemployment rate 
owing to various factors. Real gross domes-
tic product (GDP) growth is just one of the 
variables that affect the unemployment rate, and real GDP projections are them-selves subject to a high degree of uncer-tainty. In combination with anticipated productivity gains, defi  ned as output per 
employee, expectations of changes in em-
ployment can be derived from the eco-nomic growth projection. However, this does not provide suffi   cient information ei-
ther, because even if employment levels re-
main the same, the unemployment rate falls if the number of unemployed people 
decreases. This can happen, for instance, if people looking for work withdraw from the 
labour market as employment prospects are  generally gloomy – the “discouraged worker effect”. It is also possible that a 
larger number of employees retire and the 
positions that become vacant are taken by 
unemployed persons. While the fall in un-
employment in the fi  rst scenario refl  ects 
 unfavourable cyclical factors, the second 
scenario may be the result of a longer- term trend, specifi  cally the ageing of the popula-tion. In both cases, the drop in the number 
of unemployed persons is accompanied by 
a decrease in the labour force, which is the sum of unemployed and employed people, and which is used as the reference variable 
when calculating the unemployment rate. However, the participation rate, which is 
the labour force in relation to the working- age population, also falls as a result.
In addition to economic growth projec-tions, the unemployment rate is therefore 
also predicted using estimated future devel-
opments in productivity, the labour force participation rate and population fi  gures. Unlike population fi  gures, the other two factors are subject to both long- term and 
cyclical effects. Although it is diffi   cult to dis-
1 It was explicitly stated that this threshold was not an 
automatic trigger for a change in rates. The banks also specifi  ed additional factors which could lead to differ-
ent monetary policy decisions, placing particular em-
phasis on infl  ation and infl  ation expectations.2 See also the statement released by the Federal Open Market Committee on 12 December 2012.
3 See also Bank of England, Infl  ation Report, August 
2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
17

tinguish between these effects, particularly 
at the current end, it is nonetheless import-
ant to do so for making the projections. 
Some of the developments which may have 
contributed to the surprisingly rapid decline 
in unemployment in the United States and 
the United Kingdom are identifi  ed below. It turns out that the potential factors infl  uen-
cing the unemployment rate affected the 
national labour markets to varying degrees.
Between 2010 and 2012, the US economy 
generated moderate real GDP growth 
based on subdued increases in both prod-
uctivity and employment. In statistical 
terms, combined with an ongoing increase 
in the number of people of working age, 
the quite distinct decline in unemployment 
during this period was therefore more the 
result of a perceptible decrease in labour 
force participation.4 In December 2012, the 
FOMC then expected real GDP growth to accelerate signifi  cantly over the following three years, but also anticipated a slow-
down in the fall in the unemployment rate. Leaving aside a change of pace in product-ivity gains, this implies that the FOMC may 
have expected discouraged workers to re-
turn to the labour market and the participa-
tion rate to experience a slight cyclical re-
covery.5 However, in reality, the unemploy-
ment rate dropped considerably more sharply in the course of 2013 than the 
FOMC had expected, while real GDP growth 
4 According to US statistics, persons over the age of 
16 are classifi  ed as working- age. There is no upper age 
limit. The growth of the working- age population in 
this period is based largely on groups in higher age 
brackets.5 The July 2013 Monetary Policy Report suggested that 
the decline in labour force participation was likely to 
be due in part to discouraged workers withdrawing 
from the labour market. The Chairman of the Federal 
Open Market Committee also voiced this opinion at 
the press conference after the December 2012 monet-
ary policy meeting. At the time, Daly et al estimated 
that the decline in the unemployment rate could even 
stagnate temporarily if people who wished to work 
but had not yet looked for jobs joined the labour mar-
ket. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary Policy Report, July 2013, pp  4-5; 
M Daly, E Elias, B Hobijn and Ò Jordà (2012), Will the Jobless Rate Drop Take a Break?, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Letter, No 2012-37.Labour market indicators in the United States and the United Kingdom
Sources: Haver Analytics, Bureau of Labor Statistics and Office 
for  National  Statistics.  1 As  part  of  the  forward  guidance 
strategy. 2 Announcement of the forward guidance strategy. 
3 According to the Current Population Survey in the USA and the Labour Force Survey in the UK.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 201445678910Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
62636465666768
98100102104106108110112Threshold1
2000 = 100, log scale
Employment 3Labour participation rateUnemployment rateUnited States
United Kingdom
22
April
AprilApril
Average from 2000-07Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
18

was in line with expectations and the par-
ticipation rate continued to fall.
Against this backdrop, it is important to 
take a closer look at the driving forces be-
hind the persistent decline in the participa-
tion rate in the United States. There is no 
disputing the fact that, particularly as the 
baby boomer generation ages, cohorts with 
comparatively low participation rates have become more important, which partly ex-plains the decline in the aggregate labour force participation rate.
6 However, the ex-
tent to which the decline in the participa-tion rate of individual age and population groups refl  ects cyclical factors or longer- term trends has become a contentious 
issue.7 The aggregate participation rate had 
already peaked at the turn of the millen-
nium, leading to a discussion of the causes of its decline even prior to the recent reces-sion.
8 Aaronson et al (2006) predicted that 
the trend labour force participation rate would decrease to 64.0% in 2011 and 
to 63.7% and 63.3% in the following two 
years respectively by modelling the partici-
pation rate for specifi  c years. These turned 
out to be the exact fi  gures for the actual participation rate in 2012 and 2013, while 
the projection for 2011 was off by just one- tenth of a percentage point.
9 Another argu-
ment against strong cyclical effects is that, 
over the last few years, broader measures of underemployment, which also include people who are only loosely associated with the labour force – including discour-
aged workers – or who work part- time for fi  nancial reasons, have fallen to a similar ex-tent as the offi   cial unemployment rate.
The surprisingly sharp decline in unemploy-
ment in the United Kingdom after the an-
nouncement of the forward guidance strat-
egy is likely to have been primarily due to the persistent weakness of productivity growth. The Bank of England’s projection 
had rested on the key assumption that prod-uctivity growth would gradually pick up and 
soon resume its long- term, pre- crisis pace. However, aggregate output per employed person in the United Kingdom has only  increased slightly since the end of the  2008-09 recession, and still remains far 
below its pre- crisis level. The extent to which temporary factors play a role or the relevant trend path has fl  attened is a key element of 
what is known as the British productivity puzzle.
10 Although the UK economy ex-
panded fairly strongly in the last three quar-
ters, causing aggregate output in the fi  rst quarter of 2014 to exceed its level in the second quarter of 2013 by 2¼%, at the 
same time, employment increased at almost 
the same pace. There has therefore also 
hardly been any growth in aggregate output per person employed since mid-2013.
A striking feature of the UK labour market 
– especially in comparison to the US labour market – is the persistently strong growth in 
employment, which is the macroeconomic fl  ip side to the weak productivity perform-
ance. Employment reached a historical peak at the end of 2013, although aggregate out-put remained 1½% below its pre- crisis level. However, it should also be remembered that a large part of the growth is attributable to 
a rise in the number of self- employed per-sons, who recently accounted for around 
15% of the total employment fi  gure, 
2½ percentage points higher than on aver-
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The decline in labour 
force participation in the USA, Monthly Report, May 
2012, pp 19-21.
7 Based on observations across the individual US 
states, Erceg and Levin, for example, argue that the 
decline in the participation rate of middle- aged men is 
largely due to cyclical factors. On the other hand, 
 participation among this group of the population also shows a downward long- term trend. See Erceg, 
C J and Levin, A T, Labor Force Participation and Mon-
etary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession, IMF 
Working Paper WP/ 13/ 245.
8 For further information, see also J Bullard, The Rise 
and Fall of Labor Force Participation in the United 
States, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, First Quarter 2014, pp 1-12.
9 Based on a similar empirical model, Kudlyak also 
concluded that the actual participation rate deviates 
very little from its trend path. See S Aaronson, B Fallick, A Figura, J Pingle and W Wascher (2006), The Recent 
Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and Its Implications for Potential Labor Supply, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, Vol 37, No 1, pp 69-139; 
M Kudlyak, A Cohort Model of Labor Force Participa-
tion, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic 
Quarterly, First Quarter 2013, Vol 99, No 1, pp 25-43.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Weak productivity per-
formance in the United Kingdom in comparison with the United States, Monthly Report, April 2013, pp 28-30.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
19

tions are imposed. For one thing, the euro area 
is heavily dependent on energy imports from 
Russia: in 2013, the country supplied one-  
quarter of total imports of gas and crude oil 
from outside the euro area. However, Russia is much less important as a sales market: last year 
it accounted for just under 5% of the euro 
 area’s exports to the rest of the world.
Assuming, in a risk scenario, that the cyclical 
downturn currently in evidence in Russia leads 
to a crisis- like slump in domestic demand 
equivalent roughly to the 1998 Russian crisis, 
NiGEM simulations indicate that the impact on 
the real economy of the euro area as a whole 
would be extremely limited. This is predicated 
on the assumption of an uninterrupted energy 
supply, however. Should such a crisis escalate 
further and the energy supply be interrupted in whole or in part, the macroeconomic impact in 
the euro area would, however, most likely be 
much greater (the severity varying greatly from 
one country to another). Owing to a lack of alternative transportation capacity, amongst 
other reasons, the euro area would not be able 
to compensate for a stoppage of gas imports 
from Russia in the short run; were it to last for 
some time, the economic impact would be 
considerably more difficult to deal with than if Russian oil exports were to plummet. Although the latter would cause prices to swing wildly in the crude oil markets, which would entail pur -
chasing power losses not only in the euro area but also in non- European oil- consuming coun-
tries, a supply crisis could probably be averted 
thanks to considerable unused production cap-acity in other oil- exporting countries and to the 
existence of, in some cases, considerable stra -
tegic reserves in the major industrial countries.
In the quarter ended, euro-  area GDP growth 
received a positive boost from construction; owing to the aforementioned mild winter  weather, construction output in January-  
February was up by no less than 2¾%, after 
seasonal adjustment, from the preceding three- Perceptible 
 impetus from construction but only marginal contribution by industrial sector in winter quarterage between 2000 and 2007. The ratio of 
part- time work also expanded by 1½ per-
centage points compared to its long- term 
average, reaching 27%. The proportion of 
people searching unsuccessfully for full- time 
work has almost doubled. In light of these 
employment gains, labour market participa-tion has largely remained stable over the last 
few years and has recently even marginally 
exceeded its average pre- crisis level. Al-
though demographic trends are increasingly playing a role in the pattern of the participa-tion rate, the generation of baby boomers is younger than in the United States, such that the importance of ageing effects is increas-
ing only gradually.11 Increased participation 
by those aged 35-64, in particular, has re-
cently made a major contribution to the ex-pansion of the aggregate participation rate. 
These developments may be institutionally 
driven to a certain extent. A number of la-
bour market policy measures over the past 
few years (eg social benefi  t reforms) may 
have created incentives for increased labour force participation in the United Kingdom.As the fairly different situations in the United States and the United Kingdom 
show, the unemployment rate is infl  uenced by a variety of factors and is not necessarily 
easy to forecast. Moreover, there does not 
appear to be a clear consensus on the ex-
tent to which the unemployment rate suc-
cessfully captures the conditions on the la-
bour market. As the unemployment rates 
approached the threshold values, both the 
Federal Reserve and the Bank of England 
adjusted their monetary policy communica-tion and now attach less importance to this indicator.
12
11 See V Madouros (2006), Projections of the UK la-
bour force: 2006 to 2020, Offi   ce for National Statistics 
Feature, pp 13-27.12 See also Bank of England, Infl  ation Report, February 
2014 and the Federal Open Market Committee’s state-ment of 19 March 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
20

month period. However, industrial output (ex -
cluding construction) grew more slowly in the 
first quarter than previously, at ¼% quarter- on- 
quarter. The weather- related 4% drop in en -
ergy production needs to be taken into account 
here. Seen in isolation, manufacturing output 
grew by ¾%. Broken down by sector, manu -
facturers of durables saw the strongest quar -
terly output growth (+2½%), followed by pro-
ducers of intermediate goods (+1%) and those 
of capital goods and non- durable consumer 
goods (each +¾%).
On the expenditure side, gross fixed capital for -
mation appears to have once again generated a 
positive contribution to growth. This is indi -
cated not only by the distinct increase in con -
struction output but also by rapid growth in the 
manufacture of machinery and equipment. It is 
fitting that, according to the March-  April 2014 
survey on behalf of the European Commission, industrial firms are planning to expand their in-
vestment by 5% in real terms this year, after cutting their investment budgets by 2% last 
year. Household consumption growth appears 
to have been pointing at least slightly upwards during the reporting period, with real retail sales 
(excluding motor vehicles and fuels) up in the 
first quarter by ¾%, after seasonal adjustment, 
on the quarter and 1% on the year. However, by contrast, new car registrations were down 
by 2½% on the quarter, yet still up by 5% on 
the year. At the beginning of the year, foreign 
trade, in purely arithmetical terms, seems to 
have provided virtually no impetus for growth. 
At all events, growth in nominal exports of 
goods to non- euro- area countries in the Janu -
ary- February period compared to the autumn 
quarter (+¼% after seasonal adjustment) was 
similarly muted as that of the value of imports.
In the labour market, which experience shows 
generally perceptibly lags the production cycle, 
initial tendencies towards an improvement 
were visible in the fourth quarter of 2013 and 
first quarter of 2014. In the fourth quarter of 
2013 – the most recent quarter for which data are available – the number of persons in work Domestic 
 demand more buoyant
Slight improve-
ment in the  labour marketGermany
2101
––+
–3–2–10+1
2101
––+Growth tendencies in the euro area
France
Sources: national statistics, Eurostat and the ECB.
Deutsche BundesbankItaly
Spain
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Real GDP, seasonally adjusted, 
quarter-on-quarter percentage change 
32101
–––+
–4–3–2–10+1+2Euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
21

Changes in nominal wages in the euro area in the light 
of macroeconomic adjustment processes
Given the sharp year- on- year deceleration 
in euro- area consumer price infl  ation in re-
cent months (down to 0.7% as this report 
went to press) and the generally somewhat 
sluggish economic recovery, public debate 
lately has been dominated by fears of a 
gradual drift into defl  ationary territory. Such discussion is fuelled by concerns that nega-tive rates of price change, if not singular in 
nature but instead continuous and spread across several successive months, might lead to a self- reinforcing downward spiral that would be hard to counteract using 
economic stabilising measures.
While there is currently little evidence to suggest that the infl  ation rate might drop 
to less than zero, the question still arises as to the exact circumstances – be they a cur-rency appreciation or adjustment processes aimed at correcting macroeconomic imbal-ances – under which falling prices could, if 
at all, give rise to a protracted and poten-
tially self- reinforcing downward spiral. 
Much like infl  ation, which, at the end of the day, can only be kept alive through a com-bination of climbing prices and wages, de-
fl  ation, too, is only made possible by the 
simultaneous interplay of falling prices and 
wages. Nominal wages need to decline 
sharply and on a long- term basis if a broad- 
based fall in prices is to be sustained for a 
prolonged period of time, otherwise it will 
soon grind to a halt.
In the euro area as a whole, hourly wage 
growth has slowed distinctly since the onset 
of the global fi  nancial and economic crisis. This is demonstrated by the 2013 growth fi  gure which, at 1.9%, was down from an average level of 2.9% over the 2006-2008 period.
1 Overall, aggregate hourly 
wages in the euro area climbed by 11.5% 
between 2008 and 2013. The strongest in-
creases were recorded in Austria, Finland, Slovakia and Estonia, although Germany 
also saw pay rises that came in above the 
euro- area average. Particularly in those 
countries hit hardest by the crisis, wage set-
ting in recent years has responded to the ad-
justment process originally triggered by the 
global fi  nancial and economic crisis and sub-
sequently intensifi  ed by the sovereign debt 
crisis, a process which was accompanied by a marked rise in unemployment. In these cri-
sis- stricken countries, wage growth dimin-
ished substantially or dipped at least briefl  y 
into negative territory in some instances.
One of the points raised in the current de-
bate surrounding defl  ationary risks in the 
euro area is the strong possibility of adjust-
ment processes in euro- area periphery 
countries generating defl  ationary pressure which, given the rather low infl  ation rates prevailing in most of the other member 
states, might send the entire currency area down a defl  ationary path.
2 Such contagion 
would, however, presuppose a very pro-
nounced decline in prices in the crisis coun-
tries, not least because the six countries in 
question (Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, 
Greece and Cyprus) only produce one third 
of euro- area GDP , and at the same time make up just 37% of the currency area’s consumer basket. At present, persistently 
falling price levels as measured by the Har-
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) can, however, only be observed in Greece and Cyprus. In March, Spain and Portugal 
saw a year- on- year decline in consumer 
prices of 0.2% and 0.4% respectively, but in the following month this fi  gure had already narrowed in the case of Portugal and, in the case of Spain, reverted to a small uptick. In 
1 2008 counts as a crisis year if measured in terms of 
its output growth path; however, wage growth, which 
usually only exhibits a lagged response to cyclical 
changes, was still relatively high for this period.2 See IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
22

April, Italy and Ireland had infl  ation rates of 
0.5% and 0.4% respectively. The low infl  a-
tion rates observed in the periphery coun-
tries is not only attributable to country- 
specifi  c factors but also to lower commod-
ity prices and the appreciation of the euro.
Moreover, contractionary stimuli affecting 
prices in these countries would have to be 
sustained by shrinking wages. But here, 
too, there is divergence. In Greece, hourly 
wages and salaries across all sectors of the economy have contracted since 2010 by an annual average of 4.9% (18.2% in cumula-
tive terms), far outstripping the concomi-
tant fall in prices. As regards Cyprus, which was only drawn into the crisis at a relatively late stage, this process of wage contraction did not set in until 2012. Ireland also experi-
enced declines; these were instrumental in 
driving hourly wages in 2013 down 5.1% from where they had stood in 2009. In 
Spain, hourly wages and salaries have been static since 2009, lingering at the high level 
they had previously attained; in Portugal, 
they were 0.6% lower in 2013 than in 2009. By contrast, wage growth in Italy continued apace, chalking up a solid 6.0% in the fi  ve 
years up to 2013. That said, individual an-
nual growth fi  gures since 2011 have all been smaller than those achieved in the 
three preceding years.Gross hourly wages
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13in €
99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 201351015202530
51015202530
10152025
101520255101510152025
51015101520 Italy Spain
CyprusGreece
GermanyIrelandPortugal
Euro areaTotal Private sector Public sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
23

In this context, it should be borne in mind 
that aggregate wage developments in the periphery countries in recent years have been greatly infl  uenced by administrative 
measures and agreements concluded be-
tween public sector wage bargainers (ie pay 
cuts, in particular reductions to Christmas 
bonuses, wage freezes or extended working 
hours without additional pay).3 The largest 
decline in hourly wages paid to public sector 
employees has occurred in Greece, where 
pay has fallen by 27.0% since peaking in 
2009. Sharp reductions from their respective 
peaks were also seen in Ireland (-12.0%), 
 Cyprus (-9.8%) and Spain (-10.0%). In Portu-gal, the strong public sector wage cuts that 
came into force in 2012 had to be thrown 
overboard almost in their entirety after being 
rejected by the Constitutional Court. Even 
so, Portuguese public sector wages have still dropped by 6.3% since 2010. In Italy, gross 
public sector wages have stagnated since 2010. As seen elsewhere, this stands in 
marked contrast to developments in the pri-vate sector. Governments in the crisis coun-tries felt compelled to take these measures, partly on account of the pressure emanating 
from the adjustment programmes agreed 
with the IMF, the European Commission and the ECB, and partly of their own accord, the 
aim being to reduce what were, in most cases, ballooning public defi  cits and to re-
gain market confi  dence in the soundness of their public fi  nances.
Yet the sometimes substantial corrections made to public sector wages and salaries were opportune not just because of the strong need to consolidate public fi  nances but also because – with the exception of 
Portugal – remuneration in this sector in the years prior to the crisis had outpaced salaries 
in the private sector. In addition, the wage 
advantage enjoyed by the public sector over 
the private sector prior to the onset of the 
crisis was much more pronounced in all the crisis countries than across the euro area on 
average. Hourly wages in the public sector in Cyprus in 2008 were 82% higher than the average rate paid in that country’s economy as a whole (including the public sector). The difference was also very pronounced in Italy, 
Portugal and Greece, at 40%, 45% and 42% 
respectively. Ireland and Spain told a similar story, with public sector workers being paid well above the mean amount for the coun-
try as a whole.
4 At the current end, the dif-
ference in remuneration between the two 
sectors is no longer as pronounced as it was 
before the crisis, but it is still much higher 
than in Germany, say. Government sector wage reductions have not just contributed to consolidating public fi  nances. They are 
also important from a macroeconomic per-
spective inasmuch as a relative fall in public sector wage levels increases the incentive to 
seek employment in the private sector, and 
public sector wage developments are likely 
to act as a signal for wage settlements in 
other sectors.
In the private realm, meaning the economy 
as a whole excluding the public sector, aver-
age hourly wages have only decreased markedly in Greece and Cyprus in recent 
years, albeit to a much smaller degree than 
in the public sector. In the other periphery countries, hourly remuneration in the pri-vate sector has either virtually stagnated 
(Ireland, Portugal) or increased slightly in the period since 2009 (Italy, Spain). Here, how-ever, we are talking about aggregated data 
which also comprise composition effects. 
3 Here, the public sector consists of the following sec-
tors: public administration, defence and compulsory 
social security; education; human health and social 
work activities in accordance with the NACE 2 Classifi  -cation.
4 In this context, it is frequently remarked that the 
higher average remuneration of public sector employ-
ees has to do with their level of education and train-
ing. However, a recent study by the European Commis-sion found that throughout the public sector there are 
many positions where wages are supplemented by 
substantial premiums, even if other relevant factors are 
taken into account. See European Commission, 
Directorate- General for Economic and Financial Affairs 
(2014), Government wages and labour market out-
comes, Occasional Paper No 190.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
24

Specifi  cally, a disproportionately high num-
ber of employees with a low level of educa-
tion and a correspondingly low wage were 
laid off during the crisis.5 The increased pro-
portion of employees earning a higher 
hourly wage generated a slight hike in the 
average wage level. Furthermore, microdata- based studies indicate that any pay cuts out-side the government sector were mainly im-
plemented in the form of lower additional 
payments (such as ad hoc bonuses, Christ-
mas bonuses or holiday pay). The research 
also found that any lowering of the hourly 
pay rate mostly only affected new staff, while existing employees were able to at least maintain their wage levels.
6 So al-
though no full rigidity is discernible with re-spect to wage cuts, in most of the countries concerned the necessary corrections to cost competitiveness tend to be implemented by way of wage freezes.
However, since the bulk of the public sector 
pay cuts have now come to an end, in 
 future hourly wage patterns in the broader 
economies of these countries are likely to 
move more in step with developments in 
the private sector once again. The majority 
of the periphery countries are now on a moderate recovery path and their labour markets have stabilised since mid-2013. Nevertheless, the persistent high level of 
unemployment prevailing in these countries means that wage momentum is likely to re-
main muted for the time being. Of the six 
aforementioned periphery countries, the European Commission’s latest forecast ex-pects Greece and Cyprus to register con-
tractions in labour income per employee7 in 
the order of 3% in the course of this year. In 
Portugal, it will probably decrease by less 
than 1%, while Italy, Spain and Ireland are 
expected to see further moderate increases. 
Looking at next year, the Commission ex-pects labour income in Greece to stabilise 
at a low level and anticipates growth of be-
tween ¼% (Spain) and 1¼% (Italy) in the remaining fi  ve countries. Parallel to this, Germany and a number of other euro- area 
countries with a relatively buoyant econ-
omy show signs of a continued strengthen-
ing in wage growth. Assessing the euro 
area as a whole, the Commission’s forecast 
predicts that labour income per employee 
could rise by 1½% this year and by a further 2% in 2015.
Overall, it may be concluded that most of 
the periphery countries have achieved cost 
competitiveness improvements over the 
past few years, with some economies taking substantial steps forward. These corrections 
have been instrumented fi  rst and foremost 
through wage freezes in the trade and in-
dustry sectors and only in a few exceptional 
cases by means of private sector pay cuts; 
hence, this group of countries was spared a 
defl  ationary wage- price spiral which could have spilled over to the rest of the euro area. And, as things stand currently, it is highly unlikely to happen. Nevertheless, 
given the prevailing very high level of under-employment, the current course of wage re-
straint evident in the crisis countries needs 
to be of a lasting nature so as to lower the 
employment threshold and to help reduce the high rate of unemployment through 
more employment- intensive growth.
5 See Banco de Espana, Analysis of composition ef-
fects on wage behaviour, Economic Bulletin, February 
2014.6 See D Dias, C Robalo Marques and F Martins (2013), Wage rigidity and employment adjustment at the fi  rm 
level: evidence from survey data, Labour Economics, Vol 23, pp 40-49; as well as A Doris, D O’Neill and O Sweetman (2013), Wage Flexibility and the Great  Recession: The Response of the Irish Labour Market, 
NUI, Maynooth, Working Paper WP N244-13.
7 As the international institutions do not publish any 
forecasts regarding hourly wages and salaries, it seems 
reasonable to use projections of labour income per employee as a substitute reference, taking into ac-
count not just pay but also employer social insurance 
contributions. This approach also seems justifi  ed given that experience has shown that the number of work-
ing hours provided by an individual employee on a year- to- year basis does not change much, save for 
phases of strong economic turnarounds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
25

in the euro area increased marginally. Whereas 
Italy and the Netherlands each saw job losses 
of ½%, employment grew at rates of between 
½% and ¾% in Spain, Ireland and Portugal. 
France saw (minimal) net creation of new jobs 
for the first time in two years, and the positive employment trend continued in Germany. Sea-
sonally adjusted unemployment in the euro area continued to decline slightly in the first quarter and was 360,000 lower than a year 
earlier. The unemployment rate, at 11.8%, was 0.2 percentage point below its cyclical peak of 2013.
In the first three months of 2014, euro- area 
consumer prices went back up slightly, yet an-
nual HICP inflation continued its decline, to +0.7%. Consumer prices were up by a slight 
0.2% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment 
following a minimal decline of 0.1% in the 
fourth quarter of 2013. One major factor in the 
sign change was that prices for unprocessed food and energy did not fall any further. An
-
other was that services prices picked up per -
ceptibly. On the other hand, the prices of in -dustrial goods (excluding energy) continued to rise at a subdued pace. The price data for April 
are also showing a flat overall tendency. An -
nual HICP inflation, at +0.7%, was no higher 
than the average of the first quarter, and given the pattern exhibited over the past few months, 
low HICP inflation rates may be expected to 
continue in the near future.
The low inflation rates in the euro area are at-
tributable to common factors such as the eu -
ro’s appreciation, which has made itself felt 
particularly in the prices of industrial goods 
and energy, and the favourable food price ten-
dencies, which can be regarded as a return to 
normal following the sharp rises in the past 
few years. In addition, there are country-  
specific factors in connection with efforts to overcome the debt and structural crises and 
which put pressure on wages and prices. The 
significance and extent of wage adjustment in 
the crisis countries and its implications for price tendencies are explained in the box on 
pages 22 to 25.Still only moder-
ate increase in consumer pricesCommon and country- specific factorsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
26

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In view of the modest economic recovery and 
expectations that the ongoing improvement 
will gradually push inflation rates higher, the ECB Governing Council has taken no further 
policy action so far this year. The interest rates 
on the marginal lending facility and main refi -
nancing operations have thus stood at 0.75% 
and 0.25% respectively since mid- November 
2013, while the interest rate on the deposit 
 facility has been 0.00% since mid-  July 2012.
The ECB Governing Council has underscored its 
intention to keep key interest rates at their 
present or lower levels for an extended period 
of time, in the light of its assessment that high 
levels of unutilised capacity and the subdued 
monetary and credit dynamics will curb the in-flation outlook over the medium term. The on-
going decline in inflationary pressure also 
prompted the Governing Council at the begin-ning of April to signal that, within the scope of its mandate, it would also resort to unconven-
tional instruments in order to cope effectively 
with potential risks arising from a too pro -
longed period of low inflation. These risks in particular include the danger of longer- term 
inflation expectations, which are currently still 
close to 2%, adjusting downwards as the low- inflation period continues.
The Eurosystem did not purchase any add -
itional securities as part of monetary policy-  
based purchase programmes in the period 
under review. In particular, there were still no 
outright monetary transactions (OMT). The Eu-
rosystem’s holdings of securities acquired 
under the Securities Market Programme (SMP), 
which was terminated in 2012, and the two covered bond purchase programmes (CBPP), which have likewise been discontinued, are 
 diminishing over time as instruments reach ma-
turity.
The outstanding refinancing volume declined 
further in the period under review as a result of 
continued voluntary repayments of the funds 
provided in the three- year tenders. Although re-
payments in February were initially modest, March, in particular, saw banks pay back size
-
able volumes of funds, which is likely to have been connected to balance sheet reporting at 
the end of the quarter and the residual maturity 
of the second three- year tender falling to less 
than a year.1 Banks continued to make relatively 
large repayments in April, too, causing overall 
excess liquidity to drop further by the end of the month and dip below the €100 billion threshold 
for the first time since August 2011. This was Key interest 
rates still at   all-time low
ECB Governing 
Council signal-ling readiness  
to take further 
monetary policy 
measures
Still no OMT 
bond purchasesOverall down-ward trend in refinancing  volume and ex-
cess liquidity …
Money market interest rates
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. • Average 1 to 14 May 2014.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rate
1 As the residual maturity has fallen to below one year, the 
liquidity no longer counts towards the net stable funding 
ratio (NSFR), which some market participants are already 
striving to comply with before it officially comes into force.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
27

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the three reserve maintenance periods 
from 15 January to 8 April 2014, liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors 
declined from an average of €492 billion in the January- February period to €468 billion in the March- April period. The autonomous 
factors in the euro area were very volatile, 
ranging between €451 billion and €512 bil-
lion. While government deposits increased 
by €12.6 billion on balance, a reduced over-
all amount of banknotes in circulation (-€9.5 billion on balance) and liquidity- 
providing  changes in the remaining autono-mous factors resulted in a lower calculated need for central bank liquidity among euro- area c redit institutions (see table below). In addition, this effect was enhanced by a net 
decline of €0.3 billion in the minimum re-
serve requirement.The outstanding tender volume (excluding liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning operations) declined from €672 billion to €627 billion 
within the period under review, primarily re-fl  ecting demand in the main refi  nancing op-
erations and early repayments of the two 
three- year tenders. The average volume of 
main refi  nancing operations of around 
€100 billion tended to increase towards the end of the month, and even hit €121 billion in the March- April period ahead of the end 
of the quarter. Early repayments of the li-quidity provided in the three- year tenders 
added up to €58.3 billion in total over the 
three reserve periods, with the willingness 
of banks to repay at its highest between the 
middle and the end of March 2014. This could have been due, amongst others, to 
the end- of- quarter reporting date.
Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2014
15 Jan to
11 Feb12 Feb to11 Mar12 Mar to8 Apr
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) + 16.1 –  0.3 –  6.3
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 22.2 +  1.6 +  8.0
3 Net foreign assets
2 – 22.4 +  0.1 +  8.5
4 Other factors 2 + 37.6 +  4.7 +  7.4
Total +  9.1 +  6.1 + 17.6
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations – 23.9 – 13.6 + 13.6
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 15.7 –  6.0 – 35.8
(c) Other operations – 19.4 – 14.1 –  2.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0 +  0.4
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 18.0 + 12.6 +  0.3
Total – 41.0 – 21.1 – 23.5
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 32.1 – 14.9 –  5.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.4 +  0.8 –  0.7
1 For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
28

In the case of the two Covered Bond Pur-
chase Programmes, CBPP1 and CBPP2, bal-
ance sheet holdings fell by €3.9 billion to 
€37.8 billion and by €0.9 billion to €14.5 
billion, respectively, in the period under re-
view. The balance sheet holdings of secur-
ities purchased as part of the Securities 
Markets Programme (SMP) declined by €4.9 
billion to €172.5 billion owing to securities 
reaching maturity and quarterly revalu-ations. Furthermore, liquidity- absorbing 
fi  ne- tuning operations were also conducted 
in the reporting period to neutralise the li-
quidity effect of securities being purchased under the SMP . Two cases of underbidding occurred towards the end of January, which 
further underlined the heightened prefer-
ence for liquidity on the part of credit insti-tutions before the end of the month.
From the January- February 2014 period, ex-
cess liquidity declined by an average of €34 
billion to €121 billion in the March- April period, producing fairly large, short- term fl  uctuations which were often caused by changes in the autonomous factors, but were also the result of higher repayments of liquidity provided in the three- year ten-
ders, more volatile demand for tenders and underbidding in the SMP liquidity- absorbing tenders (see chart above). At the end of the 
reporting period, excess liquidity ap-
proached the €100 billion mark.
At the beginning of the January- February maintenance period, a marked decline in excess liquidity meant that both the un-secured overnight rate EONIA and the GC Pooling rate for secured overnight money 
stood at distinctly elevated levels (with rates 
of up to 0.36%) for some days, clearly above the main refi  nancing rate at times (see chart overleaf). Excess liquidity in-
creased again signifi  cantly by €46 billion to €171 billion in the following week as credit 
institutions adjusted their bidding behav-Liquidity provision and use
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Securities Markets Programme (SMP), First Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP1), 
Second Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP2). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the de-
posit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations (including SMP absorptions)
Deposit facility
40030020010001002003004005006007008009001,000
––––++++++++++
January February March April May
2014Deposits on current accounts above the required reservesThree-month tenders
Three-year tendersPurchase programmes 1Marginal lending facility
Reserve period tenders
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
29

iour and overnight money market rates de-
clined and remained relatively constant over a prolonged period of time (until the end of the quarter at the end of March), although this period was characterised by large fl  uc-tuations and a reduction in excess liquidity. 
Besides the regular increases at the end of 
the month, EONIA stood at 0.16%/ 0.17% for the most part, and the secured over-night rate on GC Pooling was a couple of 
basis points below that. The fact that over-night rates were not very volatile suggested 
that credit institutions had gradually be-come accustomed to the lower and more 
volatile  liquidity conditions and had adapted 
their liquidity management accordingly. 
However, from the end of the quarter in 
March, overnight rates increased again, 
with rates leaping sharply at the end of 
March itself (up to almost 1.00%).
The allotment rates of the weekly SMP 
liquidity- absorbing tenders were not very volatile in the period under review and, 
weighted, fell just short of the maximum 
bid rate of 0.25%. For banks with a strong 
liquidity position, it was probably usually 
more profi  table to take part in the liquidity- absorbing tenders than to lend the liquidity in the money market each day, as illustrated by the adjacent chart.
The April- May 2014 maintenance period, which followed the period under review, 
was characterised by volatile liquidity condi-
tions, too, although the average EONIA was 
higher, at 0.24%, than in the previous 
period. Further repayments of the liquidity 
provided in the three- year tenders of an 
overall €32 billion and an elevated level of 
autonomous factors from the end of April 
– with increases to up to €531 billion at the 
end of April – caused excess liquidity to 
drop below the €100 billion mark on sev-eral occasions, resulting in a sharp rise in 
overnight rates (EONIA of up to 0.46%). In 
response to this and in order to safeguard 
liquidity at the end of the month and over 
the long weekend at the beginning of May, 
banks increased their demand substantially 
to €173 billion in the main refi  nancing oper-ation. At the same time, there was consid-
erable underbidding in the SMP liquidity- 
absorbing tender, which meant that excess liquidity suddenly rose to up to €180 billion 
and EONIA fell as low as 0.11%. Subse-
quently, liquidity conditions again changed 
course owing to the decline in demand in 
the main refi  nancing operations and to the 
virtually complete SMP- related absorption. 
At an average of around €80 billion in ex-
cess liquidity, overnight rates initially ex-
ceeded the main refi  nancing rate again and declined towards the end of the period on 13 May (GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket) at 0.16%).Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
1 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  re-
quirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankJanuary February March April May
201400.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Daily data
€ bn%
0100200300Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight
Weighted allotment 
rate for SMP liquidity-
absorbing tenders
Main refinancing rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
30

also against the backdrop of an unexpectedly 
high temporary increase in government de -
posits in the Eurosystem, which count as liquid-ity- absorbing autonomous factors.
This reduction in excess liquidity, which was ac-companied by a considerable increase in short- 
term money market rates, was followed by a 
sharp rise in banking sector demand in regular 
Eurosystem refinancing operations. At the same 
time, there was widespread underbidding in 
the weekly liquidity- absorbing operations.2 
Taken together, this caused the excess liquidity to more than double once again. As usual, the banking sector’s demand for liquidity appeared to rise considerably owing to end- of- month ef-
fects, which were intensified by the public holi-
day and the bridge day. However, a change once again in the banking sector’s bidding 
 behaviour prompted a nearly complete U- turn 
in this trend a week later. Overall, daily excess 
liquidity moved within a relatively wide range 
(€74 billion to €179 billion) in recent weeks, a 
development associated with increased fluctu -
ations in short- term money market rates.
This is due to the interaction between the li -
quidity situation and money market rates. 
When, amid falling excess liquidity, the volume 
of liquidity available on the interbank market 
runs short, say, due to a shock in autonomous 
factors, and banks’ demand for liquidity rises, 
the result tends to be an increase in money 
market rates. As banks can only modify their in-
dividual bidding behaviour in the Eurosystem’s 
refinancing and liquidity- absorbing operations 
once a week, to align it with the level of money market rates, it is possible for the EONIA to rise above the main refinancing rate for several days in a row despite full allotment in the refinancing 
operations. As soon as the banks adjust their 
bids in the Eurosystem’s operations, the level of 
excess liquidity goes back up and money mar -
ket rates fall, which is likely to prompt banks to 
revise their bidding behaviour once again the 
following week. The fact that banks do not co-
ordinate their individual bidding behaviour with 
one another is likely to also trigger greater fluc-tuations in excess liquidity and short- term 
money market rates in the future. However, this 
should generally be seen in a positive light, as it 
indicates that banks are increasingly reverting to 
a more normal liquidity management instead of 
holding large precautionary reserves of excess 
central bank liquidity.
Short- term money market rates rose only grad-
ually in the euro area in February and March in 
response to the downward trend in excess 
 liquidity. Stronger fluctuations in the unsecured 
EONIA and other short- term money market 
rates could be observed initially only at month- 
end and at the end of the quarter. It was the 
aforementioned unexpected increase in au -
tonomous factors, together with banks’ in -
creased preference for liquidity in the last week 
of April, that brought an end to the period of 
equilibrium following fluctuations in January, 
causing the EONIA to outpace the main refi -
nancing rate for several days. Although this trend reversed itself at the beginning of May, 
fluctuations in short- term money market rates 
remained high in view of the liquidity condi -
tions. Rising or fluctuating short- term money 
market rates, however, should not be seen as a 
sign of tensions on the money market but  rather as indicating a gradual shift from a re
-
gime of high excess liquidity, in which money 
market rates were anchored close to the de -
posit facility rate, to a regime with more bal -
anced liquidity conditions, in which money 
market rates should be in line with the main 
refinancing rate. Thus, this trend can be seen as 
an indication that the money market is slowly 
but steadily returning to normal functioning.
Money market forward rates3 in the euro area 
rose slightly from the beginning to the middle … but greater 
weekly fluctu-ations of late
Liquidity situ-
ation and money market rates deter-mined by banks’ individual bid-ding behaviourMarked fluctu-
ations in money 
market rates in 
April
2 Each week, the Eurosystem offers banks a liquidity-  
absorbing operation in the amount of the outstanding SMP 
portfolio volume. This operation was introduced alongside 
the SMP in May 2010 to underscore that the purpose of 
this programme was not to loosen monetary policy.
3 Implicit forward rates, derived from swap rates, for the 
unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA and interest 
rates of exchange- traded futures on the three- month Euri-
bor.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
31

of March, after stalling at a very low level 
throughout almost all of February. In the re -
mainder of the period under review up until the 
beginning of May, forward rates moved in a 
very narrow range between their low in Febru-
ary and their slightly higher level of mid- March. 
The increase and fluctuations in forward rates 
remained well below movements in the EONIA rate. Thus, on the whole, fluctuations in short-  
term money market rates have not diffused to 
the forward rates. Even the structure of the for -
ward price curve remained flat throughout the 
months under review and is currently slightly 
inverted at the short end, which indicates that 
there is a certain likelihood that market partici-pants are pricing in additional Eurosystem mon-
etary policy measures or at least no longer ex -
pect interest rates to increase noticeably for the foreseeable future despite fluctuations in short-  
term money market rates.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The deleveraging process in the euro- area MFI 
sector, which briefly accelerated in the autumn 
months ahead of the ECB’s balance sheet as -
sessment, continued into the new year. In 
terms of balance sheet items relevant to mon-
etary growth, this mainly concerned banks’ 
holdings of securities issued by the private sec-
tor. Loans to the private sector are currently not the main focus of deleveraging. Lending to this 
sector fell only marginally over the winter 
months on balance. Consequently, the down -
ward trend in monetary and credit growth 
which had lasted for several quarters came to a 
standstill in the quarter under review. Despite isolated signs that the macroeconomic recov
-
ery in recent quarters is slowly encouraging 
lending to non- financial corporations, it is too 
early to speak of a widespread recovery in 
loans to this sector.
The M3 monetary aggregate recorded marked 
growth on balance in the first quarter, bol -
stered by continued inflows of funds from abroad. This primarily concerned overnight de-
posits, which benefitted from a further decline 
in the interest rate on other deposits and re -
corded considerable growth once again. By 
contrast, the majority of other assets contained 
in M3 holdings, in particular short- term time 
deposits, money market fund shares and bank debt securities with a maturity of less than two 
years, were reduced further amid low interest 
rates and diminishing risk aversion.
Against this backdrop, the downward trend in 
monetary growth since the beginning of last 
year came to a halt in the reporting quarter 
and the annual growth rate of M3 rose margin-ally to 1.1%. At the same time, annual growth 
of loans to the euro- area private sector (ad -
justed for loan sales and securitisation) stalled 
at the previous quarter’s level of -2%, causing 
the difference between monetary growth and 
credit growth to remain large. Underlying mon-
etary dynamics therefore continue to be very 
subdued.
The volume of loans to the domestic private 
sector fell only slightly on balance over the win-ter months after a marked decrease in the pre-
vious three quarters; however, the slowdown 
in the downward trend was mainly powered by loans to financial enterprises, which posted net inflows for the first time in a year. By contrast, 
loans to non- financial corporations decreased 
considerably on balance, though at a slightly 
slower pace than in the two previous quarters. Nonetheless, the annual growth rate for these 
loans dropped to -3.1% as a result of a base 
effect.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS), which was con-
ducted in the first quarter, pointed to a gradual stabilisation of the non- financial corporate sec-
tor. The surveyed banks in the euro area indi -
cated that the continued decline in non-  
financial corporations’ demand for bank loans 
since the third quarter of 2011 has come to a 
standstill. At the same time, banks have, on 
balance, largely left standards for loans to en -
terprises unchanged at the previous quarter’s Very little 
change in money market forward rates given persist -
ently flat for-ward curve
Macroeconomic 
setting
M3 growth 
driven by over-night depositsDownward trend in money and credit growth stopped
Decline in loans 
to non- financial corporations slowed further
Standards for 
loans to enter-prises broadly unchanged  according to BLSDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
32

level. However, euro- area banks see this level 
as being relatively strict when measured against 
the standards that have been in place since the escalation of the sovereign debt crisis.
Lending to non- financial corporations con -
tinued to vary widely between euro- area coun-
tries. Of the four large member states, only 
French banks reported distinctly positive quar -
terly inflows. By contrast, lending continued to decline in Italy and, in particular, in Spain, albeit at a slower pace than in previous quarters. This 
could be a result of the gradual economic re -
covery in these countries, which – with a typ -
ical lag of several quarters – should boost lend-
ing to non- financial corporations. However, 
these positive stimuli are being masked by the 
fact that the private sector in a number of 
these countries still needs to take corrective ac-tion on debt reduction. Moreover, demand for 
credit in the euro area on the whole was also 
dampened as a result of non- financial corpor -
ations in some euro- area countries partially re-
placing bank loans by making greater use of 
internal financing or – in light of the favourable financing conditions for enterprises – by raising funding directly on the capital markets.
An analysis of sectors shows that the corporate 
sector has been widely affected by weak credit growth. Not only has there been a particularly strong decline in real estate loans, which have 
been hit hard by the financial and economic 
crisis, but annual credit growth rates are visibly 
in negative territory in almost all other eco -
nomic sectors in the euro- area periphery coun-
tries as well. Thus, a broad upward trend in 
lending is not yet discernible in these countries.
Lending to households in the euro area was 
weak, recording an annual growth rate of only 0.4%. This was primarily attributable in the first 
quarter to moderate positive flows in lending 
for house purchase. Lending in this area, too, 
varies from one country to the next. Once 
again, growth in loans for house purchase was 
mainly evident in core euro- area countries. By 
contrast, the current need for household delev-
eraging in periphery countries meant that this 
kind of lending continued to decline.
Meanwhile, in the euro area as a whole, the 
ongoing economic recovery has translated into 
a moderate rise in private consumption, caus -
ing consumer loans on balance to go back up 
slightly in the first quarter for the first time in 
4½ years. This overall positive growth is cor -
roborated by the BLS. In the survey, banks sig-
nalled that they have marginally loosened 
credit standards for loans to households, simul-
taneously reporting an overall moderate in -
crease in borrowing requirements among Heterogeneity in 
euro- area lend-ing remains highAlmost all sec-tors in euro- area 
periphery coun-tries hit by weak credit growth
Slight increase  
in loans to 
householdsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2014 Q1 2013 Q4
Central government deposits 1.8 – 25.3
Monetary aggregate M3 52.6 – 10.6
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 91.3 48.7
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 24.0 – 39.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 14.8 – 20.1
Monetary capital 6.8 – 19.9
of which
Capital and reserves 53.9 – 17.1
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities – 47.0 –  2.8Assets 2014 Q1 2013 Q4
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 30.4 – 153.2
Loans
1 –  8.7 –  57.7
Securities – 19.0 –  89.7
Credit to general government in the euro area 16.5 –  50.7
Loans 20.2 –  14.9
Securities –  3.7 –  35.9
Net external assets 89.9 154.8
Other counterparts of M3 – 17.5 –  12.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
33

households. Thus, for the first time since the 
first quarter of 2007, banks reported an easing 
of credit standards for both housing loans and 
consumer loans together with a simultaneous 
rise in demand.
The accelerated reduction of certain balance 
sheet items observed in the fourth quarter of 
2013, which is likely to have been triggered by 
the balance sheet assessment of systemically 
important euro- area banks, did not continue as 
expected in the quarter under review.4 In fact, 
non- seasonally adjusted data for the four large 
member states indicate that some of the trans-actions that were carried out in relation to the balance sheet reduction were already reversed 
in January. In terms of volume, these primarily 
concerned claims on other euro- area banks 
and financial derivatives in the trading port -
folio, ie items that have little or no impact on 
monetary growth. The reduction of MFI secur -
ities holdings, too, which had picked up pace 
at the end of the year, slowed considerably in 
the first quarter of 2014. Furthermore, monthly 
balance sheet statistics indicate that, in Janu -
ary, French and Spanish banks in particular 
once again intensified their purchases of secur -
ities issued by euro- area governments. All in all, 
the reduction of securitised lending to general 
government and the private sector alike only 
had a moderate dampening effect on the ex -
pansion of the monetary aggregate M3 in the first quarter.
The dampening effects of lending were coun -
terbalanced by a marked expansion in the MFI sector’s net external asset position. In contrast 
to the euro- area’s continued current account 
surpluses, which played somewhat less of a 
role than in previous quarters, securities trans -
actions with non- residents had a stronger im -
pact on monetary growth. As in previous quar -
ters, this was mainly driven by foreign invest -
ors’ healthy demand for euro- area securities. Moderate fall  
in securitised 
lending
Marked expan-
sion in net  external asset positionMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 De-
noted with a negative sign because, taken in isolation, an in-
crease curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the decline in assets in the bank balance sheets of the four large euro- area countries, 
Monthly Report, February 2014, pp 37-39.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
34

The resulting flow of capital into the euro area 
was only partially counterbalanced by domestic non- MFIs’ purchases of foreign securities.
By contrast, monetary capital had no significant impact on the monetary aggregate in the quar -
ter under review. The overall slight increase was 
solely prompted by considerable growth in 
capital and reserves, which had declined in the 
fourth quarter of 2013 against the backdrop of 
balance sheet adjustments. Alongside small 
outflows from long- term bank deposits, this 
was primarily counterbalanced by a renewed 
sizeable reduction in bank debt securities with 
a maturity of more than two years, which had 
been built up again in the final quarter of 2013 
for the first time since mid-2011. Despite the 
improvements in issuing long- term bank debt 
securities reported by institutions in the BLS, outflows were recorded in this area by Ger
-
man, Spanish and French banks in particular. This suggests that bank- related factors also 
continue to play a role in this context. In add-
ition to some credit institutions requiring less funding on account of deleveraging, a key 
 factor here is that banks have been substituting 
bank debt securities with alternative sources of 
financing, such as Eurosystem liquidity pro -
vided on favourable terms as well as continu -
ously growing deposits. This is consistent with 
banks reporting an overall slight improvement 
in the funding situation in the BLS. According 
to the surveyed banks, the impact of the sover -
eign debt crisis on funding and credit standards has remained virtually unchanged.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with  domestic customers
Similar to other euro- area countries, the invest-
ment behaviour of non- banks in Germany in 
the first quarter of 2014 was characterised by 
sustained growth in short- term deposits and a 
parallel reduction in longer- term deposits. This 
development reflects the money- holding sec -
tor’s continued strong preference for liquidity, which in light of the even lower opportunity 
costs associated with holding money short-  
term, has prompted a marked increase in sight 
deposits in particular. The slight flattening of 
the yield curve also meant that the expansion 
in short- term time deposits that was already 
evident in the previous quarter continued to 
pick up pace in the quarter under review. Be -
sides these shifts within M3, banks’ deposit business in Germany in the quarter under re
-
view was once again defined by money- holding 
market participants moving some of their assets from relatively low- interest M3 instru
-
ments with longer maturities to riskier assets 
outside M3 in search of a better yield.
In contrast to the previous quarter, growth in 
short- term deposits in the quarter under review 
was supported by all money- holding sectors, 
with the greatest inflows recorded from house-
holds and non- financial corporations. While 
households built up sight deposits once again, albeit to a noticeably smaller extent than in the Monetary 
 capital without major impact  
on monetary aggregate
Further increase 
in deposit  business …… still driven by sight deposits and short- term time depositsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2013 2014
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 12.6 20.6
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 1.2 9.9
of over 2 years – 7.3 – 7.6
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months – 0.5 – 3.2
of over 3 months – 1.3 – 0.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.8 – 1.2
Securitised lending 5.0 – 2.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 2.1 3.0
of which to households 3 3.1 5.6
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 – 0.1 – 4.6
Securitised lending – 2.6 – 1.1
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
35

previous quarter, non- financial corporations 
were more interested in short- term time de -
posits, increasing their holdings noticeably in 
the review period after slight growth in the 
previous quarter. This development is likely to 
be the result of non-  financial corporations’ 
high level of liquidity that has been evident for 
several quarters and which is driven by their 
stable profit situation as well as a renewed nar -
rowing in the spread between interest rates on short- term time deposits and those on M3 de-
posits with longer maturities.
Moreover, domestic banks’ deposit business 
was once again characterised by a distinct re -
duction in long- term time deposits in the quar -
ter under review. As in previous quarters, the 
largest movements in this context were booked 
on the accounts of financial corporations, in particular insurance companies and pension funds. In light of the overall positive capital 
market developments in the quarter under re -
view, financial corporations are likely to have shifted some of their freed- up funds to less 
 liquid and riskier funds outside M3. Other 
money- holding sectors, too, reduced their 
longer- term M3 deposits, albeit on a much 
smaller scale. This was most likely due to a fur -
ther decline in the remuneration of this form of investment.
The revival of banks’ lending business in Ger -
many with the domestic non- bank sector, 
which could be observed in the preceding two quarters, did not continue at the same pace in the first quarter of 2014. This was largely attrib-utable to a marked decrease in lending to gen-
eral government and a considerable decline in 
loans to non- financial corporations. However, 
lending to the private sector developed posi -
tively overall, with loans to households record-
ing distinct inflows and unsecuritised loans to 
financial corporations increasing slightly for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2012.
As in the previous quarters, lending to house -
holds (and thus to the entire domestic private 
sector) was mainly driven by loans for house purchase. These were stepped- up once again 
in the quarter under review, boosted to some 
degree by good weather and the continued 
 favourable financing conditions. The results of 
the BLS also point in the same direction. Partici-
pating banks indicated a renewed upsurge in 
demand for loans for house purchase in the first quarter of 2014, following a gradual fall-  
off in demand growth in the previous quarters. 
According to the managers surveyed, borrow -
ers rated the situation on the housing market 
in the quarter under review as being consider -
ably better than in the previous quarter.
Banks participating in the BLS also saw a 
marked rise in demand for consumer loans in 
the first quarter of 2014, which was powered 
by improved income prospects and a greater 
propensity to make purchases. On balance, the 
favourable conditions for private consumption 
translated into accelerated growth in consumer 
lending. Nonetheless, loans to domestic house-
holds in Germany remained moderate on the Further decline 
in longer- term depositsPositive, yet sub-dued, growth in banks’ lending to domestic non- banks
Loans for house purchase up  further
Expansion in 
consumer  
loans slightly  acceleratedLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201421012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
36

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: dif-
ference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respond-
ents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “nar-
rowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2014 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20142.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
37

Financing environment of small and medium- sized 
 enterprises in the euro area – concept and results of the SAFE survey
Small and medium- sized enterprises (SMEs) 
are often at the centre of the ongoing  eco-
nomic policy debate about the fi  nancing 
situation of fi  rms in some countries of the 
euro area. Unlike large fi  rms, SMEs have 
only limited possibilities to meet their fi  nan-
cing needs by tapping the various external 
sources and to react fl  exibly to changes in 
the availability of certain fi  nancing instru-ments: the bank loan is usually the only form of external fi  nancing available to them, whereas large fi  rms can turn to the capital market or to other non- banks.
1 
Thus, any restrictions in the supply of bank loans could have a stronger impact on SMEs than on larger fi  rms.
The European Central Bank’s Survey on the 
Access to Finance of SMEs in the Euro Area 
(SAFE) provides information on the fi  nan-
cing environment for SMEs in the euro area 
and facilitates an analysis at country and 
sector level as well as across different char-
acteristics of the fi  rms. The survey was introduced in 2009 after the global fi  nan-cial crisis escalated, at a time when many banks suffered liquidity bottlenecks and it was feared that they might signifi  cantly 
scale back their lending to SMEs in particu-
lar. It has been run every six months ever since and primarily examines the situation 
of SMEs. Large fi  rms are included purely for 
comparison purposes.2 The possible an-
swers are of a qualitative nature only, and 
require the respondents to assess the situ-
ation on the basis of a set scale. A total of 7,500 enterprises are surveyed as a rule, of which just under 7,000 are SMEs.
3 The en-
terprises base their assessment on their fi  -nancial situation and the perceived fi  nan-cing environment in the preceding six 
months. Ten survey rounds have been con-ducted so far; the most recent results were published on 30 April 2014.
According to the survey, the fi  nancial situ-
ation of euro- area SMEs deteriorated stead-
ily overall during the fi  rst years of the fi  nan-
cial and economic crisis. This was true not 
only of their individual earnings and profi  t 
situation but also of the attendant access to 
external sources of fi  nance. By contrast, the 
enterprises’ assessment at the current end 
is markedly better than before. However, 
there is rather a high degree of heterogen-eity over the entire period, both across the euro- area countries and with regard to the different economic activities.
Most recently, SMEs in the euro area as a 
whole reported that their earnings situation had stabilised after it had deteriorated for a prolonged period of time in the wake of the crisis. By contrast, earnings in the construc-
tion sector, which is in particularly strong need of adjustment following the real es-tate boom in some countries prior to the crisis, has so far continued to worsen for 
the majority of respondent enterprises. The 
euro- area SMEs reported that the profi  t 
situation, which has been weak during the last few years in line with developments in the earnings situation, deteriorated again in 
1 Of course, alternative forms of fi  nance also exist for 
SMEs, such as SME bonds, promissory notes, forms of fi  nance leasing or trade credit. However, the volume of these types of fi  nance is relatively small.2 SMEs are defi  ned here as enterprises with fewer than 250 employees.3 Given the small sample size for the majority of coun-tries, most of which have only 500 or fewer surveyed 
enterprises, the survey is not entirely representative. 
For this reason, the results should be interpreted with 
caution. Larger samples of around 1,000 enterprises 
exist only for Germany, France, Italy and Spain.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
38

the most recent survey round, albeit to a 
lesser extent than in the periods before.
Nevertheless, SMEs have recently further in-
tensifi  ed their efforts to reduce debt, which have been observable for some time. This is 
especially true of SMEs in the manufactur-
ing sector, whereas only weak deleveraging progress has been made in construction to date. At country level, the reduction of debt 
was found to be strongest in Ireland and 
the Netherlands on the whole, while SMEs 
in Italy saw their debt levels increase again.
Access to fi  nance, which, according to 
SMEs, had deteriorated markedly in 2009 
and 2012 in particular, was perceived to be less of a concern of late. The percentage of SMEs which considered that to be the most 
pressing problem was at its lowest level in 
the last survey round since the survey began 
(fi  nding customers was reported as being 
the most pressing problem, notably at the 
current end). While access to fi  nance is still considered the dominant concern for SMEs 
in Greece, the percentage of SMEs which held that view declined in most euro- area countries. Although the levels vary from country to country, this indicates that the 
fi  nancial situation is, in fact, easing. By con-
trast, the availability of skilled staff or ex-perienced managers has been the main 
concern in Germany for quite some time.
The SAFE survey also asks specifi  cally about 
the availability of bank loans in order to 
capture as precisely as possible any diffi   cul-
ties in accessing fi  nance. In the perception 
of SMEs throughout the euro area, the 
availability of bank loans has deteriorated 
steadily on balance over the last few years, 
albeit at a much slower pace of late. The percentage of SMEs reporting a deterior-ation in bank loan availability dropped in the last survey round to the lowest level 
since the survey began. The main drivers of this development were the clouded macro-
economic outlook as well as fi  rm- specifi  c 
factors and factors affecting the provision 
of loans by banks. The worsening availabil-
ity of bank loans affected the construction 
sector in particular. Here too, however, the 
deterioration was less pronounced in the last round of the survey than in previous 
rounds. At country level, a net improvement was again reported in Germany and Portu-gal, with Spain also signalling improved ac-cess to fi  nance for the fi  rst time.
At euro- area level, the respondent enter-
prises have reported a constant increase in their need for bank loans over the past few years; however, the increase was only min-
imal in the most recent round of the SAFE 
survey. Whereas Greece, Italy and France signalled an especially strong rise in their 
need for bank loans, Germany, Portugal as 
well as, for the fi  rst time, Spain reported The most pressing problems
faced by euro-area SMEsin the second half of 2013 
*
Source: ECB. * Percentage of respondents.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 10 20 30 40Euro area
Germany
Spain
Greece
Ireland
Italy
PortugalAccess to finance
Finding customers
Costs of production or labour
Availability of skilled staff or experienced managers
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
39

whole in the first quarter of 2014 despite 
growth in lending: the 12-month rate for loans 
to households only inched upwards from 1.2% in the previous quarter to 1.3%.
By contrast, there was a perceptible decline in 
banks’ lending business with domestic non-  
financial corporations in the quarter under re-
view, following a period of equilibrium be -
tween new lending and redemptions in the 
previous quarter. The rise in net redemptions of 
loans to enterprises in Germany is likely to be 
due to a number of factors. Against the back-
drop of moderate investment activity and Ger -
man enterprises’ stable profit situation as well 
as the faded appeal of M3 instruments, this de-
velopment suggests that enterprises have in -
creasingly been using their earnings to pay 
down outstanding liabilities. Furthermore, the 
importance of MFI loans as a source of corpor -
ate financing has been experiencing a trend 
decline for years and an increasing proportion 
of corporate investment continues to be sourced from other forms of financing as well 
as through alternative lenders (especially intra- 
group loans, capital- market- based inflows of 
funds and trade credit).5 This assessment is cor -
roborated by the results of the BLS. The sur -
veyed German banks have been signalling for 
some quarters now that it is predominantly re-
course to other sources of funding, internal 
funds in particular, that has had a dampening 
effect on enterprises’ demand for bank loans.
The slight expansion observed in loans to the non- financial private sector in the quarter 
under review was accompanied by largely un-
changed bank lending policies. The German re-
sults of the BLS indicate that on balance, in the 
first quarter of 2014, the surveyed institutions 
did not adjust their standards for loans to en -
terprises, irrespective of the maturity and the Marked decline 
in loans to  non- financial corporations
German banks’ credit standards virtually un-changed for loans to enter-prises …that their need for bank loans was decreas-
ing on balance.
The SAFE survey reveals that, on the whole, 
euro- area SMEs expect the future to bring a 
slight improvement in access to fi  nance as well as a further improvement in the avail-
ability of internal funds. The outlook was 
found to be particularly positive for SMEs in 
Germany and Spain, while for Italy it was 
less negative than in previous survey rounds.Availability and need of bank loans for SMEs in the euro area*
Source: ECB. * Change over the preceding six months; net percentage.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13605040302010010203040
––––––++++%
11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 2013–60–50–40–30–20–100+10+20+30+40 Spain Portugal Italy Ireland Greece Germany Euro area
Need
Availability
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The structure of corporate 
financing amid weak loan growth in Germany and the euro 
area, Monthly Report, August 2013, pp 42-43.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
40

firm size. This represents a continuation of the 
period of little overall change in lending pol -
icies, which commenced in mid-2009. Al -
though equity costs as well as industry and 
firm- specific factors – taken in isolation – had a 
slight tightening effect on credit standards in 
the first quarter, lending from other banks, by 
itself, effected an easing of the surveyed banks’ 
credit standards. Margins were adapted de -
pending on the borrower’s credit rating: on the 
quarter, they were narrowed slightly for aver -
age- risk loans to enterprises and widened mar -
ginally for riskier loans.
Credit standards for loans to households also 
remained virtually unchanged overall. On bal -
ance, surveyed banks tightened credit stand -
ards somewhat for loans for house purchase 
as, in contrast to borrowers, they were less op-timistic about the outlook for the housing mar -
ket. At the same time, participating institutions 
in this line of business moderately narrowed their margins for average- risk loans. By con
-
trast, banks active in consumer lending to 
households made no noteworthy adjustments 
to their lending policies.
The BLS survey conducted in April contained additional questions on participating banks’ 
funding conditions, on the impact of the sover -
eign debt crisis on financing and on lending 
policies as well as, for the first time, questions regarding the level of credit standards. In gen-
eral, the institutions reported a slight overall improvement in their funding environment in the first quarter of 2014. As in the previous quarters, the sovereign debt crisis had only a 
marginal impact on changes in funding condi-tions, but this did not affect credit standards.
The question regarding the level of credit standards in each bank’s assessment referred to the midpoint of the range of credit stand
-
ards since the escalation of the sovereign debt 
crisis. Compared with this (subjective) bench -
mark, the surveyed banks deem credit stand -
ards in corporate banking to be relatively tight 
at present. In lending to households, by con -
trast, they reported that, on balance, their cur -
rent standards for loans for house purchase and consumer credit were only marginally 
tighter than the respective benchmark.
In light of their still very low level, bank lending 
rates on new business probably tended to sup-
port domestic lending to the private sector. In 
the first quarter, bank lending rates across all 
business areas, maturities and volumes largely 
tracked the slight decline in capital market rates or stagnated.
Interest rates for loans to enterprises in the first 
quarter remained roughly on par with the pre-vious quarter. On average, at the end of March, 
the reporting institutions were charging inter -
est of 3.0% for small- scale and 1.9% for large- 
scale short- term loans to domestic non-  
financial corporations. Interest rates for both small and large-  scale long-  term loans ended 
the reporting period at 2.8%.
By contrast, loans for house purchase in the first quarter of 2014 were somewhat more 
 favourable. At the end of March, interest rates 
on long- term loans stood at 2.9%. The only ex-
ception to the general trend was the consider -
able increase in interest rates for short- term 
consumer loans. This increase shows inter alia 
that the reduction of interest rates on con -
sumer credit typical for the last quarter of the 
year was reversed in the first quarter of 2014. 
Households’ and non- financial corporations’ 
deposits earned somewhat less interest overall compared with the previous quarter.… and to 
households
Current stand-
ards for loans  
to enterprises 
relatively tightBank lending 
rates tracking 
decline in cap-
ital market rates 
or stagnatingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
41

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The financial markets were relatively robust in 
the first quarter of 2014 despite a raft of nega-
tive factors. Although the geopolitical tension 
surrounding the Ukraine crisis triggered volatile 
price movements in response to the daily news 
reports, there was nothing to suggest that the 
financial market as a whole had been gripped 
by heightened risk aversion, with the heavy 
price losses that this normally entails. Even the 
fresh bout of financial market turbulence which 
hit a number of emerging markets early in the 
year tailed off quite quickly. A batch of cyclical 
indicators which mostly delivered a downside 
shock up to the end of March likewise had only 
a muted impact on the markets. The financial 
markets appeared to be partly shielded from these shocks by the perception of a relatively robust underlying pace of global economic growth and by the persisting expansionary 
monetary policy stance of the major industrial 
countries (notwithstanding the US Federal Re -
serve’s gradual tapering of its asset purchases). 
Moreover, sentiment has brightened again of 
late. On the whole, this caused bond yields to 
contract worldwide and the equity markets to 
post gains predominantly. As the year got under way, the Japanese yen was one of the 
main winners in the foreign exchange markets, probably on account of its traditional status as a safe haven currency as well as the unwinding of risky carry trades. The euro, meanwhile, saw very little change (-½%) on a weighted average although it is still relatively highly valued.
Exchange rates
After trading at a rate of US$1.36 at the begin-
ning of February, thereafter the euro appreci -
ated markedly against the US dollar. The trigger 
for this significant strengthening of the euro 
was the ECB monetary policy meeting in Febru-
ary, when – contrary to the prevailing expect -ations of some market participants – it neither 
decided on nor indicated any further easing 
measures. The euro received additional support 
from the publication of surprisingly negative 
figures on US retail sales and the US property 
market. After the ECB Governing Council meet-
ing in March maintained its wait- and- see 
stance, and better- than- expected economic 
growth figures were announced for the euro 
area and Germany, the euro- dollar rate climbed 
further. In mid- March it stood at US$1.39, its 
highest level for 2½ years.
Subsequently, the euro initially surrendered 
some of its gains against the US dollar. At this time, comments made by the chair of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee had prompted 
speculation that the Fed’s policy rates might be raised as early as the middle of next year – and 
thus surprisingly soon. However, at the begin -
ning of April the publication of the minutes of 
the meeting showed that some members of 
the Fed’s policy committee regarded the latest interest rate expectations as overblown, where-
upon the euro strengthened again. In mid-  
April, the euro drew additional strength from 
better- than- anticipated figures for German and 
Spanish industrial output and the smooth issue 
of a Greek government bond. In the weeks that followed, the euro- dollar rate remained 
within a narrow range of between US$1.38 and US$1.39 without any clearly discernible 
trend. Renewed expectations of further easing 
measures from the ECB have recently put the euro under pressure. As this report went to 
press, the euro was trading at US$1.37, which was 1% below its level at the beginning of the year.
In the initial weeks of 2014, the euro – in com-
mon with a number of other currencies – re -
corded a significant loss in value against the 
yen; by mid- February it had fallen to ¥137. Sub-
sequently, after expectations of further monet-
ary easing in the euro area had been damp -Financial 
 markets robust despite negative factors
Euro exchange 
rate movements against the US dollar, …… the yen …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
42

ened, the euro gained markedly against the 
yen, rising to ¥143 by mid- March; however, it 
gave up some of these gains in the second half 
of the month. At the beginning of April, the 
euro rose again to ¥143. This was caused to an 
extent by the emergence of speculation that 
the Japanese central bank would seek to stimu-
late the economy through additional expan -
sionary monetary policy measures, in view of 
the increase in value added tax in Japan and 
the negative impact this could be expected to 
have on economic activity. However, contrary to 
these expectations, thus far the Bank of Japan 
has not engaged in any further easing. Most  recently, the euro stood at ¥139, making it 
about 4% weaker than at the start of the year.
The euro lost value on balance against the 
pound sterling during the reporting period. The 
pound was bolstered by surprisingly favourable 
figures for the British labour market, a confi -
dent economic projection from the Bank of England and property market data. Most re
-
cently, the positive economic news culminated 
in the announcement of a sharp rise in British 
gross domestic product (GDP) in the first quar -
ter of 2014, which, at 3.1%, was even better 
than anticipated. As this report went to press, 
the euro stood at £0.82, which was 2% below its value at the beginning of the year.
Since the beginning of 2014, the euro’s value 
vis- à- vis the currencies of 20 major trading 
partners has fallen by an average of ½%. As 
well as losing ground against the yen and the 
pound sterling, as mentioned above, it also de-
clined markedly against the Australian dollar, amongst other currencies. These losses stood 
in contrast to slight gains against the US dollar and appreciation against the currencies of Can-ada, China, Hungary and Sweden. Against the 
backdrop of the conflict in Ukraine, the euro also recorded a distinct strengthening against the Russian rouble and the Ukrainian hryvnia, 
which are not included in the basket of 20 cur -
rencies. The price competitiveness of euro- area 
suppliers compared with important trading 
partners has deteriorated somewhat as a result of the euro’s appreciation and – measured by 
the long- term average – is trending at an un -
favourable level.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Yields on the US bond market dropped signifi-
cantly in the reporting period. At the beginning of the year, the yield on ten- year US Treasuries 
was still 3%. This relatively high yield level 
–  compared to those in preceding years – re-
flected the expectation that the US economy would switch to a steeper growth path and … and against 
the pound  sterling
Effective euro 
exchange rate
Falling yields  
in the United States, …Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2013 20141.201.301.40
110120130140150
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.13 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
43

that the US central bank would, as the year 
progressed, continue with its asset purchase taper initiated in December. Then, low US growth, which came as a surprise for many market participants, and turbulence on the  financial markets in some emerging market 
economies, which triggered increased demand 
for the safety of bonds, combined to push 
down yields by 55 basis points overall to 2.5%. 
The US central bank, meanwhile, did not shift 
from its path of progressively reducing its 
monthly asset purchases by US$5 billion per 
asset class – ie Treasuries and mortgage- backed 
securities – as it was evident that growth in the 
first quarter had been held back not least by 
weather effects.
In Japan, too, there was a decline in yields on 
ten- year government bonds, which fell 15 basis 
points from a low level at the beginning of the year to reach 0.6%. Since then, Japanese yields 
have fluctuated within a range of just 7 basis 
points. Aside from international influences, the reason for the decline in yields can be found in 
a whole series of worse-  than-  expected eco -
nomic indicators, despite strong growth in the real economy in the first quarter caused by ex-penditure brought forward for tax reasons; the 
poor figures prompted fears among market 
participants that the package of measures put 
together by the government, consisting of monetary policy easing, fiscally induced de
-
mand and structural reforms, was not having the desired impact. In addition, the Bank of Japan dominates the bond market, buying huge quantities of government bonds as part of its quantitative and qualitative monetary 
easing programme, and thus keeps yields at a 
low level. As a result of price- inelastic demand 
on the part of the Bank of Japan, which ac -
quires up to 70% of the volume of new issues 
in the relevant maturity segment, the central 
bank’s balance sheet is continually expanding.
Bonds in the euro area followed the general 
yield trend. The close tie with US yields made 
itself felt. In addition, financial market partici -
pants are keeping a close eye on current infla-tion figures in the euro area and are not ruling out further monetary easing from the Eurosys-
tem, despite the gradual pick- up in the euro-  
area economy. As a result, yields in the core 
euro- area countries fell even more sharply than 
in the United States in the reporting period. 
The yield spread between ten- year US Treasur -
ies and German Bunds expanded by 15 basis points to 120 basis points – the widest it has 
been for several years.
Since the end of December, the GDP- weighted 
yield on long- term bonds issued by euro- area 
countries (not including Germany) has – as in 
the preceding months – experienced a much 
sharper fall (of 95 basis points to 2.5%) than 
the yield on German Bunds. Yields in the per -
iphery countries experienced an above- average 
decline. One reason for this has been the gen-
eral investment climate, marked by low interest 
rates and a pronounced appetite for risk in 
bond purchases. However, the drop in yields 
also echoes the fact that critical variables such … in Japan, …… in the core 
euro area …
… and in the euro- area  peripheryBond yields in Germanyand the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20141.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5Monthly data
%
Percentage
pointsSpread between
US and Germangovernment bond yieldsYield on ten-year government bonds
outstanding
USA1
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
44

as competitiveness and current account deficits 
are predominantly moving in the right direction in these countries. The rating agencies have ad-
justed their assessments accordingly and have 
upgraded Cyprus, Spain, Portugal and Ireland 
this year. However, the lasting positive growth 
effects required to secure periphery countries’ 
debt sustainability in the long term are still ab-sent in some countries. On the other hand, the OMT programme, announced but never yet ac-tivated, and the financial assistance already fur -
nished or promised, continue to work their ef-fect in the background. That is particularly clear 
in the case of Greece, where the debt ratio, 
currently 175% of GDP , is likely to rise again 
slightly in the current year, according to the 
European Commission forecast. In 2013, Greece achieved what is called a programme 
primary surplus, ie a surplus excluding interest 
payments and crisis- related expenditure such 
as the cost of recapitalising banks. In this con-text, the Greek government successfully issued a five- year bond under English law to the value 
of €3 billion on 17 April 2014, which was most recently yielding just over 5%. This bond issue 
met with lively interest from private investors abroad, amongst others. This is likely to be
-
speak both the search for yield and investor confidence in the reiterated assurances from 
euro- area heads of state and government that 
the 2012 haircut for Greek bonds held by pri -
vate creditors constituted a one- off.
The German yield curve derived from the yields 
on Federal securities has become flatter by 50 
basis points, measured by the yield differential 
between two- year and ten- year bonds. How -
ever, it remains quite steep at 140 basis points. It is mainly the relatively long maturities which 
have experienced declining yields. Yields on 
two- year bonds, which are driven to a consid-
erable degree by monetary policy, nonetheless 
also fell somewhat. This reflects the above-  
mentioned speculation about further monetary easing.
Breaking down the yield curve into its deter -
mining components – the real interest rate and inflation expectations – shows that in the re -
porting period it was primarily the real, ie 
inflation-  adjusted, interest rate which declined 
– by 45 basis points. The five- year forward in -
flation rate in five years, a variable favoured by 
central banks because it is less affected by short- term fluctuations, remains at 2%, and 
thus close to its value at the start of the year. 
The corresponding forward inflation rate de -
rived from inflation swaps fell somewhat up to the end of February; most recently it was a little over 2.0%. Therefore, longer- term inflation ex-
pectations are to be regarded as firmly an -
chored in the current interest rate environment.
Financing conditions for enterprises in the cap-
ital market have improved still further, under -
pinning recovery in the euro area. European 
 financials saw their yields on corporate bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years 
and a BBB rating fall significantly from 4.5% at Yield curve for 
German Federal securities flatterInflation expect -
ations firmly  anchored
Further improve-
ment in finan-cing conditions for enterprisesCorporate bond yields in the euro area*
Source: Markit. * BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014036912151821242730%, weekly averages
iBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
CorporatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
45

the start of the year to 3.5% latterly.1 The cor -
responding bond yields for European non-  
financial corporations also dropped, from 3.1% 
to 2.3%. This means that corporate bond yields 
remained well below their five- year average 
and distinctly lower than before the outbreak of the financial crisis. In addition, despite the 
downward movement in German Bund yields, 
the yield spreads against Bunds with the same 
maturities narrowed. For financial and real-  
economy corporations with a BBB rating, the 
spreads contracted by 40 and 20 basis points 
to 2.4 percentage points and 1.2 percentage 
point respectively. Narrower spreads are in 
keeping with abating uncertainty on the Euro-pean equity market. They also indicate a fur -
ther decline in risk aversion amongst bond 
market participants and quite a low level of in-
vestor compensation for expected default 
losses. Against the backdrop of a continued global low- interest- rate environment, this is 
likely to be a manifestation of the ongoing 
search for yield on the part of investors.
Gross issuance in the German bond market stood at €395½ billion in the first quarter of 2014, and was therefore up on the previous-  
quarter level (€366 billion). After deducting sig-
nificantly higher redemptions and taking ac -
count of changes in issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, on balance there were net re
-
demptions of domestic bonds to the value of €11½ billion. Nonetheless, foreign borrowers placed debt securities worth €27½ billion on 
the German market. Thus, funds totalling a net 
€16 billion were raised in the German bond 
market in the reporting period.
The public sector raised €4 billion on the bond 
market in the first quarter of 2014, compared 
with €9 billion one quarter earlier. The figures 
also include issues from resolution agencies of 
German banks which are ascribed to the public 
sector for statistical purposes. Central govern -
ment itself issued mainly five- year Federal notes 
(€13½ billion), and to a lesser extent 30-year Federal bonds (€2½ billion). By contrast, the 
German Federal government redeemed Federal 
Treasury discount paper (Bubills) totalling €8½ 
billion net. In the quarter under review, state 
governments redeemed their own bonds to the value of €5½ billion in net terms.
In the first quarter of 2014, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth €2 billion 
net. As has been the case for some time, do -
mestic firms made use of the favourable finan-
cing conditions on the capital market and ex -
tended the duration of their liabilities. Whilst they placed €5½ billion worth of bonds with Net sales in the 
bond market up
Public sector 
borrowing
Net sales of 
 corporate bondsFive-year forward inflation rate in five years
*
Sources:  BGC  Partners,  Bloomberg  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions. * Derived from the fixed rate on inflation swaps which is 
exchanged against annual realised inflation rates (HICP exclud-ing tobacco) in the next five or ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 20142.02.22.42.6% pa
MAM
2014Daily data Monthly averagesYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years15 May 201430 December 2013 %
1 Based on corporate bond yields included in the various 
iBoxx bond indices for different rating grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
46

maturities of over one year on the market, they 
allowed money market paper with a net value of €3 billion to expire.
Domestic credit institutions are still in the pro-
cess of deleveraging. Year- on- year their capital 
market debt was down €107½ billion, of which 
€17½ billion was accounted for in the first quarter of 2014. In particular, they redeemed “other bank bonds”, which can be structured flexibly (€10 billion), and public Pfandbriefe (€8  billion), as well as mortgage Pfandbriefe (€1 billion). Specialised credit institutions, 
meanwhile, issued debt securities totalling €1 
billion net.
In the first quarter of 2014, non- resident invest-
ors were the main buyers on the domestic 
bond market; they added paper worth €14½ billion to their portfolios. These were exclu
-
sively securities from public sector issuers on 
balance. Domestic non- banks acquired debt se-
curities for €9½ billion, with foreign paper the focus of investor interest. By contrast, domestic credit institutions and the Bundesbank reduced 
their portfolios of interest- bearing paper by 
€5½ billion and €2½ billion respectively.
In an environment in which positive and nega-
tive factors have long been almost evenly bal -
anced, the equity markets in Europe and the 
United States recorded price gains. At the be -
ginning of the year, financial market tension 
was engendered mainly by macroeconomic weaknesses and political uncertainty in some 
emerging market economies; this market ten -
sion, in combination with predominantly mod-
est figures for global economic growth, also 
drove down prices on the international equity 
markets. However, as the quarter progressed, a 
global decline in yields on government bonds 
as well as the prospect of monetary policy con-tinuity in the United States and of a continued low- interest- rate environment helped to stabil-
ise prices. Growing expectations since April of 
a moderate pick- up in the US economy and 
some positive economic signals for the euro 
area and Germany have also boosted momen-Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tions
Purchases of 
debt securities
Equity markets 
somewhat firmerInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 1.2 8.1 1.8
Credit institutions – 14.9 –  0.6 –  5.4
of which
Foreign debt securities –  2.7 2.3 5.0
Deutsche Bundesbank –  4.1 –  2.1 –  2.3
Other sectors 20.1 10.8 9.5
of which
Domestic debt securities –  8.3 –  8.0 – 14.8
Non-residents 10.4 – 19.9 14.3
Shares
Residents 14.0 –  7.0 10.7
Credit institutions 8.3 –  2.2 7.2
of which
Domestic shares 4.4 –  1.9 5.7
Non-banks 5.7 –  4.8 3.5
of which
Domestic shares 2.1 –  1.7 1.2
Non-residents –  5.4 4.9 –  6.0
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 24.5 29.1 20.9
Investment in retail funds 5.0 –  0.5 2.7
of which
Equity funds 0.0 1.2 –  0.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
Equity market
Source: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Monthly, lin scale
Price/earnings ratio based on
12-month earnings expectationsEuro StoxxEnd of December 2008 = 100, weekly averages,
log scale
Price indices
5075100150200250
81012141618
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Standard & Poor's 500
Standard & Poor's 500
Euro StoxxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
47

Discrepancy between changes in net foreign assets and 
the cumulated fi  nancial account: an unsuitable indicator of wealth losses
In the fi  rst few years of European monetary 
union (EMU), increases in net foreign assets 
could easily be ascribed to cumulated net 
capital exports as captured in the balance of 
payments.1 To a large degree, other deter-
minants such as valuation effects or statis-tical peculiarities cancelled each other out over time. However, since around 2007, it 
has been possible to observe a growing dis-
crepancy which by the end of 20132 had 
swollen to €636½ billion.3 Differences be-
tween the cumulated net capital exports4 
and changes in foreign assets are commonly interpreted as an indicator of sizeable losses 
arising from German foreign investment during the fi  nancial crisis.
5 Here, write- 
downs and value changes are thought to 
have radically eaten into resident investors’ 
cross- border claims. This has given rise to the argument that German foreign expos-
ures as a whole generate a low yield and are therefore a “bad deal”. This view is a fallacy because, when interpreting the discrepancy, 
it is essential to keep in mind the manifold 
statistical and methodological differences 
that exist between the fl  ow accounts used 
for the balance of payments and the state-
ments of stock used in the international in-vestment position (IIP). In this context, crisis- induced write- downs played a role but were 
insignifi  cant at the aggregated level. Ultim-
ately, it can be shown that Germany’s exter-
nal assets generated a higher total return than, for example, its external liabilities – 
both before and during the crisis.
Factors contributing to the discrepancyStatistical factorsStatistical factors have led to marked differ-
ences between the (cumulated) capital fl  ows and changes in Germany’s external 
assets (which since 2007 have totalled more 
than €400 billion). For many items, the two accounting systems used for the balance of payments and the IIP are based on different 
primary statistics. This can result in devi-ations which, however, simultaneously allow data collection systems to be moni-tored and improved. Financial derivatives, 
which for years have been recorded in the 
balance of payments where they have gen-erated net capital exports, are one example of this. Starting with the monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs), data on derivatives hold-
ings in Germany have also gradually been 
collected since 2010 and incorporated into 
the IIP statistics. Nonetheless, as 2013 came to a close the net fi  nancial derivatives item 
recorded in the IIP stood around €173 bil-
lion below the amount that would normally 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany’s international 
investment position since the beginning of monetary 
union: developments and structure, Monthly Report, 
October 2008, pp 15-32.
2 According to provisional data relating to the quar-
terly international investment position.
3 If we take the period commencing with the launch 
of EMU, the discrepancy narrows to €540 billion be-
cause, in the fi  rst few years of monetary union, net 
external assets expanded at a higher rate than that 
 recorded for cumulated balance of payment transac-
tions.
4 Occasionally, this is calculated using the cumulated 
balances of the current account. The difference be-
tween the fi  nancial and the current account (including 
capital transfers) is recorded under the statistical item 
“errors and omissions” in the balance of payments. Cross- border cash movements, which the statistics 
have hitherto been unable to reliably capture for the 
euro area, are of key signifi  cance to the (broadly posi-tive) errors and omissions item.
5 See K Klär, F Lindner and K Šehović (2013): Investi-
tion in die Zukunft? Zur Entwicklung des deutschen Auslandsvermögens, Wirtschaftsdienst: Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftspolitik, 93 (3), pp  189-197; as well as 
G Baldi and B Bremer (2013), Verluste auf das deutsche 
Nettoauslandsvermögen – wie sind sie entstanden?, 
DIW Weekly Report, No 49, pp 32-40. See also Euro-pean Commission, Macroeconomic Imbalances – Ger-
many 2014, European Economy, Occasional Papers 174,  
March 2014, p 72.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
48

have been expected given the cash fl  ows in 
all sectors since 2007. This discrepancy is 
mainly attributable to temporarily large- 
scale purchases by securitisation vehicles of fi  nancial derivatives captured in the balance of payments
6 as a means of hedging struc-
tured securities issued in Germany (known 
as certifi  cates).7 The relevant cross- border 
transactions relating to the matching certifi  -cates are then recorded as portfolio invest-
ments. The securities item (which includes the securities deposit statistics) and the equity stakes of direct investment enter-
prises (which includes the foreign direct in-
vestment stock statistics) are another two examples of where different data sources 
are used. Leaving aside fi  nancial derivatives, 
the combined effect of statistical factors 
was to reduce the reported fi  gure for Ger-
many’s external assets by around €240 bil-
lion compared with their expected level 
after taking into account capital fl  ows.
Valuation effects
Valuation- related adjustments can be pri-
marily explained by market price and ex-change rate effects. Among other things, market price changes can affect securities exposures, real estate, the Bundesbank’s 
gold holdings as well as the equity stakes of 
listed enterprises. Exchange rate effects, meanwhile, impact on any exposures de-nominated in foreign currency. Given the 
typical fl  uctuations in market prices and ex-change rates, valuation effects usually even out over time, at least to some degree. The IIP thus offers no more than a snapshot of 
the aggregate external position. All in all, market price and exchange rate effects have diminished Germany’s net external assets by €233 billion since 2007. The 
€177½ billion drop in net external assets at-
tributable to market price effects was not-
ably explained by price gains on German bonds held by non- residents. The safe haven status which German bonds enjoyed during the crisis sent non- resident investors fl  ocking to Federal bonds, which also placed additional pressure on their yields and con-tributed to price gains.
On balance, €55½ billion of the drop in net 
external assets was explained by exchange 
rate effects. Between 2007 and 2012, posi-
tive and negative exchange rate effects 
 virtually cancelled each other out. In net terms, this means that the exchange rate 
effect can be almost entirely traced back to the appreciation of the euro during the past year which, on balance, explained the drop 
in net external assets on account of the 
higher proportion of positions denominated 
6 In future, the IIP should also include derivatives hold-
ings in the corporate sector, which also encompasses 
securitisation vehicles, the aim being to close another 
gap in the data collection system.7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Certifi  cates and warrants 
in the balance of payments, Monthly Report, March 
2008, pp 26-27.Financial account, current account and net external assets
1 Including capital transfers.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 05 10 1330003006009001,2001,500
–+++++€ bn
Factors contributing to the discrepancy 
since the start of 2007
Valuation losses on 
external assets 12%
Valuation gains on external liabilities
25%
Capture of financial derivatives 27%Other
statisticalfactors36%Net external assets
(cumulated 
changes)Financial account balance
(cumulated)
Current account 
balance
1
(cumulated)DiscrepancyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
49

in foreign currency included in Germany’s 
external assets.
Lasting impairments caused by write- downs 
and disposals of assets are refl  ected, for in-stance, in banks’ general provisions for loan 
losses as a separately captured item. They totalled €37½ billion in the IIP during the 
fi  nancial crisis.
Profi  tability of German external assetsThis section presents two suitable methods 
for gauging the profi  tability of external 
assets – the return on assets (expressed as 
investment income over external assets), 
and the total return (which includes valu-
ation effects).
Return on assetsAs regards cross- border investment income 
(which primarily consists of dividends and 
interest income), since 2004 German in-
vestments abroad have outperformed non- 
residents’ assets in Germany. At last count 
(2013), investment income on German ex-
ternal assets equated to a return of 2.8% 
compared with just 2.1% on non- residents’ assets in the German market.
Total return
Besides considering the income fl  ows re-
corded in the balance of payments, it is also 
possible for market price- driven and ex-
change rate- driven changes included in the 
IIP as well as valuation allowances made in 
respect of write- downs to be allocated to 
the various investment instruments, and to 
set them in relation to the level of external assets at the start of the period in question. 
Calculated in this manner, the total return 
on German external assets averaged 4.0% 
between 20058 and 2013, slightly outper-
forming the 3.8% total return on non- residents’ assets in Germany. Broken down 
by investment instrument, German direct investment abroad yielded a higher- than- average total return of 7.2%. By contrast, foreign enterprises’ direct investment in 
Germany generated an annual total return 
of just 4.9%.
Conclusion
To a very large extent, the discrepancy be-
tween cumulated net capital fl  ows and the 
increase in net external assets observed be-
tween 2007 and 2013 is not the result of 
crisis- induced wealth losses but can be ex-
plained by differences in statistical data col-
lection methods and by increases in the 
prices of German external liabilities. All in all, both the return on German external assets and the total return (which also in-
cludes valuation effects) exceed the return 
on external liabilities. What this ultimately indicates is that German investors have fared relatively well with their investment 
abroad. In any case, it is fl  at- out inaccurate 
to say that German foreign investments 
have performed particularly poorly.
8 A lack of detailed data from earlier years prevents 
the total return from being calculated for the period 
before 2005.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
50

tum on the equity markets. Greater confidence 
in the economy has been reflected on both 
sides of the Atlantic in some favourable quar -
terly results from enterprises and in heightened 
activity in planned mergers and acquisitions. 
However, in Germany and Europe, the price re-
covery has contrasted with recurring worries 
among market participants that the geopolit -
ical conflict surrounding Ukraine and the result-
ant possibility of economic sanctions against 
Russia may be detrimental to enterprises.
Overall, European and US shares were most re-
cently 2.1% and 1.2% higher respectively than 
at the end of December as measured by the 
broad Euro Stoxx and S&P 500 indices. How -
ever, shares in the CDAX index lost 0.6% of 
their value. Bank stocks recorded losses in the 
United States (-0.9%), whilst rising markedly in the euro area (+3.0%). A factor in these latter gains was probably the anticipatory confidence 
placed in the periphery countries by market 
participants in recognition of the structural re -
form efforts they have initiated, which is likely 
to have benefited the banks in the form of 
higher prices for government bonds in the per -
iphery countries. The same confidence has also been reflected on national stock markets in the 
euro area, with Italian, Portuguese and Irish 
shares in particular posting large price gains.
The price/earnings ratio, based on 12-month earnings growth expectations, was most re
-
cently above or close to its level at the end of December, at 13.7 for the Euro Stoxx and 15.2 
for the S&P 500. This, together with falling price uncertainty which remains distinctly below the five- year averages, points to rela
-
tively high share valuations. However, valuation 
levels must be judged in the light of the fact 
that, with a brightening economic picture, the medium- term earnings growth expectations of 
European and US enterprises have improved. 
Applying dividend discount models to the data 
produces an equity risk premium of 8.3% for 
the Euro Stoxx index, compared with 7.8% at 
the end of December. This increase in the risk 
premium reflects, first, the fact that already Marked price 
gains for Euro-pean banks
Price/earnings 
ratio higherMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q3 Q4 Q1p
I Current account 1, 2 + 45.2 + 62.9 + 48.5 
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 49.8 + 49.9 + 47.7 
Services 1 –  5.1 +  6.2 +  4.6 
Income 1 + 19.4 + 23.4 + 19.6 
Current transfers 1 – 10.4 –  7.7 – 15.7 
II Capital transfers 1, 4 +  0.1 +  1.0 +  1.8 
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 64.7 – 75.4 – 66.2 
1 Direct investment –  4.0 + 10.0 – 23.9 
German investment 
abroad –  8.2 –  9.5 – 22.7 
Foreign investment
in Germany +  4.2 + 19.5 –  1.2 
2 Portfolio investment – 38.4 – 34.0 – 31.7 
German investment abroad – 32.6 – 23.7 – 40.6 
Shares –  8.7 +  2.9 –  3.4 
Mutual fund shares –  7.7 –  8.3 –  9.7 
Debt securities – 16.3 – 18.2 – 27.5 
Bonds and notes
5, 6 – 16.6 – 17.7 – 22.6 
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes –  7.8 – 12.0 – 22.4 
Money market  instruments +  0.3 –  0.5 –  4.9 
Foreign investmentin Germany –  5.7 – 10.3 +  8.9 
Shares +  4.0 +  4.2 –  5.3 
Mutual fund shares +  1.2 +  5.4 –  0.1 
Debt securities – 10.9 – 19.9 + 14.3 
Bonds and notes
5, 6 –  5.3 + 10.9 +  7.5 
of which
Public bonds and 
notes +  4.3 + 16.4 + 19.3 
Money market  instruments –  5.6 – 30.8 +  6.8 
3 Financial derivatives
7 –  1.2 –  5.5 –  4.5 
4 Other investment 8 – 22.1 – 44.5 –  6.6 
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 9 – 15.3 – 63.9 +  0.8 
of which short-term – 25.9 – 74.7 +  7.2 
Enterprises and
households +  2.8 – 22.5 – 19.2 
of which short-term +  8.5 – 12.8 – 15.6 
General government – 11.5 –  9.5 –  6.0 
of which short-term – 10.4 –  6.3 –  8.7 
Bundesbank +  2.0 + 51.4 + 17.9 
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
10 +  0.8 –  1.5 +  0.6 
IV Errors and omissions + 19.4 + 11.5 + 15.9 
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Adjusted for accrued interest up to and includ-
ing 2012. 7 Securitised and non-securitised options as well as 
fi  nancial futures contracts. 8 Includes fi  nancial and trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. 9 Excluding the Bundesbank. 
10 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due to 
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
51

slightly negative long- term real interest rates, 
measured on the basis of ten- year Bunds and 
inflation expectations from surveys (Consensus 
Forecast), have fallen further. Second, the 
higher level of compensation required for equity risks indicates a certain degree of cau
-
tion amongst share market participants, which puts the higher price/earnings ratio in context.
Issuing activity on the German equity market 
remained relatively muted in the first quarter of 
2014. Domestic enterprises issued €1 billion worth of new shares, the majority of which were listed equities. The volume of foreign equities outstanding on the German market 
rose by €4 billion. Equities were purchased pri-marily by German credit institutions (€7 billion), which invested mainly in domestic securities on 
balance (€5½ billion). Resident non- banks 
bought shares for €3½ billion, with their main focus on foreign paper. By contrast, foreign in-vestors sold shares in the amount of €6 billion.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €23½ bil-lion, after raising funds totalling €28½ billion in 
the previous three months. The fresh funds mainly accrued to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€21 billion). Among 
the asset classes, bond funds were the main issuers of new shares (€12 billion), but mixed 
securities- based funds (€5½ billion), open- end 
real estate funds (€2½ billion) and mixed funds (€2 billion) were also active in the market. For -
eign funds traded in the German market ac -
quired new resources totalling €9½ billion net 
in the first quarter of 2014. Domestic non-  banks were the main buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth €34 billion to their port
-
folios. These were domestic shares for the most 
part. German credit institutions, on the other 
hand, sold mutual fund shares for €½ billion. 
On balance, foreign investors had only a mar -
ginal involvement in the mutual fund market.
Direct investment
As in cross- border portfolio transactions, which 
recorded a net outflow of funds totalling €31½ 
billion, net capital exports amounting to €24 
billion were registered in the form of direct 
 invest ment in the first quarter of 2014.
The largest factor in this was the comparatively 
high level of funding provided by domestic 
owners to their subsidiaries abroad, amounting 
to €22½ billion in the first quarter. This mainly 
took the form of reinvested foreign profits (€11½ billion) and increased equity capital (€8½ billion). Major destinations for German 
direct investment were the Netherlands (€12½ 
billion) as well as the United Kingdom and 
France (€3 billion each).
Foreign investors slightly reduced their funding 
of subsidiaries in Germany in the first quarter 
(€1 billion). On balance, this shrinkage in cap -
ital took place exclusively through intragroup 
credit transactions (€4½ billion). In contrast, 
foreign parent companies increased their cap -
ital in the form of reinvested earnings at Ger -
man subsidiaries (€3½ billion).Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and pur-
chases of mutual  
fund sharesCapital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
52

Economic conditions in Germany
Underlying trends
The economic upturn in Germany continued to 
gain in strength after the start of 2014. The up-
ward movement in domestic activity has been 
evident for some time and has been boosted 
latterly by the fact that, along with private con-
sumption and housing construction, invest -
ment in machinery and equipment is now trending upwards again following a lengthy 
period in the doldrums. This broadly sustained 
demand- side economic growth is being 
rounded off by impulses that have been com -
ing for a year from the export side; although 
these stimuli are rather moderate overall, they 
are nevertheless quite steady. So far, disruptive factors stemming from the international setting 
have not distinctly affected the sentiment of enterprises and consumers in Germany; in
-
stead, the trend recovery in the euro area has 
probably helped to improve the climate for in-
vestment, which was characterised for a long 
time by uncertainties.
The pick- up in economic activity in the first 
quarter of 2014 is obvious from the substantial 
seasonally and calendar- adjusted 0.8% quar -
ter- on- quarter growth in real gross domestic 
product (GDP) that was reported for this period. 
What is also evident, however, is that first-  
quarter growth noticeably exceeds the under -
lying cyclical dynamics. The effect of the wea-
ther had a major impact, since the extremely warm and dry winter did little to impair eco
-
nomic activity in outdoor professions. Accord -
ing to the Bundesbank’s estimations, the par -
ticular weather situation means that the quar -
ter- on- quarter GDP rate is probably 0.3 per -
centage point higher than in the case of a 
“normal” winter (see box on pages 54 to 55). 
The high level of output achieved in the first quarter of 2014 owing to the effect of the 
weather also means, however, that the season-
ally adjusted and calendar- adjusted rate of GDP growth in the second quarter will understate 
the cyclical factor.
The mild winter allowed a considerable season-
ally adjusted rise in the level of construction 
output. Losses in the industry’s utilisation of 
equipment remained well below the usual sea-
sonal level. In seasonally adjusted terms, cap -
acity utilisation showed a further substantial 
increase on the already exceptionally high fig -
ures of the preceding quarters. The construc -
tion sector has already been working at virtu -
ally maximum capacity for three years now, 
which is due mainly to considerably increased 
demand for housing. Since last year, public sec-tor construction has been picking up again fol-lowing a sharp dip in 2012 owing to the ending of the cyclical stimulus. Most recently, there has 
also been a marked increase in demand for 
commercial buildings.Steep upturn 
sustained  primarily by  domestic activity
GDP growth 
overstates under-
lying cyclical 
trend owing to effect of the weatherSubstantial 
 increase in 
 construction …
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014102104106108110112114
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
53

The impact of weather conditions on gross domestic 
 product in the latter part of 2013 and early part of 2014
Exceptional weather conditions over the 
winter months can have a considerable in-
fl  uence on the seasonally adjusted growth 
pattern of gross domestic product (GDP). 
Seasonal adjustment involves making pre-defi  ned corrections for the effects that 
recur annually. This implies that the impact 
of a “normal” winter on output is elimin-
ated from the original data. As a result, the effects of abnormal weather conditions re-main visible in the adjusted data, which can 
make the interpretation of the macroeo-
nomic trend more diffi   cult.
In the light of the exceptionally mild wea-
ther in the latter part of 2013 and early part of 2014, the question therefore arises as to 
whether there is a more accurate way of 
quantifying the impact exerted by the wea-
ther on macroeonomic activity. Generally 
this can be done using an aggregated ap-
proach measuring the magnitude of the weather effect on GDP directly as well as 
indirectly via its components. On the supply 
side, this involves using gross value added 
fi  gures broken down by economic sector. 
Corresponding data are available at a quar-
terly frequency. Another alternative is the 
estimation of weather effects using monthly time series on output and parts of the ser-vices sector.
There are also several possibilities when se-
lecting a suitable weather indicator as an 
explanatory variable. From a macroeco-
nomic perspective, the number of ice days1 
is particularly informative. The restriction to 
a single weather variable offers estimation 
advantages and thus facilitates a more pre-cise quantifi  cation of weather effects.
2 Thus 
an additional ice day reduces GDP in the fi  rst quarter by approximately 0.07% on average and in the fourth quarter by only just under 0.03%.3 The number of ice days 
thus exerts a signifi  cantly stronger negative 
infl  uence on GDP in the fi  rst quarter of a year than in the preceding quarter, which 
may be explained by the fact that in general 
economic output is relatively low between 
Christmas and New Year irrespective of 
weather conditions.
Using the available weather data, a positive 
effect of approximately 0.3 percentage 
point can be estimated in the fi  rst quarter 
of 2014 for the quarter- on- quarter GDP 
growth rate adjusted for seasonal and cal-
endar effects. By contrast, there is only a weak infl  uence on the fourth quarter of 2013 in spite of the number of ice days 
being signifi  cantly below the long- term 
average.
An assessment using the components of gross value added shows that macroeco-nomic effects which are caused by special 
weather conditions stem from construction to a large degree. Whilst the number of ice 
days likewise has a negative effect on 
manufacturing production and overall eco-
nomic output in the services sectors, the 
weather has the opposite impact on energy 
1 The German Meteorological Service defi  nes an ice 
day as one on which the maximum air temperature is 
below freezing. To construct a times series for Ger-
many as a whole, the ice days measured in 29 selected 
representative German weather stations from Monday to Friday were weighted according to inhabitants and 
employees subject to social security contributions in 
the main construction industry.2 For an approach using several weather variables ap-plied to Dutch GDP , see P Ouwehand and F Ruth, How unusual weather infl  uences GDP , CBS Discussion Paper, 2014/ 10.
3 The estimation of the semi- elasticities was carried 
out within the framework of a RegARIMA model, in line with the calculation of calendar effects. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Calendar effects on economic 
activity, Monthly Report, December 2012, annex, 
pp 51-60.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
54

production. Monthly indicators deliver re-
sults which are more clear- cut, but are not 
available for all economic sectors. Overall, 
the aggregated and both disaggregated ap-
proaches produce similar results.
In comparison with the pattern for offi   cial 
price, calendar and seasonally adjusted GDP , the series additionally adjusted for weather is visibly smoother and the vari-
ance in quarter- on- quarter changes signifi  -
cantly lower. In particular, the infl  uence of 
the weather can explain the unusual swings in GDP growth rates in the fi  rst half of 2010, 
in the latter part of 2010 and early part of 
2011 and also in the fi  rst half of 2013.
Overall, the form of weather adjustment 
used thus delivers satisfactory and plausible 
results. However, residual weather effects 
and over- adjustment problems may reduce 
the reliability of an additional weather- adjusted series. In line with European rec-ommendations, weather adjustment is therefore not part of the offi   cial seasonal 
and calendar adjustment.4
Following a fi  rst quarter which was robust 
owing to the weather, the results of the 
weather adjustment ultimately also suggest implications for the further performance of GDP in 2014. Here a distinction needs to be made between two effects. Initially, GDP re-
turns to the normal cyclical level. This re-
sults in a negative growth rate effect of an 
estimated 0.3 percentage point after sea-sonal and calendar adjustment for the 
second quarter. Furthermore, the question 
arises as to whether special weather condi-tions only cause economic activity to be dis-
tributed differently over time or whether 
there is a level effect; therefore whether the 
economic output in 2014 will be higher 
overall due to the favourable weather con-
ditions in the fi  rst quarter. In the fi  rst in-
stance, following a positive weather effect the growth rates would be lower than those of the cyclical trend in subsequent 
quarters; in the second instance they would 
be affected to a lesser extent or not at all. 
The empirical results which have been avail-
able for relatively long periods of time are 
unclear here. There is much to suggest, 
however, that it depends on the particular 
cyclical position. At present, in view of the 
steep rise in demand for construction work and the high utilisation of equipment in the 
construction sector, the withdrawal effects 
in subsequent quarters will probably be 
small.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Calendar effects on eco-
nomic activity, Monthly Report, December 2012, 
pp 51-60, in particular footnote 6.Gross domestic product
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 20141041061081101121142005 = 100, at previous-year prices
–10+1+2Calendar and seasonally adjusted
In addition weather adjusted
Lin scale
Percentage change compared 
with the previous quarterLog scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
55

Enterprises’ willingness to increase their invest-
ment budgets does not affect only construc -
tion work. Usually, investment in machinery 
and equipment picks up in the wake of an im-
proving outlook for the economy. This is espe-
cially true if aggregate capacity utilisation has 
already reached a normal level – as at the cur -
rent end. Added to this is the fact that, in the 
face of heightened uncertainty, technology-  
related replacement and plant projects have 
probably also been deferred over the past two 
years. Following the subdued increase at the end of 2013, enterprises’ spending on move
-
able fixed assets showed a marked increase in the first three months of the current year. Sea-sonally adjusted domestic sales of capital goods producers were 1¾% up on the quarter, for ex-ample. Added to this was a significant increase 
in imports of machinery and equipment in 
January and February 2014.
Private consumption remained a major pillar of 
the cyclical upturn in the first three months of this year. According to surveys by the consumer 
research institution, Gesellschaft für Konsum -
forschung (GfK), consumers are rating their in-come prospects more optimistically again, and, 
despite a certain correction, the propensity to 
purchase remained at a high level. Retail bene-
fited from consumers’ readiness to spend; in 
the period from January to April, the business 
situation was assessed as more favourable than at any time over the past two years. This is con-
sistent with the report that retail sales in the first three months of 2014 showed a percep
-
tible rise on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms. Given the known shortcomings of the 
initial results, caution is still advised when inter -
preting these data, however. Measured by new 
registrations for non- commercial use, sales of 
motor cars are unlikely to have made any sig -
nificant contribution to the rise in private con-sumption. Furthermore, since the start of 2014, 
sales of light heating oil to homeowners have 
been very low owing to small- scale consump -
tion on account of the weather.
The underlying trend in foreign trade has been 
pointing upwards for a year again now. It is, 
above all, the import side that has gained in 
dynamism recently, whereas German firms’ ex-
port activities – given the mixed situation in 
global economic activity overall – are setting no 
more than a subdued pace of expansion at present. This background implies fundamen
-
tally dampening effects on the foreign trade surplus. So far, however, these have been 
counteracted by marked gains in the terms of 
trade due to clearly declining prices for inter -
nationally traded commodities and semi-  
finished products. Even so, in seasonally ad -
justed terms both the trade balance and the current account balance moderated substan
-… but also 
 distinctly more investment in machinery and equipmentMarked rise  
in private 
 consumption
Domestic 
 momentum  reduced surplus on trade and current account balances90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Jan-
Feb 8090100110120
Jan-
Feb
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
56

tially in the first three months of 2014 com -
pared with their heightened levels at the end of 
last year.
According to the Federal Statistical Office, sea-
sonally adjusted exports in the reporting period were not up on their level in the final quarter of 2013. This was probably due chiefly to the fact 
that exports to countries outside Europe after 
the start of the year failed to keep up their 
marked pace of expansion in the fourth quarter of 2013. According to the regional data that is 
currently available only for January and Febru -
ary, German firms’ exports to the United States 
and Japan once again failed to make any head-
way after showing a marked loss of momen -
tum in 2013, which followed steep increases in 
the two years before. By contrast, sales of 
goods in China and the south and east Asian emerging markets showed a seasonally ad
-
justed rise, although the increases remained comparatively moderate. On the other hand, EU countries made up some ground again as importers of German products. Significantly 
more goods were exported to countries in cen-
tral and eastern Europe in particular; the up -
ward trend in exports to this region has been 
strengthening quite steadily since its temporary 
stagnation in 2012. Sales of goods to the rest 
of the euro area increased distinctly in the first 
few months of 2014. Positive results are now 
predominant again in export business with the euro- area partner countries owing to their eco-
nomic recovery. There was a continuation of the sharp expansion in exports to the United 
Kingdom.
Exports expanded sharply at the beginning of 
2014. The reporting quarter thus fits in with the 
picture of an underlying trend of increasingly 
growing momentum. This upward movement 
related to all major categories of goods with 
the exception of energy. The mild winter prob-
ably helped to limit imports of energy. German enterprises’ demand for imported intermediate 
goods was particularly high during the period 
under review. This suggests that the business 
sector in Germany has geared itself to stepping up output. At the start of 2014, suppliers else-where in Europe as well as overseas benefited 
to a similar extent from the demand boost 
 generated by buoyant economic activity in Ger -
many, while European manufacturers per -
formed better last year.
Sectoral trends
Quarter- on- quarter growth in industrial output 
in the first three months of 2014, at 1¼%, was 
practically just as strong as in the fourth quar -
ter of last year. Given the very sharp increase in 
orders of 2¼% in the final quarter of 2013, a 
strengthening of the upward trend would have been expected.
1 Nevertheless, industrial output 
was 4¾% higher than in the final quarter of 2012 when sectoral activity had undergone a 
short- term dip. Intermediate and capital goods 
producers have worked their way more or less in parallel out of the intervening low. In terms of capacity utilisation, however, there are iden-
tifiable differences between these two main 
sectors of industry. According to the Ifo survey results for April, capacity utilisation in the case 
of intermediate goods producers was already markedly exceeding its longer- term average, 
while the cyclical position of capital goods pro-ducers lagged behind this. Overall, manufactur -
ing firms are using their installed physical cap-ital on the scale of the longer- term average.
Compared with other sectors, motor vehicle 
manufacturers made a very strong start to the 
year (+2½% on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms). This contrasted with weaker 
growth at the current end in mechanical engin-
eering. After achieving a marked increase in 
output in the final quarter of 2013, this indus-
trial sector failed to make any improvement on 
that level in the reporting quarter after sea -
sonal adjustment. In the intermediate goods 
sector, the metal- working industry performed Subdued 
 exports …
… but signifi-
cantly more  importsFurther rise  
in industrial 
 output …
… headed by 
motor vehicle manufacturers
1 A higher outcome was also implied by the provisional 
figures for January and February, although these were 
 revised downwards for the March report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
57

relatively well with a rise of 1¾%. The chemical 
and pharmaceutical industry reduced its output by 1¼% on the quarter. Consumer goods out-
put was somewhat higher in seasonally ad -
justed terms.
Given the very mild weather, construction out-
put rose very strongly in the first quarter of 
2014 at a seasonally adjusted 4¾%. There was 
slightly above- average growth in building con-
struction at 5%. It is striking that the finishing 
trades, which are generally far less dependent 
on the weather, performed better with an in -
crease of 4¾% than civil engineering activity 
(+4¼%). This suggests that particularly housing 
construction firms made use of the favourable 
weather conditions to process existing orders. 
Energy production was still tending to be weak. 
In the reporting quarter, there was a decline of 
1½% after seasonal adjustment, which was 
probably also due to the weather.The business situation in the wholesale and re-tail trade showed a marked improvement in the 
first quarter of 2014. This finding is based on both the reported sales figures in the official 
statistics and the results of the Ifo surveys. Out-side the wholesale and retail sector, the current situation was, in fact, rated even more favour -
ably by service providers overall. In the trans -
port sector, there is likely to have been a 
marked expansion of services after the start of the year. For example, compared with the final 
quarter of 2013, the first quarter of this year 
saw a seasonally adjusted increase of 1¼% in 
the total mileage of domestic heavy goods ve-
hicles subject to tolls on German motorways and trunk roads. This probably owed some
-
thing to the effects of the weather. By contrast, there was no more than a marginal increase in turnover in the case of hotels and restaurants.
Employment and  
labour market
The upturn in economic activity clearly pro -
vided a boost for the labour market in the first 
quarter of 2014. Added to this were the effects of the mild weather on sectors of the economy 
where employment is usually depressed in the 
cold months of the year. The first three months of 2014 brought a seasonally adjusted increase 
in employment of 127,000, or 0.3%, on the 
quarter, which was distinctly more than in pre-
vious quarters. Together with the downward 
revisions for the first half of 2013 and with up-
ward revisions for the second half, this led to 
an increase of 0.8% in the year- on- year figure. 
Additional regular jobs subject to social security contributions were the main reason for the in-
crease in the number of persons in work. Fur -
thermore, there were somewhat more persons 
in low- paid part- time employment, although 
there was a quite significant decline in self-  
employment. On an average of the first two 
months of 2014 alone – more recent estimates are not yet available – the increase in jobs sub-ject to social security contributions showed an Construction 
output hit new peak, not least because of mild weatherEconomic  situation also improved in the services sector
Economic  upturn has spread to  
labour marketOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
58

increase of 132,000 on the final quarter of last 
year. This corresponds to growth of ½%.
The dominance of the cyclical component is in-
dicated by the fact that the expansion in em-
ployment is broadly based. New jobs were cre-
ated not only in the construction sector but 
also in manufacturing as well as in temporary 
agency employment, which is closely linked to 
manufacturing, and in logistics. In the services 
sector, there was an above-  aver age rise in the 
number of jobs, especially in healthcare and so-
cial services and in the education sector. Add -
itional employees were also hired on a signifi -
cant scale in wholesale and retail, hotels and 
restaurants, information and communication as 
well as in business-  r elated services (excluding 
temporary agency employment).
In view of the fact that unemployment is at a 
low level, the expanding demand for labour in 
Germany is favouring the activation of persons 
who were hitherto not available to the labour 
market and is leading to an ongoing strong im-
migration of persons who are willing to work, 
especially from the countries of the EU. Accord-
ing to the Federal Statistical Office, the migra -
tion surplus from January to November 2013 
amounted to roughly 430,000 persons, which 
was 17% more than in the same period of 2012. 
There was no overall increase from the coun -
tries of central and eastern Europe, including 
Romania and Bulgaria. By contrast, there was a 
further increase in the number of immigrants from the euro countries in southern Europe, principally Italy. Since the accession of Croatia to the EU in mid-2013, immigration from that country has increased greatly; the migration 
surplus, at 12,000 persons in the first 11 months 
of 2013, is not a significant factor, however. 
With regard to freedom of movement for work-
ers, restrictions still apply to Croatian citizens; for Romanian and Bulgarian citizens such re -
strictions were lifted at the end of last year.2Job growth in all 
major sectors
Strong immigra-
tion and …Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014April40.040.541.041.542.042.5
27.027.528.028.529.029.530.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–1,000–5000+500AprilSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprilMillion
Jan-
FebMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
2 Above and beyond that, in 2013 there were more refu-
gee movements, especially from Syria, Africa and Russia 
(with a sharp increase in applications for asylum).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
59

The largest group of immigrants – with a sur -
plus of approximately 120,000 new arrivals in 
2013, this consisted once again of persons 
from the EU8 countries – has been successfully 
integrated into the labour market. According to the figures of the Federal Employment Agency, there were 76,000 more citizens of these coun-tries in paid employment last year than in 2012, the vast majority of them being in jobs subject to social security contributions. Even so, immi-
grants mostly perform comparatively low- paid 
work mainly in sectors such as construction, lo-
gistics, hotels and restaurants, and temporary agency employment. This assessment is not 
qualified either by the fact that unemployment 
among EU8 citizens has risen somewhat re -
cently (7,600 more than in 2012 on an annual average). This moderate increase is likely to be 
largely explained by frictional unemployment (the number of unemployed persons looking 
for jobs) among the rapidly growing number of 
EU8 citizens residing in Germany. Immigrants 
from other parts of the EU also seem to be suc-
ceeding in integrating into the German labour 
market.
Registered unemployment showed a marked seasonally adjusted fall in the first quarter of this year, following a tendency to a slight in
-
crease in the unemployment figures in the two 
preceding years. On an average of the report -
ing period, the official unemployment figure 
was 54,000 lower than in the fourth quarter of last year. The number of unemployed was 2.91 million; the unemployment rate went down by 0.2 percentage point to 6.7%. The decline con-
tinued quite clearly in April. The official un -
employment figure stands at 2.87 million at 
present. Besides the pick- up in economic activ-
ity, the mild weather was probably a help. The 
decline affected both short- term unemploy -
ment covered by the statutory insurance 
scheme and recipients of unemployment bene-fit II. Compared with the situation in the same 
quarter last year, not only has there been an 
increase in the number of persons leaving un-
employment, there has also been a reduction 
in those entering unemployment. Nevertheless, in practical terms it is only persons under the 
statutory insurance scheme who are benefiting 
from the labour market’s heightened absorp -
tion capacity, while the current decline among 
recipients of unemployment benefit II is due, above all, to a smaller number of new appli
-
cants.
For the time being, recruitment practice in 
trade and industry and in business- related ser -
vices is likely to remain as expansionary as in the first quarter. This is suggested by the Ifo 
employment barometer, which provides infor -
mation on employment plans over the coming 
three months based on firm surveys. For more 
than half a year now, this leading indicator has 
persisted at a high level. The Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s BA-  X job index confirms these 
expectations with its slight upward tendency. 
Both main components of the index – new 
 vacancies as well as the existing number of re-
ported (unsubsidised) vacancies – are pointing 
upwards. An increasing number of jobs subject 
to social security contributions are being 
offered, especially in cyclically sensitive sectors, 
such as industry, construction and trade, as 
well as in professional, scientific and technical 
services. According to the labour market bar -
ometer of the Institute for Employment Re -
search (IAB), there is unlikely to be any further 
significant fall in unemployment over the next 
three months. Since reaching an interim peak 
in February, the indicator has been slowly going 
back down into neutral territory.
Wages and prices
Growth in negotiated rates of pay in the first three months of 2014, at 3.3% year on year, was considerably stronger than in the final 
quarter of 2013 (+2.4%). This was due mainly 
to the retrospectively granted part of the nego-
tiated rate increase in the retail sector being paid as a lump sum at the beginning of this 
year in many cases. The annual rate in the case 
of negotiated basic rates of pay went up by only 0.4 percentage point to +2.8%. The … successful 
 labour market integration
Marked decline 
in unemploy-mentLabour market outlook remains positive
Exceptionally 
steep growth in negotiated rates of pay in 2014 Q1 owing to back payment in the retail sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
60

stronger underlying pace of growth in negoti -
ated rates of pay is likely to continue in the 
second quarter. This is indicated by the pay 
agreements concluded during 2013 and at the 
beginning of this year.
Judging by the outcomes so far, the 2014 pay 
round has been a seamless continuation of last 
year’s pay round. Taking account of industry-  
specific differences, the annualised agreed in -
crease in negotiated pay averaged roughly 3%. 
Increases are generally made in two stages, 
with the first stage being the largest. The most important and (in terms of the volume increase) 
largest agreement concerns central and local government with around 1.7 million salaried 
employees.3 Running for a period of two years, 
the pay agreement provides for phased in -
creases in the scheduled rates of pay totalling 
5.4%, with the remuneration of the low and medium pay groups (up to €3,000 a month) 
rising overproportionally in the first stage. The 
pay agreements in the construction sector and 
for the painting and varnishing trade is some-
what less than this and the agreement in the printing industry is well behind it. Moreover, the fact that these agreements also run for a 
longer period helps to limit the cost strains on firms.
At the beginning of April 2014, the Federal 
Cabinet adopted the Act Reinforcing Collective 
Bargaining Autonomy (Tarifautonomie stär-
kungs gesetz) which provides inter alia for the 
introduction of a general statutory minimum 
wage of €8.50 an hour from January 2015. The only exemptions from this minimum wage level are young persons under 18 years of age who 
have not completed a course of vocational 
training, interns employed on periods of work 
placement or training for no longer than six 
months, persons doing voluntary work and the previously long- term unemployed in the first six 
months after taking up work. Sector- specific 
minimum wage levels below €8.50 will remain 
in force until the end of 2016 as far as they 
have been declared generally binding on the 
basis of the Posted Workers Act (Arbeitnehmer- Entsendegesetz) or the Temporary Employment 
Act (Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz). This 
applies nationally to, for example, employees in 
the hairdressing trade as well as workers in the office cleaning and roofing industries, tempor -
ary employment agencies and large laundries in 
eastern Germany. In 2017, proposals on the 
level of the minimum wage can be presented 
to the Federal government for the first time by 
a minimum wage commission consisting of a 
chairperson, three voting members designated by the employers’ associations and three voting members designated by the unions along with two expert advisers (without voting rights). Ad-justments will be made by statutory order.
The Act Reinforcing Collective Bargaining Au -
tonomy also provides for the Posted Workers Act to be opened up for all sectors and a re
-
form of the declaration of agreements as gen-erally binding. The relevant draft legislation en-
visages a considerably streamlined procedure 
for the future extension of collectively agreed 
sectoral minimum wages to enterprises which 
are not bound by collective agreements. At 
present, there are 15 sectoral minimum wage 
levels, of which 13 have been declared to be Wage increases 
in this year’s pay round much as in 2013 so far
According to 
draft legislation, general  minimum wage with only a few exceptionsExpansion of sector- specific minimum wages also plannedNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1Q1
3 For Federal civil servants, the draft legislation provides for a reduction of 0.2 percentage point in the agreed pay in-creases in order to build up a pension reserve.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
61

generally binding. These are currently set at be-
tween €6.50 for employees in the hairdressing trade in eastern Germany and €13.95 for skilled construction workers in western Germany.
Price trends in Germany are currently being de-
termined by opposing forces. While prices that 
are more sensitive to external influences are 
falling, prices determined to a greater extent by 
domestic factors are showing a marked in -
crease. At the upstream stages of the economy, 
prices in the first quarter of 2014 were down on the preceding three- month period in sea
-
sonally adjusted terms, albeit to varying de -
grees. In the case of domestic producer prices, 
the decline was focused on the energy com -
ponent and, less intensely, on intermediate 
goods, while prices of capital goods remained 
unchanged and consumer goods prices showed 
a marked increase. The improved cyclical situ -
ation of the German economy is likely to have 
been a significant factor in this. This stood in 
contrast to imports, where the fall in prices af-
fected the whole range of goods. The decline 
was especially marked in the case of energy, with falling crude oil prices acting in combin
-
ation with the appreciation of the euro. The 
euro’s higher exchange rate against a number 
of major trading partners’ currencies also 
played a large part in other imported goods be-
coming cheaper. This was reinforced by the 
moderation of international prices for industrial 
commodities. In the case of goods imports, these movements led to the year- on- year de
-
cline in prices widening to 2.8% and, for do -
mestic industrial products, to 1.0%. In the case of export prices, however, the year- on- year de-
cline narrowed slightly to 0.9%. In line with this, there was a distinct improvement in the year- on- year terms of trade, although they 
were still below their long- term average.
Despite extremely buoyant construction activ -
ity, prices for construction work continued to show only a moderate increase in the first quarter of 2014. The year- on- year rate of in
-
crease persisted at 2.0% for both structural work and finishing trades. Construction de
-Declining prices 
at upstream stages of the economy
Construction 
prices rising moderatelyExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20149095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
95100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import priceslog scale
%
April95100105
AprilDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
62

mand and the fact that the utilisation of equip-
ment is at a much higher level than average 
have so far not led to an upward acceleration 
in prices; this may have something to do with 
the favourable developments in material costs, 
where the rise in prices moderated. Moreover, 
construction work services were also per -
formed internationally; accordingly, overcap -
acity in other European countries is slowing 
down price inflation in Germany. According to 
the Association of the German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken),  
the prices of owner- occupied housing rose by 
2.4% on the year in the first quarter of 2014. 
The year- on- year figure showed no further 
change following the marked decline in the 
previous quarter. Compared with other leading indicators, the vdp index show price dynamics 
in the German housing market to be quite 
moderate at present.
Following a slight decline in the final quarter of 
2013 due to energy prices, consumer prices ac-celerated again distinctly in the first quarter of 2014. This resulted in a seasonally adjusted rate of 0.4% on the quarter. Declining oil prices, the 
appreciation of the euro and the mild winter 
weather led to a further marked fall in energy 
prices, but they were not down as sharply as in 
the final quarter of 2013. Over the course of 
the quarter, there set in a countermovement to 
the previous year’s sharp rise in food prices, 
which was also related to the weather. By con-
trast, prices for services in particular acceler -
ated again distinctly despite the late date of Easter, and rents were going up at a faster pace. Despite the appreciation of the euro, 
even prices of industrial goods went up some-what more quickly than in the preceding quar -
ter, which is likely to have been connected with 
seasonal price reductions being brought for -
ward to December on account of the warm winter weather. Even so, the fact that Easter fell later than in 2013 meant that the annual 
rate of the national consumer price index (CPI) fell from 1.3% to 1.1% in the first quarter and 
annual inflation as measured by the Harmon -ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) was down from the same figure of 1.3% to 1.0%.
The upward price trend continued in April. Consumer prices rose by 0.3% on the month 
after seasonal adjustment, again mainly due to an increase in services prices and housing rents. 
Furthermore, energy became more expensive 
and prices of industrial goods were somewhat 
higher. By contrast, food prices remained un -
changed compared with the previous month. 
The late date of Easter played a part in the an-nual CPI and HICP going up to 1.3% and 1.1% respectively.
Orders received and outlook
In the coming months, the economic upturn in Germany will be driven very largely by domestic forces. External impulses, by contrast, are likely to be rather subdued. Moreover, in view of the 
heightened perception of economic risks in some emerging market economies as well as 
considerable geopolitical uncertainties in east -
ern Europe, there has lately been a marked in-crease in the potential for external disruptions. 
If no major unforeseen events result from this 
situation, the economic upturn may be ex -
pected to continue. As the positive effect of 
the mild winter in the first quarter will, in purely 
mathematical terms, dampen the seasonally 
adjusted quarter- on- quarter rate in the second 
quarter, GDP growth in the second quarter is 
still likely to be relatively low in seasonally and calendar- adjusted terms.
A stronger domestic component of demand is 
indicated by the fact that seasonally adjusted 
domestic industrial orders received increased significantly by 2% in the first quarter of this 
year, whereas the overall inflow of orders was 
no higher than in the preceding three- month 
period. This was not due solely to domestic en-terprises ordering more primary and intermedi-
ate products (+1%) in anticipation of planned 
expansions in production. Above all, capital 
and consumer goods producers also received Marked rise in 
consumer prices in 2014 Q1Consumer prices continuing to accelerate in April
Upswing 
 continues
More domestic 
industrial orders, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
63

more orders from domestic customers (+2½% 
and +3¼% respectively). Momentum in the 
capital goods sector did not stem from the 
motor vehicle industry, however, and very little 
came from mechanical engineering. There was, 
however, a particularly sharp rise in what are generally large- volume orders in the other 
transport equipment sector.
Seasonally adjusted export orders in the first quarter of 2014 were clearly down on the 
fourth quarter of last year. This was partly due 
to the fact that there were fewer large- scale 
orders for other transport equipment than in the preceding three-  month period. Further
-
more, since the start of 2014, orders from EMU partner countries were a long way from match-
ing their strongly elevated level in the period 
from October to December 2013. However, in 
quarter- on- quarter terms, somewhat more 
orders were received from non- euro- area coun-
tries (+¾%) after seasonal adjustment.
The recently more moderate underlying trend 
in external demand when compared with do -
mestic orders applies to all the major industrial 
sectors with the exception of the automotive 
industry. After the start of the year, motor ve -
hicle manufacturers were again benefiting from 
the popularity of German makes of car, espe -
cially outside Europe. In the EMU partner coun-
tries, which are recovering only slowly on the 
whole, in the first quarter seasonally adjusted 
demand for German- made intermediate goods 
was only slightly stronger than in the final quar -
ter of 2014, when there had been a perceptible 
increase for the first time since the beginning 
of 2012. In seasonally adjusted terms, orders received for intermediate goods from outside the euro area in the period from January to 
March failed on average to match their height-
ened level in the fourth quarter of last year. 
What is striking is the underlying trend in the 
German mechanical engineering sector which, for a year now, has been receiving more orders 
from the rest of the euro area again; in any 
event, the year- on- year figure was nearly one- 
tenth up on the low at the beginning of 2013. … but fewer 
 export orders
External demand 
for German 
motor vehicles 
picking up againDemand for industrial goods and 
construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Jan-
Feb
Jan-
Feb90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction orderslog scale
Main industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
64

This stands in contrast with non- European ex -
port orders for machinery during the same 
period, which showed an overall decline of 
2¾% from the level at that time.
The construction sector enjoyed a further sub-
stantial surge in orders at the beginning of the 
year. One area this affected was housing con -
struction. The upturn in demand is unbroken in 
this subsector. In January and February 2014, not only were more permits for apartments 
granted than on an average of the fourth quar -
ter of 2013 after seasonal adjustment (+7¾%), 
the figure was also somewhat up on the very 
high number of dwellings approved by the 
 authorities during the summer months of 2013 
as part of new building projects. Additionally, 
at the start of the year enterprises also placed 
somewhat more orders for construction pro -
jects. Major commercial civil engineering pro -jects are also likely to have been of significance 
in this context.
The favourable demand conditions in industry 
and construction correspond to the ongoing improvement in business expectations which the Ifo Institute recently identified for these 
sectors of the economy. Added to this are ris -
ing optimism in retail and other services sectors 
as well as the more confident sentiment of 
households. The pick- up in the labour market 
and the perceptible growth in wages and salar -
ies, which form the basis for the income pro -
spects that consumers rate as very positive, 
may be seen as additional pointers to a further 
upturn in domestic activity. The continuing fa -
vourable export expectations in manufacturing point to a modestly positive underlying trend in external demand.Unbroken 
 upward trend  
in construction ordersDomestic 
 momentum 
 sustained by 
 enterprises’ and consumers’  optimismDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
65

Public finances*
General government budget
The general government budget has been 
broadly balanced for the past two years and, as 
things stand, this is expected to continue in 
2014. On the one hand, the economic upturn, 
favourable financing conditions and the higher 
Bundesbank profit compared to 2013 are, be -
sides other factors, likely to ease the pressure 
on the general government budget. On the 
other hand, strains will arise, in particular, from the various spending programmes agreed after 
the national elections. In structural terms, too, 
the budget should be close to balance. The 
debt ratio fell to 78.4% at the end of 2013 (end-2012: 81.0%) and is expected to record 
another considerable decline to around 75% by the end of 2014. With the general government 
budget at least broadly balanced, this reduc -
tion in the ratio is largely attributable to growth in nominal gross domestic product (GDP) in the 
ratio’s denominator. In addition, government-  
owned bad banks are likely to continue to re -
duce their liabilities as they sell off financial assets. However, the decline in the debt ratio 
will be slowed down by the payments agreed 
as part of the euro- area financial assistance 
mechanisms, although these are much lower 
than in previous years.1
The revenue ratio may change very little in 
2014. Fiscal drag,2 in particular, will be partially 
offset by income tax relief measures. The ex -
penditure ratio could also remain virtually un -
changed despite the various new spending 
programmes (especially for pensions, transport 
infrastructure, childcare, education and re -
search). This is due to three factors. First, only 
part of these measures will come into effect in 2014. Second, the economic upturn is pushing down the expenditure ratio, above all via nom-inal GDP growth in the denominator. And third, 
the interest expenditure ratio could fall be -
cause, as things stand today, both the average interest rate on government debt and the debt ratio are set to  decline.
In 2015, too, the general government budget 
could remain broadly balanced and the debt 
ratio may decline further. Positive economic de-
velopments are likely to increasingly boost pub-
lic finances and, not least as a result of the de-
clining debt ratio, the interest expenditure ratio will probably fall further. However, these relief- 
providing factors will contrast with growing 
strains from the latest spending programmes. 
Furthermore, with expenditure dynamics con -
tinuing unabated and reserves at a high level, 
the statutory health insurance contribution 
rates are likely to see a modest and temporary 
decline. The pension adjustment rules may also 
dictate a cut in the contribution rate to the 
statutory pension insurance scheme to ensure 
compliance with the upper reserve limit; how-ever, as with the statutory health insurance in-stitutions, it is only a matter of time before the rate will have to be put up again.
The Federal Government presented its updated 
stability programme for the 2014-18 period in 
April.3 As things stand, achieving the envisaged General govern-
ment budget  
set to remain broadly  balanced in 2014 and …
… debt ratio to 
decline consid-erably
Revenue and ex-
penditure ratios may remain stable on the wholeBroadly bal-anced budget and declining debt ratio cur-rently expected for 2015, too
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section is based on data contained in the national accounts and on the Maastricht ratios. These data, in turn, are based on the 
European System of Accounts (ESA) 1995 (currently still 
valid but due to be replaced as of September 2014 by the 
revised ESA 2010). The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and the social security funds is based on the figures as defined in the gov-
ernment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).1 There are also general budgetary risks, not least as a re-sult of uncertainty in the global and European context.
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
(positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax -
ation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific 
excise duties are largely independent of prices.3 As part of European budgetary surveillance, EU member 
states have to present a stability or convergence pro -
gramme every April. As in previous years, the programme is 
based on central government’s macroeconomic forecast from the beginning of the year. This projection was up
-
dated in mid-  April and a revised official tax estimate on that 
basis was presented at the start of May (see p 73). How -
ever, the implied revisions for the fiscal forecast are only 
minimal on the whole as a result of this new information.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
66

development should be possible and the inten-
tion of complying with the European rules gov-
erning the structural fiscal balance and the re-duction of the debt ratio while also leaving an added safety margin is welcome. The aim is to 
ensure that the general government budget 
 remains balanced and that a surplus of ½% of 
GDP can be attained as of 2017.4 The stability 
programme shows a significant decline in the 
debt ratio to 65% by the end of 2018. Accord-
ing to the programme, the medium- term ob -
jective of a general government structural def-
icit ratio of no more than 0.5% of GDP will thus be maintained with a margin of around 1 per -
centage point throughout this period. How -
ever, this is partly due to a further decline in the 
interest burden. Overall, general government 
fiscal policy will be relaxed as time progresses if it is evaluated on the basis of the cyclically ad-
justed primary balance (excluding interest ex -
penditure). Central government’s various ex -
penditure- increasing measures, besides other 
factors, will play a key role here. These will only 
be partially offset by additional revenue from 
fiscal drag and increases in social contribution 
rates as well as the somewhat restrained ex -
penditure policy assumed for other areas (eg 
personnel).
The structural surplus of ½% of GDP envisaged 
in the stability programme is also based on the assumption that cyclical factors are having a 
significant unfavourable impact in 2014 and 
their influence will remain negative until 2017. 
This assumption is based on the method of cyc-
lical adjustment used in European budgetary surveillance. All in all, however, the recent 
macroeconomic data suggest that the cyclical 
situation in Germany is not unfavourable. The 
macroeconomic forecast used by the govern -
ment puts the cyclical impact in the forecast 
period on the positive side. The unadjusted fis-
cal development outlined in the stability pro -
gramme, showing a balanced budget and slight surpluses, would thus partly reflect  favourable cyclical factors, and the structural 
budget would, in fact, be balanced or slightly 
negative.5
Given the exceptionally favourable underlying 
conditions, the fact that the economy as a whole is expected to grow smoothly and un
-
certainty in the global and European context, it 
would seem wholly appropriate to achieve 
larger surpluses. The debt ratio could then be Stability pro-
gramme envis-ages compliance with European rulesAssessment of structural situ-ation seems too favourable
Marked sur-
pluses appro-priate given  favourable underlying  conditionsKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
 
Item 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Real GDP growth (%)
Stability programme April 2014 0.4 1.8 2.0 1.4 1.4 1.4
Stability programme April 2013 0.4 1.6 1.4 1.4 1.4 –
General government fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2014 0.0 0 0 0 ½ ½
Stability programme April 2013 – ½ 0 0 ½ ½ –
Structural fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2014 0.7 ½ ½ ½ ½ ½
Stability programme April 2013 0 ½ ½ ½ ½ –
Debt-to-GDP ratio
Stability programme April 2014 78.4 76 72½ 70 67½ 65
Stability programme April 2013 80½ 77½ 75 71½ 69 –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 For the forecast period, the only figures available are in 
relation to GDP and have been rounded to the nearest ½, 
which makes them more difficult to analyse.
5 Past estimates of the cyclical components have often 
been too negative; see Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact 
of biased potential output estimates within fiscal rules, 
Monthly Report, April 2014, pp 33-34.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
67

Fiscal developments in the euro area
Distinct decline in euro- area general 
government defi  cit ratio in 2013, but further rise in debt ratio
At the end of April, Eurostat published data 
on the general government defi  cits and 
debt levels of the EU member states as part 
of European budgetary surveillance. These 
fi  gures show that the euro- area general 
government defi  cit ratio declined from 
3.7% to 3.0% last year, an improvement 
achieved amidst unfavourable cyclical de-
velopments. According to the European Commission, the decline amounted to 
around 1 percentage point after cyclical ad-
justment. This consolidation was achieved in equal measure via the revenue and ex-penditure sides; the cyclically adjusted ex-penditure ratio also benefi  ted from the 
year- on- year fall of 0.3 percentage point in 
temporary outlays to support the banking 
sector. By contrast, the debt ratio continued 
to rise distinctly in 2013, increasing from 
92.7% to 95.0%.1
2014: further but moderate defi  cit  reduction, yet continued rise in debt ratio
The European Commission’s spring 2014 
forecast projects a continued decline in the 
euro- area defi  cit ratio this year, down to 2.5% of gross domestic product (GDP). However, this reduction is being helped along by positive cyclical conditions, and temporary factors are almost negligible, which means that the structural improve-
ment will amount to only ¼% of GDP . Des-
pite the rather more signifi  cant pick- up in economic activity projected for 2015, the 
European Commission expects only a slight 
decline in the defi  cit ratio next year 
(to 2.3%), which would amount to a loos-
ening of the fi  scal policy stance in structural 
terms. However, this fi  gure does not in-clude all the measures envisaged in the na-
tional stability programmes, as it only in-
corporates measures known in suffi   cient 
detail by the cut- off date for the forecast. 
For 2014, the Commission projects that the 
debt ratio will rise further to 96.0%. It ex-
pects the debt ratio to decline in 2015 for 
the fi  rst time since 2007, falling slightly 
to 95.4%.
More consolidation needed in most 
cases, even in countries whose defi  cit ratios are below the threshold
Only a few euro- area countries (Estonia, Finland, Germany, Italy, Latvia and Luxem-bourg) are not currently subject to an ex-
cessive defi  cit procedure. Austria, Belgium, 
Malta, the Netherlands and Slovakia kept 
their defi  cit ratios below the reference value again in 2013.
2 It must now be established 
whether these countries meet the criteria 
for closing their procedure, notably the re-
quirement to keep their defi  cit ratio below 
the reference value for a sustained period 
of time and to lower their debt ratio suffi   -
ciently. However, even if a country exits the 
excessive defi  cit procedure or has already 
eliminated its excessive defi  cit, this does not 
mean that the consolidation process is yet 
complete. Indeed, most of these countries 
still need to achieve the minimum require-
ment of a balanced (or close to balance) budget in structural terms – ie net of cyc-lical effects and one- off measures.
3 The 
1 Unlike the data reported in the Eurostat notifi  cation, 
the European Commission debt ratio fi  gures cited in 
this box also include lending between euro- area coun-
tries.2 However, Eurostat expressed some reservations con-cerning the data provided by the Netherlands because 
of uncertainty about the statistical impact of govern-
ment intervention in the nationalisation and restructur-ing of SNS Reaal in 2013. This matter is currently being clarifi  ed with the Dutch statistical agencies.3 In addition, countries with a debt ratio of more than 60% must rapidly bring it down to this threshold.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
68

countries that have signed the Fiscal Com-
pact are also obliged to enshrine this rule in 
their national legislation. The Six-Pack of 
regulations passed in 2011 was also aimed 
at achieving stricter compliance with the 
rules and a stronger binding force for the 
preventive arm of the Stability and Growth 
Pact. Notably, the Six-Pack created options 
to impose sanctions (interest- bearing de-
posits) in cases where countries fail to meet 
the structural budgetary objective and where the annual improvement in their structural balance remains signifi  cantly below the benchmark of at least 0.5% of 
GDP . Despite failing to meet the structural 
budgetary objectives, many countries’ 
structural balances are expected to improve 
only marginally this year, with some even projected to deteriorate. The European Commission (and the Ecofi  n Council) now have a duty to strictly apply the new pro-
cedures in order to strengthen the reformed preventive arm of the Stability and Growth 
Pact and to safeguard sustainable budgets 
in the long term. A departure from the 
jointly agreed requirement to achieve a bal-
anced budget in structural terms could be particularly problematic for countries with 
high debt ratios.
Number of countries subject 
to excessive defi  cit procedure still high
The countries subject to an excessive defi  cit 
procedure which still had defi  cit ratios of 
more than 3% in 2013 have been given until 2015 (France, Ireland, Portugal, Slo-venia) or 2016 (Cyprus, Greece, Spain) to 
correct their defi  cits. According to the up-
dated stability programmes, in which the 
governments present their budgetary plans for the coming years, all of these countries 
are set to correct their defi  cits on time. 
However, based on a no- policy- change as-
sumption,4 the European Commission’s 
forecast shows this to be unlikely for all of 
these countries except Greece and Portu-
gal, and projects a signifi  cant slackening in the pace of consolidation. The Commis-
sion’s forecast predicts that Slovenia’s def-
icit ratio will be just above the threshold in 
2015 and foresees a more substantial in-
fringement in France despite the deadlines 
for both of these countries having been ex-tended by two years in 2013. It also projects that Ireland’s defi  cit ratio will remain signifi  -cantly above the threshold in 2015 under a 
no- policy- change assumption. While the 
2016 correction deadline lies beyond the Commission’s forecast horizon, the defi  cit 
ratios of Cyprus and Spain are expected to 
remain very high in 2015.
European Commission responsible 
for strict application of excessive defi  cit procedure
As part of the European Semester, the Com-
mission must now critically assess whether 
the stability programmes are based on real-
istic plans. In the context of the excessive 
defi  cit procedure, moreover, it is essential to 
establish whether the countries have 
achieved the set milestones or whether their procedures need to be stepped up.
5 
The crucial criterion in the excessive defi  cit 
procedure is essentially the improvement in the structural balance, for which France and Slovenia missed their targets by a consider-
able margin. However, the EU committees 
and forums have agreed that assessments 
of compliance should also take account of 
additional aspects; adjustments are to be 
made for forecast errors, for example. Fail-ure to achieve a structural improvement can 
be excused if it is caused by estimates of potential growth and/or revenue growth 
(adjusted for legislative changes and cyclical 
factors) being lower at the time of assess-
ment than at the (earlier) point in time when the recommendation was made. It 
4 In a departure from its usual procedure for the fore-
cast, for the programme countries the European Com-mission does not solely take account of measures that have already been passed.5 Special procedures apply to programme countries.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
69

can also be excused if the combined vol-
ume of the measures taken is equal to the 
volume of the consolidation requirements 
in the recommendations.
On fi  rst refl  ection, it might seem logical not 
to take account of missed targets which are not directly caused by government actions. However, the fundamental aim of the rules is to ensure sustainable public fi  nances, and 
budgets still become less sustainable and the objective of lowering the debt ratio is still missed even if the burdens that cause 
the deterioration are unexpected. Another 
problematic aspect concerning the binding 
force of the rules is that the reformed pro-
cedure is now extremely complex, which 
makes it very diffi   cult to retrace how assess-
ments are reached. The procedure creates 
incentives for countries to make optimistic 
forecasts or optimistic estimates of the  fi  nancial impact of policy measures if they wish to avoid prompt and sweeping con-solidation. If, for example, the correction 
recommendation in an excessive defi  cit pro-cedure is based on an overly optimistic esti-
mate of revenue developments, it is more likely that missed targets will be excused 
later on. In addition, there is also substan-
tial scope for ad- hoc decisions in the exces-
sive defi  cit procedure. All in all, everything 
hinges to a large extent on the assessment 
of the European Commission, whose role has been strengthened by the reforms.
6 
However, it would seem advisable to be 
cautious about using such scope, not least 
in view of the very high debt ratios in many 
countries. If insuffi   cient defi  cit reduction is 
excused and deadline extensions are 
granted on a regular basis, there is a danger that this will progressively erode the binding force of the rules – an element which is also 
important in the long term. In particular, 
the inadequate implementation of the fi  scal rules before the crisis should be regarded as a problematic development which, in some cases, was a contributory factor in the debt crisis.Not least in view of this situation, the re-
formed Stability and Growth Path is also dir-
ectly targeted at reducing excessive debt ratios. It requires governments to reduce 
the differential to the 60% mark by an aver-age of one- twentieth per year until the ref-erence value has been reached. Yet this also 
entails a complex procedure which does 
not allow a direct assessment of whether a country has met its target. The annual aver-
age change over the previous three years, or alternatively over the period spanning 
the past, current and following year, is the 
key criterion in this assessment; cyclical ef-
fects or other special factors can also be 
taken into account on a case- by- case basis.7 
In 2014, only Estonia, Latvia, Luxembourg, 
Slovakia and Finland are likely to comply 
with the 60% reference value. According to the Commission’s estimates, most member 
states’ debt ratios will continue to rise in 
2014 and this will not change until 2015.
The reforms to the fi  scal framework, not 
least through the Six-Pack legislation, have 
essentially created scope for improvements, 
such as the fi  rmer anchoring of European 
requirements in national legislation and the somewhat more prominent role of the debt 
ratio. However, experience to date of how 
the rules are applied in practice suggests 
that the procedures will be made far more 
complicated, the rules will become less 
clear and scope for ad- hoc decisions will in-
6 The estimation of output gaps is also signifi  cant in 
this context, as they form the basis for measuring the 
impact of cyclical factors on public fi  nances. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of biased potential 
output estimates within fi  scal rules, Monthly Report, 
April 2014, pp  33-34. However, across the various 
methods, the change in the structural balance gener-
ally varies to a lesser extent than the level.
7 Transitional provisions specify that these require-
ments will not apply to the member states that were 
already subject to an excessive defi  cit procedure when 
the rules were established (in November 2011) until 
three years after that procedure has been closed. Until 
then, they will be subject to special provisions de-signed to ensure that, by the end of the transitional 
period, the countries have achieved a budgetary pos-
ition which is compatible with the debt criterion then in place.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
70

crease. Yet for fi  scal policy rules to have the 
necessary binding force, they need to be 
transparent, as well as being comprehen-
sible to the general public. A certain degree 
of clarity and simplicity therefore appears 
essential, even if this means that the rules 
cannot explicitly take account of each spe-cifi  c situation.
Troika confi  rms that programme 
 countries are broadly on track
The assistance programmes have been 
closed for Spain, Ireland and, more recently, Portugal (subject to the last programme re-
view report being approved by the Troika). 
Although these countries will still have to undergo special semi- annual assessments 
until they have repaid three- quarters of the fi  nancial assistance they have received, they 
will not be set any more separate targets (other than those in the excessive defi  cit procedure). It is now crucial that these countries continue to steer a consistent course of sustained budgetary consolida-tion, rapidly reduce their (particularly high) 
debt ratios, and both achieve and maintain a budgetary position that is sustainable over the long term.
By contrast, Greece is still subject to an as-
sistance programme, which was launched 
in May 2010 and reformulated (as the “second economic adjustment pro-
gramme”) in March 2012. As well as supply-
ing especially long- dated loan commit-
ments totalling around 125% of Greek GDP 
(€225 billion), the international assistance providers are charging very low interest rates on their assistance loans to Greece, which is also a form of fi  nancial support. 
The euro- area countries are also making dir-
ect transfers to Greece (by passing on the 
assumed profi  ts made by their central banks 
from the purchase of Greek government bonds). Taking account of Greece’s un-
scheduled tapping of the capital market in 
April 2014, the Troika still expects a funding gap of €2½ billion for 2014, which is sched-
uled to be the last year of the euro- area Forecast and plans for the public fi  nances of the euro-area countries
 
CountryEuropean Commission spring forecast, May 2014Stability programmes, 1 
April/May 2014 Deadline 
for 
 correcting 
excessive defi  cit Budget balance as a percentage of GDPGovernment debt as a percentage of GDPBudget balance as a percentage of GDP
2013 2014 2015 2013 2014 2015 2014 2015 2016
Austria –  1.5 – 2.8 – 1.5 74.5 80.3 79.2 – 2.7 – 1.4 – 0.7 2013
Belgium –  2.6 – 2.6 – 2.8 101.5 101.7 101.5 – 2.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 2013
Cyprus –  5.4 – 5.8 – 6.1 111.8 122.2 126.4 . . . 2016
Estonia –  0.2 – 0.5 – 0.6 10.0 9.8 9.6 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.4 –
Finland –  2.1 – 2.3 – 1.3 57.0 59.9 61.2 – 2.0 – 1.1 – 0.5 –
France –  4.3 – 3.9 – 3.4 93.5 95.6 96.6 – 3.8 – 3.0 – 2.2 2015
Germany 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 78.4 76.0 73.6 0 0 0 –
Greece – 12.7 – 1.6 – 1.0 175.1 177.2 172.4 . . . 2016
Ireland –  7.2 – 4.8 – 4.2 123.7 121.0 120.4 – 4.8 – 3.0 – 2.2 2015
Italy –  3.0 – 2.6 – 2.2 132.6 135.2 133.9 – 2.6 – 1.8 – 0.9 –
Latvia –  1.0 – 1.0 – 1.1 38.1 39.5 33.4 – 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.7 –
Luxembourg 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.4 23.1 23.4 25.5 0.1 – 0.5 0.2 –
Malta –  2.8 – 2.5 – 2.5 73.0 72.5 71.1 – 2.1 – 1.6 – 0.7 2014
Netherlands –  2.5 – 2.8 – 1.8 73.5 73.8 73.4 – 2.9 – 2.1 – 1.9 2014
Portugal –  4.9 – 4.0 – 2.5 129.0 126.7 124.8 – 4.0 – 2.5 – 1.5 2015
Slovakia –  2.8 – 2.9 – 2.8 55.4 56.3 57.8 – 2.8 – 2.8 – 2.0 2013
Slovenia – 14.7 – 4.3 – 3.1 71.7 80.4 81.3 – 4.1 – 2.4 – 1.5 2015
Spain –  7.1 – 5.6 – 6.1 93.9 100.2 103.8 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.8 2016
Euro area –  3.0 – 2.5 – 2.3 95.0 96.0 95.4 . . . –
Source: European Commission. 1 Member states subject to a macroeconomic adjustment programme are not obliged to 
 submit a stability programme.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
71

programme (the IMF programme will run 
until 2016). If government revenue and ex-
penditure continues to develop as planned, 
no assistance loans are yet envisaged for 2015 to cover the funding needs of just under €12½ billion. Ultimately, it is crucial 
that the will to consolidate public fi  nances 
and implement fundamental reforms does 
not weaken in Greece. Since 2010, Greece 
has taken substantial consolidation meas-
ures and has therefore managed to cut its 
defi  cit ratio considerably despite a very un-
favourable macroeconomic backdrop. 
Greece more than fulfi  lled the 2013 budget-
ary objective agreed in the programme,8 
and the Troika expects it to meet its pro-
gramme targets for 2014, too. Even so, the 
success of Greece’s second economic ad-
justment programme is not yet assured. In 
the past, inadequate implementation of measures, such as agreed structural re-
forms, led to instalments of fi  nancial assis-
tance being delayed. Despite private credit-ors having taken a haircut on Greek govern-
ment bonds in March 2012, Greece’s debt 
ratio was by far the largest in the euro area 
in 2013, totalling around 175%. It is set to 
continue rising this year, before falling from 2015 onwards. If a primary surplus amount-
ing to 4½% of GDP were achieved and maintained from 2016 onwards, the debt ratio could be reduced relatively rapidly, 
provided that the forecast of a recovery in 
economic growth proves correct.
An assistance programme was launched for 
Cyprus in April 2013. This fi  nancial package 
covers up to €10 billion in loans (around 
60% of Cypriot GDP), of which around €5 
billion have actually been disbursed to date. 
The programme envisages extensive fi  scal 
consolidation measures. Thanks to expend-
iture cuts and, in particular, better- than- expected economic developments, Cyprus more than fulfi  lled its targets for 2013. In 
addition, the reform of the Cypriot banking 
sector, which is a component of the pro-gramme, is a particularly important step. While some risks remain, substantial pro-gress has been made in this area, with an extensive bail- in of owners and creditors 
through the split and subsequent merger of the country’s two largest banks, the recap-
italisation of another bank with private funds and the restructuring and recapital-isation of the cooperative banking sector. 
Some of the capital controls imposed in Cy-
prus following its fi  nancial crisis have now 
been relaxed. Progress with plans to privat-ise state- owned enterprises has been slow, however. The ongoing success of the assis-tance programme and, in particular, the de-
sired reduction in the government debt ratio, which has risen very sharply since 
2008, depend not only on fi  scal consolida-
tion, which remains a necessary task, but 
also, notably, on the swift implementation 
of a sustainable solution to reduce the very 
high share of non- performing loans in the 
banks’ total loan portfolio and on the posi-
tive macroeconomic forecast proving cor-rect. The considerable challenges involved in rebalancing the Cypriot economy mean that there are still risks attached to this 
 endeavour.
8 Greece reported a budget balance of -12.7% of GDP , 
which was confi  rmed by Eurostat at the end of April. 
To calculate the primary balance, the interest expenses 
(4% of GDP) included in this fi  gure have to be de-
ducted. Deducting, in particular, outlays on support for 
the banking sector (10.8% of GDP) and the revenue 
transferred to Greece from the other euro- area coun-
tries in connection with the purchase of Greek govern-ment bonds by the central banks, as well as other spe-cial items, results in the oft- cited “primary surplus” of 0.8% of GDP . In principle, the programme targets for 
all programme countries are defi  ned in this way, in 
contrast to the usual defi  nition of the primary balance, which only factors out interest expenses.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
72

brought below the 60% threshold earlier, thus 
enabling Germany to make greater provisions 
for managing the effects of demographic 
change, which will soon be noticeable. It would seem appropriate, for instance, to use 
additional savings resulting from lower interest 
expenditure to improve the budget balance. 
With a view to the national budget rules, too, 
it would be advisable to use the current posi -
tive developments in the economy to rapidly 
bring down the remaining deficits at the vari -
ous levels of government and to establish size-able safety margins below the long- term deficit 
ceilings. Safety margins are particularly import-
ant in view of the strict rules enshrined in the 
German constitution to help ensure sound 
public finances. Past experience has shown that estimates of the structural budget position are subject to major uncertainty and that negative 
macroeconomic shocks often trigger a funda -
mental reassessment of the growth outlook and an upward revision of structural deficits. 
Taking this uncertainty into account by factor -
ing safety margins into the budget plans can 
reduce the need for procyclical consolidation in phases of economic weakness.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue6 came to 
just over 3½% in the first quarter of 2014 (see 
the chart above and the table on page 74). On-going favourable developments in gross wages and salaries, which have a key influence on tax 
receipts, played a significant role in this rise. 
Combined with tax progressivity, this resulted 
in dynamic growth for wage tax. The stagna -
tion of child benefit (which is deducted from 
revenue) also contributed to the higher growth 
rate. By contrast, legislative changes (above all, the increase in the basic income tax allowance as well as the increasing tax exemption of pen-
sion expenditure) had a moderate dampening effect. However, at 2½% on balance, the rise in 
profit-  related taxes was weaker and was sup -
ported considerably for the last time by the 
phasing out of grants to homebuyers. Assessed income tax, in particular, contributed to the rise in profit- related taxes while receipts from with-
holding tax on interest income and capital 
gains as well as from corporation tax declined. With a rise of just under 3% in the first quarter, growth in receipts from turnover tax was some-
what stronger than previously and was thus 
generally in line with the macroeconomic refer -
ence variables. By contrast, receipts from other 
consumption taxes were down slightly. This was probably attributable, inter alia, to tem
-
porary, dampening special effects resulting from the transfer of responsibility for levying 
motor vehicle tax to central government, and 
to delayed electricity tax refunds as part of the 
tax cap for the most energy-  intensive users 
(Spitzenausgleich).
The latest official tax estimate expects revenue 
growth (including local government taxes) to 
be solid (at just under 3½%) for 2014 as a whole, too. This growth primarily reflects the 3½% rise in Q1
Solid revenue 
growth expected for year as a whole, tooTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014012345678
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
6 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
73

macroeconomic developments.7 Fiscal drag is 
giving revenue an extra boost. However, legis-
lative changes will slightly reduce revenue on 
balance. A higher basic income tax allowance 
and the gradual changeover to downstream 
taxation of pensions is resulting in perceptible 
shortfalls, whereas the phasing out of the 
homebuyers grant (which is deducted from cash revenue) and the rises in real property transfer tax and tobacco tax are generating 
smaller amounts of additional revenue. Tax re-
funds due under the ruling by the European Court of Justice on the taxation of dividends 
paid to EU/EEA companies are slowing revenue growth.
8
After this year, the official tax estimate initially expects revenue growth to accelerate to 4% in 
2015 and to average 3½% per year in the 2016-18 period, mainly as a result of macro
-
economic growth assumptions and fiscal drag. 
Legislative changes which have already been 
approved are expected to curb this expansion slightly on balance. The tax ratio (as defined in 
the government’s financial statistics) is pro -
jected to increase from 22.6% (2013) to 22.9% by the end of the forecast period. Taken in isol-
ation, fiscal drag is expected to raise the tax 
ratio by roughly ½ percentage point.
The official tax estimate largely confirms the revenue estimate for 2014 in the November 
2013 projection. However, the estimates have 
been revised upwards somewhat for the subse-
quent years as a result of more favourable 
macroeconomic assumptions. Compared with 
the November 2013 estimate, the revision for 
2014 amounts to -€½ billion, rising from +€3 
billion to +€7 billion in the subsequent years. 
Compared to the figures that were revised up-wards in spring (as the basis for the benchmark figures for the central government budget and 
the stability programme) the official tax esti -
mate is largely unchanged.
Central government
Central government recorded a deficit of €10½ 
billion in the first quarter of 2014 compared 
with a deficit of €13 billion one year previously. Revenue rose considerably by 4½% (€3 billion). 
However, at 2½% (€1½ billion), growth in tax 
revenue was much more moderate, partly be -
cause deductions for transfers to the EU budget 
increased by €½ billion. The Bundesbank’s 
profit distribution made a significant contribu -
tion to the rise in total revenue, with the max-imum amount permitted by law of €2½ billion being transferred to the budget (previous year: 
€½ billion). On the expenditure side, the rise 
was only ½% (€½ billion). A notable rise was 
recorded for payments to the social security 
After 2014, 
 revenue growth expected to be somewhat more dynamicRevenue expect -
ations largely confirmed for 2014; revised upwards for subsequent years
Deficit decline at start of year reflects higher Bundesbank profit and lower interest burdenTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2014 1,2 2013 2014
€ billionYear-on-year 
percent-
age 
changeYear-
on-year 
percent-
age 
change
Total tax revenue
2 135.0 140.0 +  3.7 + 3.4
of which
Wage tax 36.5 39.0 +  7.0 + 6.0
Profi  t-related taxes
3 23.4 23.9 +  2.3 + 0.2
Assessed  income tax 10.7 11.8 +  9.8 + 7.5
Corporation tax 6.0 5.6 –  6.7 – 7.5
Investment  income tax
4 6.6 6.5 –  1.8 – 5.9
Turnover taxes 5 49.2 50.5 +  2.8 + 3.3
Energy tax 4.7 4.7 +  0.1 + 0.2
Tobacco tax 2.1 2.5 + 15.7 + 3.5
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2014. 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue, excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers 
grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4  With-
holding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection. For 2014, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 1.8% and nominal growth 3.5% (Novem -
ber 2013: +1.7% and +3.3%, respectively). Growth for 
2015 is forecast to be 2.0% and 3.8%, respectively (No -
vember 2013: +1.4% and +3.0%, respectively). In the me-
dium term, nominal growth of 3.1% per year is forecast 
(November 2013: +3.0%).8 Ruling of 20 October 2011 on case C-284/ 09.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
74

funds (€1 billion). The further (and greater) cut 
in the transfers to the statutory health insur -
ance fund did not yet have an impact on cen-
tral government expenditure in the first quar -
ter.9 Transfers to households were €½ billion 
up on the year due to higher payments for par -
ental benefit, the childcare supplement and 
 unemployment benefit II. Transfers to state 
government were also up by €½ billion, not 
least due to the final increase in central govern-ment’s cost assumption of the basic allowance for the elderly. By contrast, significant relief was 
provided by interest expenditure, which was 
one- eighth (€1½ billion) lower.
The Federal Cabinet adopted the revised draft 
budget for 2014 in mid- March. At €6½ billion, 
the planned deficit remains broadly the same as 
in the draft budget adopted by the previous government in summer 2013. The measures 
agreed by the new governing coalition have led, inter alia, to a rise of €½ billion in investment in 
transport infrastructure that is not financed by 
motorway tolls for heavy good vehicles (but a 
moderate cut in toll- funded investment) and a 
modest increase in development aid estimates 
and grants to the pension insurance scheme (as the contribution rate will not be lowered). As no decision has yet been reached on how to divide 
up the planned additional funds for childcare, education and research, global additional ex
-
penditure of €½ billion has been factored in for these measures. Thus, the upward revision of €1 
billion to appropriations for unemployment 
benefit II – following the previous government’s 
intended efficiency savings of €1½ billion as 
part of the 2010 “package for the future” – and 
of €½ billion to appropriations for parental 
benefit are more significant. All in all, additional expenditure is €3 billion higher than in the sum-
mer 2013 draft budget. However, this is to be more or less offset by central government re
-
claiming €1 billion of funds which appear not to 
be required by the flood assistance fund, 
through an increase of almost €1 billion in pri -
vatisation proceeds and the fact that income 
from the Bundesbank’s profit distribution was 
€½ billion higher than forecast.The revised budget plan for 2014 envisages a 
surplus of €1½ billion for the structural fiscal 
balance as defined in the debt brake rule. This 
is €½ billion below the figure estimated in the 
summer 2013 draft budget. However, it puts 
the cyclical burden deducted from this balance at €5½ billion. Given the fact that capacity util-
isation appears to have returned to more or less normal levels and that unemployment is 
low, such a high cyclical burden does not seem appropriate as it entails a very favourable struc-
tural financial position for the central govern -
ment.10 With regard to the structural surplus 
reported, it should additionally be noted that 
the flood assistance fund, an off- budget entity, 
has rightly been factored into the calculation of the structural balance but that the marked out-
flows from the fund this year are still factored 
out of the draft central government budget. 
While it is true that the exact size of these out-flows is not yet known, it nevertheless does not 
seem logical to not even include an estimate, 
especially given the particular importance of 
the planned structural budget balance for the 
budget rules. Following this approach actually 
means a decrease in the central government 
structural deficit in the draft budget as the cal-culations factor in €1 billion worth of reclaimed 
funds but omit the outpayment of this sum 
from the fund.
All in all, as things stand, the planned figures seem to be attainable on balance. The latest tax estimate expects revenue shortfalls of €½ 
billion. Furthermore, the Hamburg Fiscal Court 
recently ruled that central government has to 
repay revenue of just over €2 billion from nu -
clear fuel tax until a supreme court ruling is is-sued, which may not be in 2014. On the other 
hand, there is some doubt as to whether the 
estimated additional expenditure on transport 
infrastructure will actually be made this year 
due, not least, to the foreseeable delay in final-Fiscal balance 
virtually  unchanged in  revised draft budgetReported struc-tural surplus questionable
Estimated 
 figures seem  attainable
9 If the cut were spread equally over all quarters, the trans-fers would have been down €1 billion in the first quarter.
10 Additional scope has arisen vis- à- vis the summer 2013 
draft budget by raising the estimate for the cyclical burden and, at the same time, revising tax revenue upwards.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
75

ising the Budget Act; the same applies to the 
additional funds for childcare, education and 
research, which have yet to be divided up be -
tween the different ministries. Furthermore, a 
number of budgeted figures, such as interest 
expenditure, are likely to have again been cal -
culated rather cautiously. However, general budgetary risks remain, not least in the inter
-
national context.
Along with the revised draft budget, the Fed -
eral Cabinet also adopted the benchmark fig -
ures for the 2015 budget and the financial plan up to 2018. Compared with the summer 2013 plans, these included, in particular, the priority measures in the coalition agreement concluded 
at the end of 2013 (totalling €23 billion until 2017), which – supplemented by a significant 
increase in funds for local government to provide  
integration assistance for disabled persons – have probably also largely been extrapolated until 2018. Although the goal of no net new borrowing in the central government budget set out in the coalition agreement was adhered 
to, the previous plan of building up surpluses 
from 2016 onwards to repay existing debt (tar -
get surplus of €9½ billion in 2017) has fallen by 
the wayside. As in previous years, the bench -
mark figures allow only limited conclusions to 
be drawn regarding how the plans will be put into practice. Compared with the summer 2013 
 financial plan, the benchmark figures for 2015 
(in line with the coalition agreement) envisage 
an additional €1 billion for the transport budget and evidently also another €1 billion in financial support for local government budgets ahead of 
the announced central government contribu -
tion to spending on integration assistance for 
disabled persons. Moreover, additional funds 
totalling €½ billion were allocated to develop-ment aid. As was the case for 2014, there were particularly sizeable upward revisions (€1½ bil-
lion) relating to expenditure on the long- term 
unemployed. These revisions are probably ul -
timately due to previously planned cost savings 
in connection with efficiency improvements 
now being viewed as unrealistic.
It seems that central government will counter -
finance the additional burdens set out in the 
2015 benchmark figures primarily by making 
further downward revisions to spending appro-
priations for debt servicing (€3 billion), imple -
menting a further discretionary cut in transfers 
to the health insurance fund (down by €2½ 
billion vis- à- vis the level currently envisaged in 
principle (€14 billion per year)) and by cancel -
ling the appropriation of just over €½ billion 
from 2015 onwards aimed at financing a social equalisation component in connection with the 
current non- income- related additional contri -
butions to health insurance institutions. The data do not reveal the annual scope of the 
additional payments envisaged in the areas of 
childcare, education and research (which are 
recorded as global additional expenditure), and 
the same applies to the financial plan up 
to 2018. However, it is likely that the additional 
burdens stemming from the coalition agree -
ment will increase significantly over time. Over -
all, despite the sustained very favourable under -Benchmark 
 figures for 2015 
central govern-ment budget and financial plan up to 2018: higher primary expenditure, while previous plans to achieve surpluses  abandonedPro rata 
 counterfinancing 
through further 
cuts in planned 
expenditure on interest and 
health insurance 
fundCentral government fiscal balance
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–25–20–15–10–5
20132012Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122014
20142013€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
76

lying conditions that are assumed right through 
to 2018, surpluses are no longer envisaged, 
even though, given the general risks and in 
particular the looming demographic burdens, it 
would seem advisable to reduce interest ex -
penditure on a lasting basis by making sizeable 
repayments.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks and the loss compensation 
payments they receive) recorded a surplus of €3 
billion in the first quarter of 2014, compared 
with a figure of €1 billion in the same period last 
year. As was the case at the start of 2013, the 
pension reserves and the postal workers’ pen -
sion funds both recorded a moderate surplus. In contrast to 2013, the Bundesbank’s profit distri-
bution exceeded the amount earmarked to fi -
nance central government’s core budget. The excess of €2 billion was transferred to the In
-
vestment and Repayment Fund (which was 
 established in 2009 to help overcome the severe 
economic crisis) to repay outstanding debts. 
Outflows from the assistance fund set up in 
summer 2013 to tackle the damage caused by 
the flood were still very modest at the start of 
the year. However, the fund is expected to ex -
perience sizeable outflows during the remainder 
of 2014, not least because of central govern -
ment plans to reclaim €1 billion from the fund. 
Nevertheless, overall, the positive balances 
which are on the cards for the precautionary re-serves and the Investment and Repayment Fund 
are likely to ensure that central government’s 
off- budget entities post a slight surplus in 2014, 
after recording a positive balance of almost €11 
billion in 2013 owing to the advance payments 
to the flood assistance fund and Commerz -
bank’s repayment of capital assistance to SoFFin.
State government budgets11
Following the positive developments in 2013, 
in the first quarter of 2014 the deficit of state 
government core budgets doubled on the year 
to €2 billion. Revenue rose considerably overall 
(by 4%, or €3 billion). Tax revenue made the largest contribution to this rise, likewise climb-
ing by 4%, or €2½ billion. Transfers received by 
state government went up by as much as 6% 
(€1 billion). However, expenditure increased at an even faster pace than revenue (by 5%, or €4 billion), despite a further significant drop in the 
interest burden (-€½ billion). Current transfers 
to other budgets in the general government 
sector alone – including higher central govern-
ment payments to local government for the 
basic allowance, which are passed on via state 
government – increased by €2 billion. Spend -
ing on personnel also grew substantially (by 4½%, or €1½ billion), even though in some 
federal states the pay agreement concluded in spring 2013 was not adopted in its entirety for civil servants and  retired civil servants.
Despite the less favourable developments at 
the start of the year, state government as a 
whole is likely to see a further improvement in 
its finances in the 2014 budget year, heading towards a balanced budget. Continued dy
-
namic growth in tax revenue will probably play a significant role in this development (the May 
tax estimate forecasts a sizeable increase of 
3½%), while growth in personnel expenditure 
– which is a particularly large item – is set to 
wane during the remainder of the year, and the 
interest burden could even decrease further. 
Furthermore, refunds that are still outstanding 
in connection with flood assistance payments 
made by state government could have a posi -
tive influence on the state government budget. In the medium term, the decisions made by the 
coalition government which are reflected in central government’s new benchmark figures envisage additional funds of €5½ billion for 
state and local government between 2015 and 2017 (earmarked for the areas of higher educa-
tion, schools and day care for small children). 
Provided not all of these funds are put towards 
additional spending, they will also help ease Off- budget 
 entities: after large positive balance in 2013, only slight  surplus in 2014
Deficit up in Q1 
due to high  expenditure growthBut further  improvement  
in  finances 
 expected overall
11 The development of local government finances in 2013 
as a whole was analysed in greater detail in the short art-icles in the Bundesbank’s April 2014 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
77

the strain on state and local government 
budgets.
According to the revised cash data, state gov -
ernment’s core budgets were €2½ billion in 
deficit in 2013, while the deficit figure including 
special funds amounted to €½ billion.12 Al-
though the financial situation and outlook for 
state government as a whole are positive, indi-
vidual federal states still have a long way to go 
to meet the minimum target of a balanced 
budget by 2020. In order to comply with the debt brake requirements and the European budgetary surveillance procedure, the off-  
budget entities must ultimately also be included 
in the budget balance (after adjustment for fi -
nancial transactions and consolidation assis -
tance received during the transitional period, which are to be factored out of the calcula
-
tions). In some cases, entities which regularly record a deficit – such as construction com
-
panies – have been spun off from the core 
budgets and given their own borrowing author -
isations. However, the off- budget entities also 
include numerous precautionary units, such as 
the pension reserves, which are currently still being topped up in order to shoulder part of 
the expected sharp increase in pension expend-
iture in future years. Their surpluses should 
therefore actually be factored out of the calcu-
lation of the borrowing limits due to their pre -
cautionary nature.13 As no figures are available 
for the individual off- budget entities, the data 
now available for 2013 as a whole should thus be interpreted with particular caution. The con-solidation needs per inhabitant are, as expected, particularly high in Bremen and Saarland, which are receiving consolidation assistance. However, Hamburg also recorded a very high deficit if this extended definition of the budget balance is ap-plied. The other federal states have seen an eas-ing of their financial situations under this defin-
ition. However, there is still a marked need for 
consolidation in Hesse, North Rhine-  Westphalia 
and Rhineland Palatinate, although the out -
come for the latter two states is much better if 
the surpluses recorded by the off- budget en -
tities are included. The east German states in -cluding Berlin recorded high surpluses in some 
cases even under the extended definition of the 
budget balance. Nevertheless, demographic 
 developments combined with the foreseeable 
sharp rise in pension expenditure, as well as the 
fact that special supplementary central govern-
ment grants to the east German states will tail 
off up to the end of the decade, ultimately con-tinue to pose substantial long- term challenges, 
which can scarcely be offset by possible cost savings provided by falling pupil numbers, for example. Therefore, the currently very favour
-
able underlying conditions, not least for taxes and interest expenditure, should resolutely be used to rapidly achieve balanced budgets and to aim for marked safety margins below the 
debt limit.
Social security funds14
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
As usual, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme posted a deficit in the first quarter of 
2014, but, at €½ billion, the figure was €1½ 
billion down on the year. The marked improve-
ment was due, on the one hand, to revenue 
growth of just over 3½%, which reflects the favourable employment and wage develop
-
ments. On the other hand, expenditure rose Despite favour-
able develop-ments overall,  finances of some federal states still no-ticeably strained
Financial  improvement achieved by waiving contri-bution rate cut
12 See also press release No 119 of the Federal Statistical 
Office dated 31 March 2014. The difference between the 
revised figure and the initial preliminary result for the core budgets (deficit of €½ billion) appears to be due in particu-
lar to transfers to pension funds – which are traditionally 
recorded in the budgets as not affecting the deficit – hav-ing an impact on the balance.13 In principle, in the national accounts – which are used 
as the basis for assessing the Maastricht criteria – a current 
surplus in a precautionary fund is neutralised owing to its 
finances being consolidated with those of the core budget (which records corresponding burdens) in the year that the financial resources are set aside. If the funds are withdrawn at a later point in time, the deficit which is then recorded by the precautionary fund does not reduce the Maastricht deficit (as the off- budget entity’s finances are consolidated 
with those of the core budget at that point in time, too).
14 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-  term care insurance schemes in 2013 as a 
whole was analysed in the short articles of the March 
Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
78

extremely moderately (by just over ½%) be -
cause the mid-2013 pension increase in west -
ern Germany amounted to only 0.25% (+3.29% 
in eastern Germany). Moreover, there was no 
rise in the number of pensions.15 The contribu-
tion rate should have automatically been 
lowered from 18.9% to 18.3% at the begin -
ning of the year, but this statutory requirement 
was overridden and the rate was kept at its 
previous level so that the planned selective 
benefit increases could initially be financed 
using current revenue.
Expenditure is expected to rise perceptibly in the 
second half of 2014, partly as a result of pen -
sions increasing more sharply overall (+1.67% in 
western Germany and +2.53% in eastern Ger -
many), but primarily owing to the possible im -
plementation of the draft Act on Improvements 
in Pension Insurance Benefits (Rentenversiche-  
rungs-Leistungsverbesserungsgesetz). As overall 
economic activity is currently looking more fa -
vourable than assumed when making the pro -
jections in the annual pension insurance report 
in November 2013, it cannot be ruled out that 
the reserves of the statutory pension insurance 
scheme will even be topped up again by the end 
of 2014, provided the costs of the planned 
benefit increases do not prove to be higher than 
the figures envisaged in the draft legislation. If 
this is the case, in accordance with the current 
statutory requirement, it could be necessary to 
lower the contribution rate in 2015 so that re -
serves are brought back below the upper limit of 
1.5 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure by the end of 2015. This would result in higher def-icits in subsequent years and the minimum level 
of reserves of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure would be reached more quickly, 
thus triggering a rise in the contribution rate.
The Act on Improvements in Pension Insurance 
Benefits envisages, in particular, larger recom -
pense for periods spent bringing up children 
born before 1992 (two pension points per child 
rather than one) and the possibility to take early retirement (initially from the age of 63) on a full 
pension without actuarial deductions after 45 years of contributions (including periods of un-employment). It also envisages a longer reckon-able time for those receiving a disability pension 
(up to the age of 62 rather than 60) and add -
itional funds for rehabilitation purposes. The Act 
(which is scheduled to enter into force in mid-
2014) is already set to create additional expend-
iture of €4½ billion up to the end of the year, 
which will climb in subsequent years from €9 
billion to €11 billion by 2030 (based on current pension values). The higher pensions for periods 
spent bringing up children (“mothers’ pen -
sions”) account for by far the greatest share of the costs, at around €6½ billion per year. Over -
all, in terms of financial requirements, the fiscal policy priorities of the new Federal Government 
are centred on benefit increases for the statu -Surplus for year 
as a whole; con-tribution rate cut in 2015 feasible
Substantial 
 financial  burdens from selective benefit increasesFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
15 In addition to the generally low number of persons ap-
proaching retirement age, this is also due to the gradual increase in the statutory retirement age (2014: 65 years plus three months) and the abolition of the special age 
limit for women, which had allowed them to retire at 60 
up until the end of 2011.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
79

tory pension insurance scheme (which can 
probably be classed as non- insurance- related 
for the most part). These are significantly higher 
than additional expenditure on transport infra -
structure, childcare, education and research, for 
example, which amounts to €3½ billion on an 
annual average. The higher pension benefits 
will be financed through a higher contribution 
rate in future years, an even sharper discretion-
ary rise in central government grants over and 
above the automatic adjustment (to avoid the 
contribution rate exceeding the cap of 22% ap-plicable until 2030), and lower increases in the general pension level.
16
With regard to the incentives created by these 
measures, retirement at the age of 63 should 
be viewed particularly critically, as it constitutes a return to incentivising early retirement, some-
thing which had only recently largely been 
eliminated. The planned inclusion of periods re-
ceiving unemployment benefits (during which 
contributions are paid on behalf of the recipi -
ents) – combined with the particularly long 
period of entitlement to unemployment insur -
ance benefit (I) (up to 24 months as of 58 years of age) – could encourage people to leave em-
ployment subject to social security contribu -
tions early, at the age of 61, and receive un -
employment benefit for two years before going 
on to receive a full pension without actuarial deductions. Of course, in practice this only ap-
plies to persons born in 1951 and 1952. For 
those born later, the age of entitlement to a full pension without actuarial deductions increases by a further two months each year, reaching 65 
years from 2029. As the increase in the statu -
tory retirement age to 67 years will occur 
largely in parallel with this, the relative advan -
tages are spread over the different birth years, 
but are broadly stable (see adjacent chart).
The actuarial deductions for early retirement are 
intended to ensure that, in principle, early retire-ment does not worsen the community of insu-
rees’ overall finances, as, based on equal contri-
butions being paid overall, early retirement re -
duces an insuree’s pension to the extent that 
over the entire period that it is paid out it ap -
proximately equals the total pension that would have been received if the insuree had retired at 
the statutory retirement age. Therefore, given 
the gradual rise in the statutory retirement age, the current entitlement to a full pension without 
actuarial deductions from the age of 65 is al -
ready extremely advantageous for persons who, 
with 45 contribution years, have been insured for a particularly long period of time. For the 
beneficiaries, extending the period without ac -
tuarial deductions essentially amounts to two 
more years of pension payments compared with those who have paid the same amount of con-
tributions but have fewer contribution years. 
The existing option of retiring on a full pension without actuarial deductions from the age of 65 
would have gradually become more and more 
advantageous in line with the rising actuarial deductions resulting from the statutory retire
-
ment age increasing to 67 years of age. Access 
to a full pension without actuarial deductions 
from the age of 63 offers this advantage in full 
now and extends it, in particular, by counting 
periods of unemployment.Full pension 
without actuar-ial deductions at 63 creates negative  incentivesPersons insured for particularly long period  favouredAge at which full pension without actuarial deductions can be drawn
Source: Sixth Book of the Social Security Code (Sozialgesetz-
buch VI) and draft Act on Improvements in Pension Insurance 
Benefits (RV-Leistungsverbesserungsgesetz).
Deutsche Bundesbank1945 50 55 60 65 706364656667Age
Year of birthEarly retirement age 
for persons insured 
for a particularly 
long periodCurrent retirement age for persons insured for a particularly 
long periodStatutory retirement age
16 This will reduce expenditure by around €3 billion on an 
annual average.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
80

Federal Employment Agency
At just under €1 billion, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s deficit in the first quarter of 
2014 was virtually on a par with the figure  recorded one year previously. While revenue 
grew by just over 1%, expenditure rose by al -
most 1%. Contribution receipts continued to 
rise at a strong pace (just over 4%), but in Feb-
ruary 2013 central government had transferred 
a final refund of excess reintegration payments 
to the Federal Employment Agency. On the ex-
penditure side, spending on unemployment 
benefits only increased by just under 2% on the 
year, following the marked pick- up in economic 
activity. Outlays for (seasonal) short- time work-
ing benefits were significantly lower. By con -
trast, spending on active labour market policy 
measures rose by 7½%.
The Federal Employment Agency envisages a 
virtually balanced budget in its 2014 budget 
plan. However, as there has been a significant 
improvement in the macroeconomic projec -
tions since the budget plan was drawn up, as 
things stand it appears that the Federal Em -
ployment Agency could record a sizeable sur -
plus. The plans have already factored in ample 
provision for the possibility of a sharper in -
crease in expenditure on active labour market 
policy. In addition to macroeconomic develop-
ments, which mainly impact on the expend -
iture side of the agency’s budget, financial risks are posed in particular by periods of unemploy-
ment being counted towards pensions drawn 
at the age of 63. The more insurees this en -
courages into early retirement – including in 
the form of unemployment with insurance con-tributions paid – the higher the corresponding additional expenditure on unemployment in -
surance benefit (1) will be. The impact of this is likely to be felt all the more in periods of some-what less favourable cyclical developments.Finances virtu-
ally unchanged at start of year
Marked surplus 
possible in 2014Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the  civil  servants'  pension  fund.  2 Excluding  central  govern-
ment liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 201468101214
1,21,52,03,04,05,06,0–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Total expenditure 1
Revenue 2
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits  and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
81

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
82

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2
 External 
transactions and positions
 ..............................................................................  
5•
 3
 Gener
al economic indicators
 
.......................................................................................  
6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2
 Consolidated 
balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)
 
...........................  
10•
 3
 Banking 
system’s liquidity position
 ...............................................................................  
14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2
 
Liabilities
 
.....................................................................................................................  
18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany
 
.................................................................................................................  
20•
 2
 Principal 
assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks
 
..........  
24•
 3
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents
 
..............................  
26•
 4
 A
ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents
 
.......................  
28•
 5
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
.....................  
30•
 6
 Lending 
by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity
 .................................................................  
32•
 7
 Deposits 
of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
.....................  
34•
 8
 Deposits 
of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 
Germany
 
.....................................................................................................................  
36•
 9
 Deposits 
of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  
36•
 1
0
 Savings 
deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  
38•
 1
1
 Debt 
securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
 
...... 
38•
 1
2
 Building 
and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany
 
........................................................  
39•
 1
3
 A
ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2
 Reserve 
maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
 
............................................  
42•
 3
 Reserve 
maintenance in the euro area
 .........................................................................  
42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2
 Base 
rates
 
....................................................................................................................  
43•
 3
 Eur
osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
................................  
43•
 4
 Money 
market rates, by month
 
...................................................................................  
43•
 5
 Inter
est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)
 
...................................................................................................  
44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2
 
Liabilities
 
.....................................................................................................................  
49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2
 Sales 
of debt securities issued by residents
 
..................................................................  
51•
 3
 Amounts 
outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  
52•
 4
 Shar
es in circulation issued by residents
 
.......................................................................  
52•
 5
 Y
ields and indices on German securities
 
......................................................................  
53•
 6
 Sales 
and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
 
...............................................  
53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  54•
 2
 Financial 
assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
 
......................................  
55•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  56•
 2
 Gener
al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts
 
..................................................................................................  
56•
 3
 Gener
al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 
statistics)
 
.....................................................................................................................  
57•
 4
 Centr
al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 
financial statistics)
 
........................................................................................................  
57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  58•
 6 Centr
al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
.......................  
58•
 7
 Centr
al, state and local government: individual taxes
 
..................................................  
59•
 8
 German 
pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets
 
......................  
59•
 9
 F
ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development
 
.................................................  
60•
 1
0
 S
tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
.......................................  
60•
 1
1
 S
tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
..........................  
61•
 1
2
 Centr
al government: borrowing in the market
 .............................................................  
61•
 1
3
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by creditor
 .................................................  
61•
 1
4
 Centr
al, state and local government: debt by category
 ................................................  
62•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  63•
 2
 Output 
in the production sector
 
..................................................................................  
64•
 3
 Or
ders received by industry
 
.........................................................................................  
65•
 4
 Or
ders received by construction
 ..................................................................................  
66•
 5
 Retail 
trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles
 
...............................................................  
66•
 6
 Labour 
market
 
.............................................................................................................  
67•
 7
 
Prices
 
..........................................................................................................................  
68•
 8
 Households’ 
income
 
....................................................................................................  
69•
 9
 Negotiated 
pay rates (overall economy)
 
.......................................................................  
69•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  70•
 2
 Major 
items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
..............  
71•
 3
 F
oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries
 
.......................................................................................................  
72•
 4
 Services 
and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
............................................  
73•
 5
 C
urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany
 ..................................................  
73•
 6
 C
apital transfers
 
..........................................................................................................  
73•
 7
 Financial 
account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 .................................................  
74•
 8
 External 
position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998
 
..................................................  
75•
 9
 External 
position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union
 
...........................................................................................  
75•
 1
0
 A
ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents
 
..............................................................................................................  
76•
 1
1
 ECB 
euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies
 
...........................................  
77•
 1
2
 Eur
o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union
 ...............................................................  
77•
 1
3
 Effective 
exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness
 
...........................................................................................................  
78•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2014
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2012          July 4.6 3.4 3.5 3.1 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 3.8
         Aug 4.9 3.1 2.8 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.7         Sep 5.2 3.1 2.8 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 0.10 0.25 3.5
         Oct 6.4 4.3 3.9 3.5 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.3
         Nov 6.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.2
         Dec 6.4 4.5 3.5 3.5 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.07 0.19 3.0
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 2.9
         Feb 7.0 4.2 3.1 3.0 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.0
         Mar 7.0 4.1 2.5 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 2.9
         Apr 8.6 4.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.6 2.8 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6
         June 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.4 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 2.9
         July 7.0 4.0 2.1 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.3 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0
         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 3.0
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8
         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.7 − 2.2 − 1.1 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.2 2.4 1.3 1.2 − 1.7 − 2.2 − 1.2 0.16 0.29 2.6
         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.1 ... − 2.1 − 2.4 − 1.1 0.19 0.31 2.5
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.25 0.33 2.3
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments  r) Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2012          July
+ 22,103 + 13,975 − 4,748 + 48,914 − 12,988 − 41,031 + 358 1.2288 95.4 93.2
         Aug + 10,684 + 5,592 − 20,902 − 26,641 + 10,384 − 2,742 − 1,904 1.2400 95.2 93.1
         Sep + 12,495 + 9,561 − 22,894 − 27,568 + 485 + 3,145 + 1,045 1.2856 97.2 95.0
         Oct + 14,374 + 10,199 − 25,102 − 38,621 + 67,207 − 51,032 − 2,657 1.2974 97.8 95.5
         Nov + 21,166 + 12,758 − 36,888 − 27,983 + 27,171 − 35,111 − 964 1.2828 97.2 94.9
         Dec + 27,259 + 9,287 − 43,470 + 6,340 + 12,066 − 62,497 + 620 1.3119 98.7 96.3
2013          Jan − 5,404 − 3,373 + 3,853 − 21,755 + 30,963 − 587 − 4,768 1.3288 100.4 98.0
         Feb + 9,684 + 10,815 − 11,133 + 12,126 − 12,306 − 13,388 + 2,437 1.3359 101.6 99.1
         Mar + 24,325 + 21,850 − 15,952 − 15,544 − 8,053 + 5,368 + 2,278 1.2964 100.2 97.9
         Apr + 15,682 + 15,966 − 22,109 − 7,492 − 12,040 − 2,536 − 41 1.3026 100.5 97.9
         May + 13,281 + 16,534 − 19,277 + 43,749 + 16,032 − 78,503 − 555 1.2982 100.5 98.0
         June + 31,110 + 17,359 − 30,802 − 14,289 + 38,096 − 54,018 − 591 1.3189 101.6 98.9
         July + 25,727 + 18,655 − 28,642 + 6,932 − 33,262 − 2,551 + 239 1.3080 101.5 98.9
         Aug + 10,197 + 6,737 − 6,788 − 311 + 25,517 − 30,025 − 1,969 1.3310 102.2 99.5
         Sep + 15,496 + 12,674 − 20,433 − 19,275 + 20,258 − 20,286 − 1,131 1.3348 102.0 99.1
         Oct + 26,259 + 17,725 − 18,838 + 20,372 − 2,579 − 37,486 + 855 1.3635 102.8 99.7
         Nov + 28,409 + 17,573 − 30,283 − 19,779 + 55,696 − 66,381 + 181 1.3493 102.6 99.5
         Dec + 32,909 + 12,683 − 46,522 − 9,656 + 5,737 − 41,259 − 1,344 1.3704 103.9 100.7
2014          Jan + 6,989 + 744 − 4,680 − 9,053 + 19,186 − 12,094 − 2,719 1.3610 103.4 p) 100.3
         Feb + 13,870 + 15,762 − 12,200 + 31,945 + 26,958 − 71,939 + 837 1.3659 103.6 p) 100.5
         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3823 104.6 p) 101.3
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3813 104.5 p) 101.1
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XII.12 and 13, pp 77−78   2  Including
financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on
consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2011 1.6 1.8 3.3 9.6 2.8 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.4 5.3
2012 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.7 3.9 − 1.0 0.0 − 7.0 0.2 − 2.4 5.2
2013 − 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.8 − 1.4 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 4.1
2012          Q4 − 1.0 − 0.6 0.0 4.9 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 2.5 4.6
2013          Q1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.6 1.3 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 1.7 − 2.6 3.8
         Q2 − 0.6 0.1 0.9 1.1 − 0.9 0.5 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.3 4.4
         Q3 − 0.3 0.4 1.1 0.7 − 0.8 0.6 − 3.2 2.7 − 1.4 4.6
         Q4 0.5 0.8 1.3 0.3 − 0.6 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 3.6
2014          Q1 0.9 ... 2.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2011 3.4 4.4 7.2 19.7 2.1 2.3 − 8.0 0.0 1.2 8.9
2012 − 2.5 − 3.3 4 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.6 − 2.8 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 6.4 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.8 0.2 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.1 − 0.4
2012          Q4 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 2.1 3.0 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 6.6 − 6.8 5.7
2013          Q1 − 2.2 − 3.3 − 1.8 4.2 − 3.7 − 1.9 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 4.6 − 1.0
         Q2 − 1.1 1.2 − 0.3 3.8 − 6.3 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 3.9 − 0.1
         Q3 − 1.1 0.8 − 0.2 2.7 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 0.2
         Q4 1.5 4.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.0 0.6 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.6
2014          Q1 e 1.1 ... 5 3.2 − 1.4 − 5.9 − 0.8 p 0.0 p 2.3 0.4 − 2.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2011 80.7 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6 67.6
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1 70.8
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 70.1 72.0
2013          Q1 77.6 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 82.3 65.3 − 68.5 72.1
         Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4 72.0
         Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.8 64.9 − 71.3 71.8
         Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 77.5 79.6 65.9 − 72.2 72.2
2014          Q1 80.1 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.8 65.9 − 72.5 72.1
         Q2 79.5 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 80.9 67.7 − 71.7 72.0
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.3 7.8 9.2 17.7 14.7 8.4 16.2
2012 11.3 7.6 5.5 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.3 14.7 10.7 15.0
2013 12.0 8.4 5.3 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.3 13.1 12.2 11.9
2013          Oct 11.9 8.4 5.3 8.7 8.3 10.2 27.6 12.4 12.4 11.6
         Nov 11.9 8.5 5.2 8.8 8.3 10.2 27.5 12.2 12.7 11.6
         Dec 11.8 8.5 5.1 8.4 8.4 10.2 27.1 12.0 12.6 11.6
2014          Jan 11.8 8.5 5.1 8.2 8.4 10.3 26.6 11.9 12.7 ...
         Feb 11.8 8.5 5.1 7.8 8.5 10.4 26.5 11.9 12.7 ...
         Mar 11.8 8.5 5.3 ... 8.5 10.4 ... 11.8 12.7 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2011 9 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9 4.2
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.3
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2013          Nov 0.9 0.9 1.6 2.1 1.8 0.8 − 2.9 0.3 0.7 − 0.3
         Dec 0.8 1.2 1.2 2.0 1.9 0.8 − 1.8 0.4 0.7 − 0.4
2014          Jan 10 0.8 1.1 1.2 1.6 1.9 0.8 − 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.5
         Feb 0.7 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.6 1.1 − 0.9 0.1 0.4 0.5
         Mar 0.5 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.3 0.7 − 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Apr p 0.7 0.9 1.1 0.8 1.3 0.8 − 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.8
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2011 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 9.6 − 13.1 − 3.7 − 3.5
2012 − 3.7 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 3.0 − 1.3
2013 − 3.0 − 2.6 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 4.3 − 12.7 − 7.2 − 3.0 − 1.0
 
General government debt 11
 
2011 87.4 99.2 80.0 6.1 49.3 86.2 170.3 104.1 120.7 42.0
2012 90.7 101.1 81.0 9.8 53.6 90.6 157.2 117.4 127.0 40.8
2013 92.6 101.5 78.4 10.0 57.0 93.5 175.1 123.7 132.6 38.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positively influenced by late reports. 5  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry.
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
1.9 1.6 0.9 2.8 − 1.2 3.0 0.7 0.1 0.4 2011
− 0.2 0.6 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 2.4 2012
2.1 2.4 − 0.8 ... − 1.4 1.0 − 1.1 ... − 5.4 2013
0.4 1.3 − 1.5 1.3 − 5.4 0.4 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 3.7 2012          Q40.7 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 4.4 0.5 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 5.2 2013          Q1
2.4 3.3 − 1.7 0.2 − 2.3 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.1          Q2
2.9 2.3 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 5.2          Q3
2.5 2.2 0.8 1.1 3.1 1.5 2.1 − 0.1 − 5.1          Q4
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2014          Q1
 
Industrial production1,3
 
2.0 − − 0.7 6.8 − 1.0 5.4 1.9 − 1.7 − 8.4 2011
− 3.8 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 7.7 − 0.6 − 6.9 − 9.2 2012
− 2.8 − 0.6 0.3 0.5 5.3 − 1.0 − 1.7 − 12.5 2013
− 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 5.2 4.1 − 2.3 − 7.3 − 10.7 2012          Q4− 7.2 − 2.2 0.5 − 1.3 2.9 − 1.3 − 4.1 − 15.0 2013          Q1
− 6.9 − 0.2 0.2 1.1 2.9 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 13.1          Q2
− 2.2 − − 0.4 0.3 − 1.5 4.5 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 11.0          Q3
5.5 − 0.3 0.3 3.8 10.8 1.3 1.0 − 10.7          Q4
9.8 −
p − 9.2 ... 2.1 p 9.2 p 1.7 p 1.5 ... 2014          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 2011
76.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201264.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 2013
66.9 77.2 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.2 2013          Q1
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.7          Q2
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5          Q3
65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8          Q4
67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 46.8 79.5 74.1 54.1          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
4.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.4 7.9 20115.1 6.4 5.3 4.3 15.9 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 20125.8 6.5 6.7 4.9 16.5 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 2013
6.0 6.7 7.0 5.0 15.6 14.3 9.7 26.0 16.9 2013          Oct 
6.0 6.5 6.9 5.0 15.4 14.1 9.7 25.8 16.8          Nov 
6.1 6.7 7.0 5.0 15.3 14.1 9.8 25.6 16.9          Dec 
6.1 6.9 7.1 4.9 15.2 14.0 9.8 25.5 16.5 2014          Jan 
6.1 6.9 7.3 4.8 15.2 13.9 9.7 25.3 16.8          Feb 
6.1 6.8 7.2 4.9 15.2 13.9 9.7 25.3 17.4          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 2013
1.1 0.3 1.2 1.5 0.1 0.5 1.2 0.3 − 0.8 2013          Nov 
1.5 1.0 1.4 2.0 0.2 0.4 0.9 0.3 − 1.3          Dec 
1.5 0.9 0.8 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.9 0.3 − 1.6 2014          Jan 
0.8 1.6 0.4 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 1.3          Feb 
0.8 1.4 0.1 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.9          Mar 
0.9 0.5 0.6 ... − 0.1 − 0.2 0.5 0.3 − 0.4          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
0.2 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 4.3 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.6 − 6.3 20110.0 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.6 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.0 − 10.6 − 6.4 20120.1 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 14.7 − 7.1 − 5.4 2013
 
General government debt 11
 
18.7 68.8 65.7 73.1 108.2 43.6 47.1 70.5 71.5 201121.7 70.8 71.3 74.4 124.1 52.7 54.4 86.0 86.6 201223.1 73.0 73.5 74.5 129.0 55.4 71.7 93.9 111.7 2013
and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. 10  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 11  As a percentage of GDP; Euro area
8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based on unadjusted aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission
data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Estonia from 2011 onwards. (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Aug − 77.5 − 60.6 − 15.2 − 16.9 − 7.6 22.0 − 23.8 − 45.8 3.3 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 2.7
         Sep 65.4 32.4 − 3.6 33.0 30.7 − 6.6 − 41.2 − 34.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 1.4 − 3.7 12.4
         Oct − 3.9 − 19.7 − 6.1 15.8 1.1 20.5 7.3 − 13.2 − 24.9 − 12.6 − 0.7 − 12.7 1.0         Nov 13.9 − 3.7 − 0.5 17.7 27.2 64.5 − 12.4 − 76.8 − 2.5 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 1.4 4.2
         Dec − 71.8 − 6.4 66.6 − 65.4 − 50.6 32.4 − 89.5 − 121.9 16.5 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 19.5 42.1
2013          Jan 48.6 18.0 − 2.5 30.6 26.5 32.4 60.3 28.0 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 5.8
         Feb − 5.0 − 9.6 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 6.9
         Mar 65.7 30.3 24.1 35.4 29.8 11.5 − 42.1 − 53.7 − 6.0 16.7 − 1.5 − 32.4 11.2
         Apr 10.2 9.0 34.0 1.2 − 8.8 − 6.0 58.9 65.0 − 24.9 − 7.6 − 1.9 − 15.7 0.2
         May 10.0 − 16.5 0.3 26.5 52.1 77.6 − 0.0 − 77.6 − 5.5 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.5 11.5
         June − 1.9 − 30.4 − 24.8 28.5 36.5 36.0 − 56.6 − 92.5 13.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 22.4 37.9
         July − 122.5 − 85.3 − 12.0 − 37.2 − 39.5 − 1.8 − 27.9 − 26.1 − 35.0 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 25.8 − 3.8
         Aug − 52.0 − 34.2 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.3 − 15.8 − 50.1 − 8.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 13.7 12.0         Sep 0.5 16.6 − 2.0 − 16.1 − 16.3 23.8 − 31.6 − 55.4 − 8.3 − 3.9 − 1.3 − 2.1 − 1.0
         Oct − 43.0 − 61.3 − 26.5 18.2 5.8 34.1 65.3 31.3 8.4 2.0 − 0.5 15.3 − 8.4         Nov − 27.9 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.7 1.6 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.9         Dec − 168.8 − 93.9 − 38.7 − 75.0 − 73.1 79.3 − 85.1 − 164.4 − 12.4 − 8.8 − 0.5 − 9.6 6.5
2014          Jan 47.9 − 14.5 10.2 62.4 42.7 8.3 125.8 117.4 1.2 − 2.7 0.1 − 11.2 15.0
         Feb − 5.1 − 8.9 − 16.4 3.8 12.1 32.4 16.3 − 16.1 − 12.1 − 5.8 0.1 − 11.4 5.0
         Mar 0.7 − 0.2 − 4.5 0.9 3.5 16.4 − 20.4 − 36.8 6.2 − 10.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 17.7
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.7 − 2.1 11.6 − 7.9 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.2 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.8 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.6 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.6 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.2 7.8 6.0 − 3.6 1.1 15.7 − 3.1 − 18.8 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.7 0.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 39.6 − 8.0 − − 11.3 − 3.6 1.8 − 1.3 3.1 − 13.7 8.3 − 13.5 4.3 − 10.4 2012          Aug 
33.5 7.7 − 17.8 43.1 47.2 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.3 2.2 14.2 − 20.7 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 7.3 − 57.0 63.7 34.1 − 2.4 36.5 18.3 11.3 − 20.7 5.3 − 5.1          Oct 
40.5 33.1 − 7.3 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.5 − 13.9 8.1 7.6 − 1.2 − 19.6          Nov 
− 60.6 − 51.2 − 55.9 95.2 82.3 12.7 69.6 − 12.3 25.2 − 42.3 − 26.9 − 6.1          Dec 
33.9 78.3 − − 24.6 − 35.3 − 53.9 − 19.8 − 34.1 − 5.4 24.1 11.8 7.2 − 6.7 2013          Jan 
5.7 − 17.9 − 1.2 9.9 5.1 − 1.2 6.2 − 3.4 8.2 28.0 6.3 − 13.4          Feb 
10.6 27.8 − 44.8 58.0 47.2 11.7 35.5 5.1 5.6 24.2 − 5.9 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.6 21.8 − 57.9 54.1 73.8 7.2 66.7 − 26.5 6.7 − 11.4 − 0.4 1.4          Apr 
62.5 29.5 − 1.1 11.6 25.8 5.0 20.8 − 17.2 3.0 10.9 − 3.4 − 7.4          May
30.3 − 3.3 − − 6.7 25.7 45.1 6.2 38.9 − 19.2 − 0.2 22.9 − 19.6 − 2.1          June
− 26.1 − 56.9 − − 6.4 − 7.0 − 8.3 6.9 − 15.2 − 2.2 3.5 − 47.5 − 1.1 − 6.7          July− 55.7 14.0 − 32.8 27.4 25.4 1.4 24.0 0.5 1.5 4.9 9.5 1.1          Aug 
11.2 55.0 − − 33.7 − 1.2 23.6 − 0.2 23.8 − 19.2 − 5.6 − 7.2 − 26.4 6.6          Sep 
− 28.0 − 5.2 − 15.7 22.0 38.5 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 8.1 1.3 − 12.4          Oct 
18.4 − 20.2 − 28.3 33.8 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.2 1.9 1.2 − 1.1 − 4.0          Nov 
− 49.6 − 11.3 − − 16.1 15.8 14.2 17.8 − 3.6 − 0.1 1.7 − 11.2 − 12.8 − 12.7          Dec 
20.7 41.4 − − 7.1 − 41.2 − 37.7 − 13.5 − 24.2 − 15.9 12.5 − 6.7 24.1 − 0.8 2014          Jan 36.9 − 12.7 − 15.2 14.0 11.9 1.9 10.0 2.2 − 0.0 25.3 − 1.1 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.1 − 1.5 − 17.5 42.4 36.4 6.3 30.1 0.8 5.2 − 12.7 − 17.2 3.5          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 1.1 − 15.8 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6 2012          Aug 
1.0 62.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 11.2 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.4 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb 
− 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.4 1.6 1.9 − 10.8 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.3          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Feb 26,832.2 16,686.9 13,451.7 11,165.7 1,539.0 747.0 3,235.2 1,158.9 2,076.3 5,015.7 5,129.6
         Mar 26,693.8 16,707.6 13,447.9 11,163.9 1,526.6 757.3 3,259.8 1,155.6 2,104.1 5,034.1 4,952.1
         Apr 26,862.2 16,703.9 13,447.1 11,157.7 1,520.8 768.6 3,256.8 1,159.6 2,097.2 5,056.0 5,102.3
         May 27,825.4 16,721.3 13,448.4 11,175.7 1,520.6 752.1 3,272.8 1,161.3 2,111.5 5,205.5 5,898.6
         June 27,211.8 16,729.0 13,386.4 11,190.8 1,463.1 732.5 3,342.6 1,187.0 2,155.6 5,089.7 5,393.1
         July 27,534.1 16,699.8 13,371.0 11,218.1 1,416.1 736.8 3,328.8 1,186.4 2,142.4 5,183.4 5,651.0
         Aug 27,305.1 16,627.3 13,304.9 11,165.0 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.4 1,177.0 2,145.4 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,159.9 16,695.7 13,325.3 11,188.4 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.4 1,180.1 2,190.3 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,628.2 16,696.3 13,301.0 11,169.1 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.2 1,194.7 2,200.5 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,695.9 16,719.0 13,293.5 11,161.7 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.4 4,996.6 4,980.3
         Dec 26,246.1 16,605.8 13,240.1 11,039.4 1,433.8 767.0 3,365.7 1,170.3 2,195.4 4,845.6 4,794.7
2013          Jan 26,386.0 16,635.2 13,237.9 11,041.4 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.3 1,174.2 2,223.1 4,799.6 4,951.2
         Feb 26,500.1 16,623.2 13,225.9 11,031.4 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.8
         Mar 26,563.0 16,693.7 13,257.7 11,039.7 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,025.1
         Apr 26,700.1 16,721.5 13,261.1 11,005.3 1,440.4 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.9
         May 26,365.2 16,721.8 13,242.8 10,985.8 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9
         June 25,925.2 16,690.6 13,199.5 10,974.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,672.9 16,570.4 13,110.4 10,892.7 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,457.6 16,416.1 12,976.1 10,766.6 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,416.7 16,419.3 12,992.3 10,779.1 1,420.5 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,460.2 16,382.7 12,923.9 10,730.4 1,400.2 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,413.3 16,352.1 12,916.8 10,724.8 1,396.8 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,444.6
         Dec 24,648.8 16,162.6 12,803.5 10,651.8 1,359.3 792.4 3,359.2 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,488.4 3,997.7
2014          Jan 25,048.2 16,248.4 12,809.9 10,646.5 1,368.0 795.4 3,438.5 1,118.4 2,320.0 4,680.2 4,119.7
         Feb 24,994.3 16,228.8 12,778.7 10,642.2 1,343.0 793.5 3,450.1 1,110.2 2,339.9 4,672.0 4,093.6
         Mar 24,915.2 16,234.8 12,774.7 10,640.9 1,329.0 804.7 3,460.2 1,107.7 2,352.5 4,642.0 4,038.4
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,601.0 3,658.2 2,893.9 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.1 1,106.4 836.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
842.5 10,704.6 10,055.2 10,101.9 3,735.2 1,464.1 325.6 2,517.3 1,951.1 108.5 2012          Feb 
844.9 10,731.4 10,103.4 10,128.0 3,775.3 1,469.1 323.2 2,491.4 1,960.9 108.1          Mar 
847.6 10,689.9 10,094.3 10,126.9 3,783.4 1,468.8 312.1 2,489.2 1,965.2 108.2          Apr 
856.3 10,707.2 10,079.2 10,101.9 3,811.1 1,440.0 312.0 2,459.7 1,971.8 107.4          May867.7 10,754.8 10,113.1 10,103.6 3,869.9 1,411.5 304.0 2,433.6 1,978.1 106.6          June
871.5 10,686.7 10,067.8 10,064.9 3,886.4 1,405.2 302.9 2,381.5 1,983.4 105.5          July
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.2 10,071.1 3,896.1 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4          Aug 866.7 10,716.2 10,109.3 10,110.9 3,940.3 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.3 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.6 10,183.5 10,170.2 3,994.2 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,809.5 10,247.1 10,269.7 4,061.3 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,821.5 10,224.9 10,253.7 4,036.1 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,836.5 10,221.3 10,262.6 4,047.8 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,915.5 10,288.3 10,326.1 4,090.3 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.0 10,325.1 10,354.6 4,147.6 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.7 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.8 10,323.5 10,348.3 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.3 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.5 10,342.7 10,373.0 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.6 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,962.1 10,370.0 10,389.9 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.4 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,900.1 10,351.9 10,401.2 4,310.1 1,153.6 431.3 2,335.3 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,918.7 10,348.3 10,399.0 4,303.8 1,132.3 442.3 2,337.9 2,096.5 86.1 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,948.4 10,337.9 10,382.0 4,306.7 1,129.5 444.9 2,320.1 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,969.0 10,356.6 10,401.1 4,335.5 1,129.6 441.0 2,310.3 2,098.7 86.1          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0 2012          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.4 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Feb 342.2 260.5 122.3 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 500.9 2,982.2 2,303.8
         Mar 328.5 275.0 129.4 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 511.4 2,988.1 2,312.8
         Apr 289.9 273.2 123.1 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 521.0 2,981.5 2,289.4
         May 316.1 289.1 131.3 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 533.6 2,983.9 2,272.1
         June 333.3 317.9 134.8 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 510.1 2,975.5 2,275.5
         July 300.7 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 433.9 428.0 508.8 2,997.2 2,276.1
         Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.0 412.8 513.2 2,966.1 2,265.1
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 427.9 423.9 492.5 2,938.7 2,251.8
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.1 403.5 497.3 2,914.7 2,226.4
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.8 411.0 495.5 2,889.6 2,206.9
         Dec 251.0 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.2 368.2 467.9 2,853.4 2,183.4
2013          Jan 284.9 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 383.6 379.8 459.7 2,807.9 2,172.5
         Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 411.9 406.6 465.9 2,807.1 2,151.7
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 436.4 430.3 459.6 2,775.7 2,122.3
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 424.7 417.3 459.1 2,747.6 2,102.3
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 435.7 428.8 455.7 2,721.6 2,076.7
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 458.5 452.0 436.0 2,696.1 2,062.1
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 410.8 405.0 434.8 2,656.8 2,031.5
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 333.3 327.0 444.4 2,646.5 2,013.2
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 326.0 320.3 417.9 2,643.0 2,003.9
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 306.3 300.3 419.1 2,638.2 2,006.3
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 300.5 293.2 417.9 2,631.4 2,000.1
         Dec 214.5 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 288.7 281.9 404.8 2,587.1 1,979.3
2014          Jan 236.5 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 282.2 273.7 428.9 2,583.9 1,971.1
         Feb 272.6 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 307.3 295.7 427.7 2,558.4 1,958.6
         Mar 267.5 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.3 16.4 5.5 294.7 285.5 410.4 2,560.0 1,962.3
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.7 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.1 305.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
115.6 98.8 2,767.8 4,068.1 2,290.8 − 39.6 5,054.7 − 4,781.8 8,648.7 9,505.8 7,721.3 106.5 2012          Feb 
135.2 103.5 2,749.4 4,139.1 2,271.1 − 58.0 4,852.1 − 4,831.8 8,718.7 9,606.2 7,656.8 107.0          Mar 
119.4 107.7 2,754.4 4,178.1 2,268.7 − 56.3 5,011.8 − 4,837.2 8,721.7 9,608.6 7,656.9 107.8          Apr 
114.2 107.3 2,762.4 4,285.5 2,276.0 − 54.5 5,809.0 − 4,883.1 8,752.8 9,646.5 7,642.1 109.1          May
128.7 102.1 2,744.7 4,158.4 2,312.3 − 56.5 5,260.6 − 4,958.2 8,810.9 9,683.7 7,646.4 111.0          June
136.3 96.2 2,764.7 4,201.6 2,353.7 − 56.4 5,537.2 − 4,982.7 8,834.6 9,713.0 7,654.8 113.5          July
122.9 96.4 2,746.8 4,115.5 2,361.9 − 40.9 5,458.0 − 4,979.0 8,827.3 9,688.8 7,646.4 113.0          Aug 
120.1 92.6 2,726.0 4,047.4 2,405.8 − 61.1 5,325.8 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,702.0 7,665.2 113.1          Sep 
113.8 93.5 2,707.3 4,020.6 2,394.4 − 72.8 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,757.2 7,621.4 112.1          Oct 
96.3 91.2 2,702.1 3,939.7 2,408.9 − 69.0 4,944.8 − 5,091.6 8,957.5 9,761.4 7,627.4 114.6          Nov 
87.6 93.8 2,672.1 3,793.2 2,396.4 − 52.9 4,729.6 − 5,168.7 9,045.7 9,809.3 7,578.1 120.0          Dec 
70.4 92.3 2,645.3 3,774.3 2,387.7 − 37.9 4,932.3 − 5,109.7 9,002.2 9,749.2 7,536.2 112.0 2013          Jan 
62.0 88.1 2,657.0 3,812.4 2,378.2 − 50.1 4,982.2 − 5,119.4 9,018.5 9,757.3 7,529.6 111.1          Feb 
59.5 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.1 2,414.3 − 59.8 4,955.7 − 5,170.4 9,081.9 9,806.2 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.7 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.5 2,390.1 − 45.8 5,122.2 − 5,239.7 9,128.2 9,855.3 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
63.1 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.1 2,377.8 − 52.1 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,857.0 7,467.3 111.9          May
66.3 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.6 2,335.9 − 56.5 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.3 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.3 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.0 2,365.2 − 55.4 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.9 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.4 63.1 2,517.0 3,571.8 2,391.4 − 56.8 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.3 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.2 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.5 2,372.9 − 44.2 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,847.2 7,362.4 116.6          Sep 
64.0 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.5 2,376.8 − 41.5 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.9 7,374.9 114.3          Oct 
64.0 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.0 2,357.2 − 54.7 4,421.7 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.6 7,354.2 117.2          Nov 
39.1 49.1 2,499.0 3,308.6 2,339.0 − 54.5 3,954.0 − 5,444.1 9,248.9 9,852.3 7,310.0 114.1          Dec 
43.0 43.8 2,497.1 3,467.4 2,385.5 − 35.2 4,108.6 − 5,417.8 9,223.5 9,860.8 7,357.3 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.7 39.0 2,476.6 3,421.9 2,405.2 − 25.6 4,040.8 − 5,426.8 9,233.9 9,872.1 7,339.2 105.3          Feb 
50.0 35.5 2,474.5 3,385.3 2,421.1 − 27.5 3,985.9 − 5,463.4 9,276.5 9,889.8 7,342.8 105.7          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 − 2012          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 491.9 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.4 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,953.8 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
7.9 4.0 526.2 615.9 501.0 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.4 1,847.3 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2011          Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7 2011          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov + 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2 2011          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2013 Aug                30 2,360.6 320.0 249.6 84.6 165.1 24.0 22.3 22.3 −
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 320.0 251.4 84.7 166.8 23.2 22.3 22.3 −
                              13 2,350.1 320.0 251.0 84.6 166.4 23.7 22.3 22.3 −
                              20 2,346.6 320.0 250.7 84.7 166.0 22.7 23.1 23.1 −
                              27 2,338.0 320.0 250.0 84.6 165.4 22.7 23.3 23.3 −
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 343.9 245.4 83.5 161.9 21.5 23.6 23.6 −
                              11 2,340.4 343.9 245.7 83.5 162.2 20.9 22.8 22.8 −
                              18 2,328.0 343.9 244.7 83.3 161.4 21.2 21.5 21.5 −
                              25 2,318.7 343.9 245.4 83.1 162.3 21.3 21.7 21.7 −
         Nov                  1 2,314.4 343.9 244.8 83.2 161.6 22.2 21.5 21.5 −
                                8 2,305.4 343.9 243.9 82.7 161.2 22.4 18.7 18.7 −
                              15 2,299.0 343.9 244.2 82.5 161.7 22.5 19.1 19.1 −
                              22 2,293.6 343.9 244.9 82.5 162.4 22.8 19.4 19.4 −
                              29 2,291.0 343.9 244.3 82.5 161.8 23.4 19.3 19.3 −
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 343.9 244.6 82.5 162.1 23.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              13 2,283.0 343.9 243.7 82.4 161.2 23.8 20.2 20.2 −
                              20 2,287.5 343.9 244.0 82.7 161.3 23.3 19.5 19.5 −
                              27 2,285.4 343.9 245.7 82.9 162.8 23.0 19.5 19.5 −
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 303.2 241.6 81.7 159.9 23.2 20.2 20.2 −
                              10 2,220.5 303.2 244.3 81.6 162.7 22.5 21.8 21.8 −
                              17 2,197.9 303.2 245.8 81.6 164.2 22.6 21.0 21.0 −
                              24 2,221.3 303.2 243.9 81.6 162.3 23.3 21.1 21.1 −
                              31 2,217.1 303.2 244.2 81.4 162.8 23.7 20.2 20.2 −
2014 Feb                  7 2,190.3 303.2 244.2 81.0 163.2 22.8 19.2 19.2 −
                              14 2,190.1 303.2 244.5 80.5 164.0 23.1 19.1 19.1 −
                              21 2,184.8 303.2 244.1 80.7 163.4 23.0 18.8 18.8 −
                              28 2,181.1 303.2 243.8 80.7 163.1 24.1 19.0 19.0 −
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 303.2 244.3 80.8 163.5 23.9 18.8 18.8 −
                              14 2,167.8 303.1 244.5 80.8 163.7 23.8 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,166.1 303.1 244.7 80.7 164.0 23.9 19.2 19.2 −
                              28 2,152.1 303.1 244.5 80.7 163.9 23.1 17.7 17.7 −
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              11 2,169.1 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              18 2,167.8 326.5 244.1 80.9 163.2 23.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              25 2,169.1 326.5 245.2 81.8 163.4 23.8 18.4 18.4 −
         May                  2 2,217.1 326.5 245.6 81.8 163.8 23.5 18.7 18.7 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
790.5 97.1 693.3 − − 0.1 − 79.7 603.1 250.1 353.0 28.4 243.1 2013 Aug                30
786.5 95.6 688.6 − − 2.2 − 75.2 604.2 250.1 354.1 28.4 245.6          Sep                  6
779.5 97.2 682.3 − − 0.1 − 77.1 604.3 250.1 354.2 28.4 243.9                               13
775.4 96.2 678.9 − − 0.2 − 76.1 604.0 249.8 354.3 28.4 246.2                               20
767.3 97.0 670.2 − − 0.1 − 81.3 600.1 246.7 353.4 28.4 245.1                               27
761.6 94.5 667.0 − − 0.1 0.0 74.1 599.9 247.0 352.9 28.3 252.3          Oct                  4
753.0 93.4 659.3 − − 0.3 − 76.0 599.7 246.6 353.1 28.3 250.1                               11
749.7 91.2 658.5 − − − 0.0 73.5 599.6 246.6 353.0 28.3 245.6                               18743.9 90.6 653.3 − − − 0.0 77.3 595.0 245.7 349.2 28.3 241.9                               25
740.2 89.3 650.8 − − 0.0 0.0 80.4 593.4 241.6 351.7 28.3 239.8          Nov                  1
729.7 89.5 640.2 − − 0.0 0.0 83.2 593.2 241.6 351.6 28.3 242.2                                 8721.9 87.7 634.1 − − − 0.0 84.0 592.2 241.6 350.7 28.3 242.9                               15717.6 86.9 630.6 − − 0.2 0.0 81.4 592.3 241.5 350.8 28.3 242.9                               22719.0 97.2 621.7 − − 0.1 0.0 77.2 592.2 241.4 350.8 28.3 243.3                               29
709.3 94.6 614.5 − − 0.2 0.0 75.9 591.4 241.4 350.0 28.3 243.4          Dec                  6
713.0 98.5 614.4 − − 0.1 0.0 73.2 591.9 241.3 350.7 28.3 244.9                               13723.3 118.9 604.1 − − 0.3 0.0 74.2 585.3 235.4 349.9 28.3 245.7                               20717.1 133.6 583.3 − − 0.2 − 75.0 586.1 235.4 350.6 28.3 246.8                               27
752.3 168.7 583.3 − − 0.3 0.0 73.5 591.2 235.9 355.3 28.3 245.1 2014 Jan                  3695.9 112.5 583.3 − − 0.0 0.1 72.1 590.8 235.9 354.9 28.3 241.6                               10672.6 94.7 577.7 − − 0.1 0.0 73.1 588.7 234.0 354.7 28.3 242.6                               17693.2 116.3 576.7 − − 0.2 0.0 74.7 589.3 233.5 355.7 28.3 244.5                               24691.9 115.6 576.0 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 587.4 231.3 356.1 28.3 245.3                               31
671.3 95.1 575.6 − − 0.5 0.0 70.5 586.2 230.6 355.6 28.2 244.8 2014 Feb                  7
666.6 93.3 573.2 − − 0.1 0.0 74.7 587.2 229.9 357.3 28.2 243.4                               14665.2 92.9 572.2 − − 0.2 0.0 77.0 585.8 229.4 356.5 28.2 239.5                               21664.5 94.0 569.7 − − 0.8 0.0 74.1 586.4 229.3 357.1 28.2 237.7                               28
654.0 87.0 566.7 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 588.0 229.3 358.7 28.2 239.0          Mar                  7
648.9 92.6 556.3 − − 0.0 0.0 76.0 587.9 228.8 359.0 28.2 237.0                               14644.1 96.9 546.2 − − 0.9 0.0 77.8 588.5 228.6 359.9 28.2 236.6                               21640.8 121.3 518.0 − − 1.4 − 66.0 590.4 228.4 362.0 28.2 238.2                               28
627.4 110.6 516.5 − − 0.2 − 66.5 588.4 224.9 363.5 28.2 239.1          Apr                  4
636.7 104.6 532.1 − − − − 64.9 588.1 224.7 363.4 28.2 239.0                               11
636.3 112.2 523.8 − − 0.3 − 63.6 588.3 224.7 363.7 28.2 239.5                               18
638.1 121.8 516.3 − − 0.0 0.0 60.1 586.7 224.7 362.0 28.2 242.0                               25
688.3 172.6 515.0 − − 0.8 0.0 61.3 581.6 219.6 362.0 27.3 244.2          May                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2 2012          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2013 Aug                30 2,360.6 919.4 533.5 272.3 70.6 190.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 108.8 86.4 22.3
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 920.4 539.6 269.2 79.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.3 − 94.6 70.4 24.2
                              13 2,350.1 919.3 537.8 275.8 71.4 190.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 94.5 67.4 27.1
                              20 2,346.6 916.7 515.1 274.5 50.1 190.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 112.8 84.9 27.9
                              27 2,338.0 917.7 502.2 258.8 52.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.2 − 119.6 94.9 24.7
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 921.7 508.2 265.4 55.3 187.5 − 0.0 6.0 − 103.8 76.6 27.2
                              11 2,340.4 920.1 508.6 268.0 52.6 188.0 − 0.0 5.9 − 94.1 73.4 20.8
                              18 2,328.0 918.6 502.8 269.1 45.7 188.0 − 0.0 5.5 − 101.5 70.7 30.8
                              25 2,318.7 917.9 469.7 230.2 51.3 188.0 − 0.2 5.5 − 119.0 88.8 30.3
         Nov                  1 2,314.4 924.5 467.1 226.9 52.1 188.0 − 0.0 5.7 − 110.3 62.7 47.7
                                8 2,305.4 923.6 477.2 230.6 62.4 184.0 − 0.2 5.5 − 89.1 48.3 40.8
                              15 2,299.0 922.6 459.8 231.9 43.9 184.0 − 0.0 5.3 − 106.4 68.0 38.4
                              22 2,293.6 921.0 446.1 218.0 44.0 184.0 − 0.1 5.4 − 117.1 83.4 33.7
                              29 2,291.0 927.5 429.6 215.5 56.1 157.8 − 0.2 5.1 − 133.9 96.5 37.4
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 935.1 442.1 203.7 54.1 184.0 − 0.4 5.2 − 103.8 77.3 26.5
                              13 2,283.0 938.7 446.1 223.6 38.3 184.0 − 0.1 5.0 − 104.3 75.9 28.4
                              20 2,287.5 950.5 462.5 256.1 53.3 152.3 − 0.8 4.2 − 81.4 56.0 25.4
                              27 2,285.4 958.3 443.7 244.1 59.6 139.9 − 0.1 4.2 − 82.3 56.8 25.6
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 952.9 492.0 298.9 88.2 104.8 − 0.0 3.2 − 81.0 55.5 25.5
                              10 2,220.5 941.7 441.3 202.3 59.8 179.0 − 0.2 8.7 − 81.8 57.9 23.9
                              17 2,197.9 934.9 418.0 202.4 36.5 179.0 − 0.1 4.0 − 98.3 72.5 25.8
                              24 2,221.3 929.9 424.0 227.9 44.0 152.1 − 0.0 2.1 − 123.0 93.6 29.3
                              31 2,217.1 932.5 423.1 215.7 56.1 151.2 − 0.2 3.1 − 116.1 92.9 23.2
2014 Feb                  7 2,190.3 932.6 423.2 200.4 47.2 175.5 − 0.0 4.1 − 94.1 74.5 19.6
                              14 2,190.1 931.2 429.6 223.7 29.9 175.5 − 0.5 5.2 − 86.4 65.8 20.6
                              21 2,184.8 929.1 403.8 196.3 32.0 175.5 − 0.0 5.1 − 116.8 91.7 25.1
                              28 2,181.1 933.8 392.5 187.4 29.4 175.5 − 0.2 5.2 − 126.1 99.3 26.9
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 937.0 393.6 187.1 30.9 175.5 − 0.0 5.2 − 113.9 74.7 39.2
                              14 2,167.8 938.1 425.8 226.8 23.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.0 − 83.4 56.4 27.1
                              21 2,166.1 936.9 405.2 195.2 34.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.1 − 103.4 77.7 25.8
                              28 2,152.1 938.7 382.9 179.2 28.3 175.5 − − 9.5 − 117.1 89.9 27.2
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 942.5 382.4 181.1 25.7 175.5 − 0.0 10.3 − 95.1 69.9 25.2
                              11 2,169.1 944.2 392.0 198.2 21.2 172.5 − 0.2 4.1 − 99.9 68.9 31.0
                              18 2,167.8 951.9 386.4 202.9 30.1 153.4 − 0.0 4.1 − 98.7 63.7 35.0
                              25 2,169.1 946.4 356.9 166.1 24.0 166.8 − 0.0 4.0 − 129.2 91.1 38.1
         May                  2 2,217.1 950.3 383.3 240.2 39.1 103.9 − 0.1 2.8 − 147.7 105.3 42.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
135.0 1.8 5.8 5.8 − 54.2 221.5 − 284.7 90.4 2013 Aug                30
136.4 1.7 6.6 6.6 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4          Sep                  6
132.0 3.0 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 222.5 − 284.7 90.4                               13
134.8 2.6 4.4 4.4 − 54.2 224.8 − 284.7 90.4                               20
134.9 2.5 3.8 3.8 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4                               27
129.2 2.1 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 227.0 − 304.5 90.4          Oct                  4
131.1 2.4 3.3 3.3 − 53.6 226.3 − 304.5 90.4                               11
124.2 1.8 3.4 3.4 − 53.6 221.6 − 304.5 90.4                               18
126.7 1.7 4.6 4.6 − 53.6 225.2 − 304.5 90.4                               25
123.5 1.2 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 228.5 − 304.5 90.4          Nov                  1
129.5 1.3 4.5 4.5 − 53.6 226.1 − 304.5 90.4                                 8
122.7 1.3 4.9 4.9 − 53.6 227.4 − 304.5 90.4                               15
122.7 2.2 5.2 5.2 − 53.6 225.5 − 304.5 90.4                               22
114.3 2.3 5.1 5.1 − 53.6 224.6 − 304.5 90.4                               29
114.3 2.0 5.6 5.6 − 53.6 224.2 − 304.5 90.4          Dec                  6
110.2 2.0 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 223.2 − 304.5 90.4                               13
109.6 2.4 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 224.5 − 304.5 90.4                               20
115.2 4.4 3.2 3.2 − 53.6 225.5 − 304.5 90.4                               27
114.2 4.8 3.2 3.2 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 90.7 2014 Jan                  3
110.5 3.5 5.5 5.5 − 52.7 221.3 − 262.9 90.7                               10
106.1 2.7 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 221.6 − 262.9 90.6                               17
105.8 1.3 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 223.2 − 262.9 90.5                               24
106.1 2.9 5.1 5.1 − 52.7 222.0 − 262.9 90.6                               31
101.9 1.0 6.4 6.4 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 90.6 2014 Feb                  7
99.4 1.4 7.2 7.2 − 52.7 223.5 − 262.9 90.6                               14
94.0 1.0 6.4 6.4 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 92.1                               21
93.5 2.8 4.9 4.9 − 52.7 214.2 − 262.9 92.4                               28
90.6 1.9 5.8 5.8 − 52.7 216.5 − 262.9 92.4          Mar                  7
88.1 1.2 6.5 6.5 − 52.7 211.5 − 262.9 92.5                               14
88.2 1.0 6.9 6.9 − 52.7 211.2 − 262.9 92.5                               21
81.6 1.4 5.7 5.7 − 52.7 206.8 − 262.9 92.7                               28
84.1 1.1 4.6 4.6 − 52.8 206.1 − 288.9 93.0          Apr                  4
82.9 1.1 4.9 4.9 − 52.8 205.4 − 288.9 93.0                               11
78.3 1.3 4.4 4.4 − 52.8 208.0 − 288.9 93.0                               18
80.5 1.4 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 211.4 − 288.9 93.0                               25
78.4 1.5 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 214.0 − 288.9 93.0          May                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0 2012          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2012          June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7
         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,513.1 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
 Changes 3
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.6 − 0.5 −257.1 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2012          July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1
         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.0 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.2 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.8 2.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8 2012          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.3 583.2 336.7 246.6 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 955.6 724.0 824.1          Mar 
Changes 3
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 −420.8 2013
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7 2012          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 3.6 − 11.1 − 15.5          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2012          June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,151.3 378.6 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,149.6 378.2 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,513.1 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
 Changes 4
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.6 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2012          July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.0 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.5 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.2 0.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5 2012          June44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.3 35.0 502.1 511.6 921.0          Mar 
Changes 4
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −104.9 − 17.6 −134.1 18.9 −417.1 2013
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8 2012          July
− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.4 − 9.2 − 3.0 − 9.7          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2013          Oct 1,849 7,747.9 76.8 2,658.2 2,029.0 622.1 3,847.3 380.0 2,731.3 0.5 723.2 137.2 1,028.4
         Nov 1,845 7,782.0 77.9 2,687.1 2,054.4 624.6 3,857.7 377.1 2,739.3 0.6 729.0 135.2 1,024.1
         Dec 1,846 7,604.2 104.4 2,565.4 1,935.5 620.9 3,832.6 367.4 2,730.0 0.7 725.1 131.3 970.5
2014          Jan 1,840 7,685.5 89.1 2,618.0 1,990.0 619.3 3,855.9 381.7 2,732.2 0.6 732.3 133.6 989.0
         Feb 1,841 7,616.7 80.1 2,622.0 1,998.7 614.4 3,845.6 383.2 2,730.0 0.5 722.0 131.6 937.5
         Mar 1,840 7,565.5 77.5 2,582.0 1,961.1 611.8 3,852.0 378.7 2,727.6 0.5 733.9 132.0 921.9
Commercial banks 6
2014          Feb 276 2,796.8 34.2 979.1 886.5 89.5 1,052.2 192.7 657.9 0.2 195.7 67.2 664.1
         Mar 275 2,768.6 33.6 951.4 852.8 95.6 1,062.8 187.9 659.9 0.2 207.6 67.9 653.0
   Big banks 7
2014          Feb 4 1,736.8 9.1 579.1 529.4 47.1 458.1 109.2 246.6 0.2 97.3 60.4 630.1
         Mar 4 1,711.4 7.7 562.6 507.0 53.0 461.7 101.9 246.4 0.1 107.1 60.6 618.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2014          Feb 164 824.0 18.5 232.1 191.0 40.7 538.9 64.3 379.5 0.1 94.8 6.2 28.3
         Mar 164 824.0 15.5 229.5 188.2 40.9 544.5 67.6 380.6 0.1 95.9 6.6 27.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2014          Feb 108 236.1 6.6 167.9 166.2 1.7 55.2 19.1 31.8 0.0 3.7 0.7 5.7
         Mar 107 233.3 10.3 159.3 157.6 1.7 56.6 18.4 32.9 0.0 4.6 0.7 6.3
Landesbanken
2014          Feb 9 1,099.2 5.7 384.4 275.4 107.5 562.6 70.5 374.8 0.1 114.2 14.4 132.1
         Mar 9 1,091.2 6.1 380.4 271.8 107.0 560.3 69.0 373.9 0.1 114.2 14.2 130.2
Savings banks
2014          Feb 417 1,103.2 14.8 220.4 83.3 136.4 835.3 55.9 652.7 0.1 126.5 15.0 17.7
         Mar 417 1,099.6 13.5 217.0 81.1 135.3 836.7 57.2 651.8 0.1 127.5 15.0 17.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2014          Feb 2 278.3 0.3 161.5 129.1 32.4 66.3 13.8 21.4 0.0 30.9 14.4 35.9
         Mar 2 275.1 0.1 160.6 128.0 32.5 64.8 13.4 21.1 0.0 30.1 14.4 35.3
Credit cooperatives
2014          Feb 1,078 761.3 10.4 176.1 58.2 117.7 543.3 32.2 431.2 0.1 79.6 12.1 19.5
         Mar 1,078 760.9 9.9 173.1 55.5 117.5 546.3 33.4 431.8 0.1 80.9 12.1 19.4
Mortgage banks
2014          Feb 17 436.3 0.7 115.0 68.6 43.4 304.6 5.3 227.5 − 71.8 0.6 15.4
         Mar 17 430.9 0.5 113.4 73.3 37.0 301.2 6.1 225.2 − 70.0 0.6 15.2
Building and loan associations
2014          Feb 22 206.0 0.2 60.9 44.0 16.9 138.6 1.5 119.1 . 18.0 0.4 5.8
         Mar 22 207.3 0.7 61.4 44.5 16.9 139.1 1.6 119.5 . 18.1 0.4 5.7
Special purpose banks
2014          Feb 20 935.5 13.8 524.5 453.5 70.5 342.6 11.2 245.4 − 85.2 7.5 47.0
         Mar 20 931.8 13.2 524.7 454.2 70.0 340.8 10.1 244.4 − 85.4 7.5 45.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2014          Feb 145 853.2 19.9 348.5 306.5 39.5 396.1 63.2 237.5 0.1 92.5 5.3 83.3
         Mar 144 852.5 20.6 342.8 300.4 39.9 400.8 63.5 238.8 0.1 95.4 5.3 83.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2014          Feb 37 617.1 13.3 180.6 140.3 37.7 340.9 44.1 205.7 0.1 88.8 4.5 77.7
         Mar 37 619.2 10.2 183.5 142.8 38.2 344.2 45.0 205.9 0.1 90.8 4.5 76.7
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,736.3 408.9 1,327.4 3,273.9 1,517.1 301.9 745.6 71.7 616.3 536.2 93.1 1,213.7 437.0 1,086.9 2013          Oct 1,753.1 437.0 1,316.1 3,302.1 1,540.0 307.2 746.2 73.6 616.2 536.1 92.5 1,206.7 437.2 1,082.9          Nov 1,656.0 348.1 1,307.9 3,306.5 1,528.0 323.6 742.7 77.8 620.0 540.3 92.2 1,179.7 437.5 1,024.4          Dec 
1,712.9 418.1 1,294.8 3,304.6 1,543.1 310.0 741.6 79.6 618.9 539.6 90.9 1,186.5 437.5 1,044.1 2014          Jan 
1,702.9 409.7 1,293.2 3,312.8 1,551.3 314.2 738.0 81.9 619.6 540.0 89.8 1,173.4 438.5 989.2          Feb 1,686.2 406.7 1,279.5 3,299.9 1,546.2 312.3 735.6 75.3 618.3 538.8 87.5 1,161.7 439.1 978.6          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
668.7 259.7 409.0 1,208.0 697.5 166.8 202.7 62.4 113.6 100.8 27.5 142.1 142.3 635.7 2014          Feb 659.3 254.5 404.8 1,196.3 690.1 164.4 202.8 55.3 113.0 100.3 26.0 143.0 141.8 628.2          Mar 
Big banks 7
434.5 194.4 240.1 536.6 291.4 83.0 80.4 62.4 71.5 69.4 10.3 103.2 80.7 581.8 2014          Feb 428.8 190.2 238.6 522.9 285.3 78.5 79.3 55.3 71.2 69.1 8.7 103.8 80.8 575.1          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
133.0 39.0 93.9 551.5 331.5 63.7 98.3 0.0 41.9 31.3 16.1 38.3 53.4 47.8 2014          Feb 133.7 38.4 95.4 552.3 330.1 65.1 99.3 0.0 41.6 31.2 16.1 38.6 52.8 46.7          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
101.3 26.3 75.0 119.9 74.5 20.1 24.0 − 0.2 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.3 6.1 2014          Feb 
96.7 25.9 70.8 121.2 74.7 20.9 24.2 − 0.2 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.3 6.5          Mar 
Landesbanken
326.0 55.9 270.1 309.2 109.8 56.8 127.8 15.2 14.6 10.7 0.1 264.1 61.6 138.3 2014          Feb 319.9 53.9 266.0 314.5 114.3 58.4 127.1 16.8 14.6 10.7 0.1 261.0 61.8 134.0          Mar 
Savings banks
152.4 15.9 136.4 806.6 414.9 29.1 15.5 − 301.0 258.9 46.0 15.7 84.2 44.3 2014          Feb 151.3 17.3 134.0 803.3 413.1 28.7 15.4 − 300.7 258.6 45.5 15.2 84.3 45.4          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
137.1 31.8 105.3 35.2 11.7 10.0 11.3 3.0 − − 2.2 57.5 13.8 34.7 2014          Feb 135.3 31.9 103.3 34.3 11.6 9.2 11.3 2.1 − − 2.2 57.2 13.8 34.5          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
100.1 6.2 93.8 561.5 300.2 36.5 22.2 − 189.8 169.2 12.8 11.0 54.7 34.0 2014          Feb 100.3 7.2 93.1 559.7 299.6 36.1 22.0 − 189.4 168.7 12.6 11.0 54.9 35.0          Mar 
Mortgage banks
111.8 6.4 105.4 155.4 8.2 8.2 138.6 − 0.2 0.2 . 133.7 16.8 18.7 2014          Feb 108.9 6.7 102.2 154.1 7.9 8.3 137.6 − 0.2 0.2 . 131.6 16.9 19.5          Mar 
Building and loan associations
22.5 1.9 20.6 155.9 0.5 0.6 153.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 4.0 9.1 14.5 2014          Feb 23.1 2.3 20.8 156.3 0.5 0.6 154.0 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 4.0 9.1 14.7          Mar 
Special purpose banks
184.3 31.8 152.5 81.0 8.5 6.2 66.3 1.3 − − . 545.4 55.9 69.0 2014          Feb 188.2 33.0 155.2 81.2 9.1 6.5 65.5 1.1 − − . 538.7 56.4 67.3          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
222.0 68.1 153.8 464.7 294.5 62.5 74.1 9.2 21.5 21.2 12.1 28.2 46.9 91.4 2014          Feb 216.4 69.5 146.9 470.4 297.3 63.7 75.7 12.3 21.5 21.2 12.1 28.0 47.0 90.7          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
120.7 41.9 78.8 344.8 220.0 42.4 50.1 9.2 21.4 21.1 10.9 27.7 38.6 85.2 2014          Feb 119.7 43.6 76.1 349.2 222.6 42.9 51.5 12.3 21.4 21.1 11.0 27.5 38.7 84.2          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- undIV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2012          Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
         Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.3 430.3
         July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.5 2,691.9 0.4 2.1 433.1
         Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6
         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4
         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.5 442.1
Changes *
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2012          Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.7 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.1 − 39.8 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
         Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
         July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9 2012          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,132.0 149.5 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
Changes *
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2 2012          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 16.8 − 4.0 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2012          Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.3 450.6 116.6 334.0 8.6 280.1
         Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1
         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
         July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9
         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
         Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4
         Dec 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6
         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
Changes *
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2012          Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.0 − 25.6 − 22.2 − 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.0
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.2 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
         Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8
         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4 2012          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0          Dec 
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
Changes *
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 2012          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.9 − 51.7 − 22.2 − 19.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 8.2 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2012          Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.5 2,315.9
         Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8
         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 389.9 338.8 338.2 0.6 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,848.2 2,319.6
         July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5
         Sep 3,127.5 2,692.3 276.7 226.0 225.3 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
         Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0
         Dec 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7
         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.8 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
Changes *
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2012          Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.1 − 39.6 − 34.3 − 21.4 − 21.4 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.8 − 5.5
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
         Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
         July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7
         Sep + 0.3 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5 2012          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.7 30.0 528.6 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June
2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
Changes *
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 2012          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov − 8.2 − 1.6 − 6.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2012 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Mar 2,451.1 1,173.5 1,136.8 926.0 210.8 1,394.1 311.9 133.2 94.6 60.3 126.9 44.7 76.2 208.8
         June 2,464.2 1,173.0 1,143.3 928.7 214.6 1,402.0 314.0 131.9 94.6 60.1 124.8 45.6 74.0 219.9         Sep 2,352.4 1,177.9 1,152.6 933.4 219.2 1,282.8 316.6 130.3 95.7 60.1 124.9 46.2 72.0 104.5         Dec 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Mar 2,356.3 1,179.3 1,160.3 936.4 223.8 1,283.4 320.0 129.1 97.0 59.5 124.2 46.0 68.9 107.1
 Short-term lending
2012 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Mar 331.7 − 7.8 − 7.8 294.9 3.9 37.5 7.5 13.1 43.6 3.6 7.0 125.4
         June 338.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 301.4 3.9 37.4 6.7 12.9 41.8 4.1 6.3 135.1
         Sep 225.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 187.8 4.0 35.9 6.5 13.0 42.2 4.0 6.2 23.9
         Dec 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Mar 219.9 − 8.6 − 8.6 183.5 4.4 35.4 5.9 12.7 41.5 3.6 6.4 23.8
 Medium-term lending
2012 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Mar 249.6 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.5 11.6 25.8 6.8 9.2 16.6 3.9 11.3 37.0
         June 250.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 176.6 12.3 24.7 6.7 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.2 37.7
         Sep 247.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 173.1 12.3 24.8 6.6 9.4 16.5 4.0 11.3 34.5
         Dec 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Mar 249.1 − 35.0 − 35.0 175.0 12.3 25.3 5.9 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.4 35.8
 Long-term lending
2012 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Mar 1,869.7 1,173.5 1,094.0 926.0 168.0 922.7 296.5 69.8 80.4 38.1 66.7 37.2 58.0 46.4
         June 1,875.4 1,173.0 1,099.7 928.7 170.9 924.0 297.8 69.9 81.2 37.8 66.1 37.6 56.5 47.1         Sep 1,879.4 1,177.9 1,108.8 933.4 175.4 922.0 300.3 69.6 82.6 37.7 66.2 38.2 54.5 46.1         Dec 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Mar 1,887.3 1,179.3 1,116.7 936.4 180.3 924.9 303.3 68.4 85.2 37.5 66.1 38.5 51.1 47.5
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2013          Q1 + 15.1 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 16.4 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 13.4
         Q2 + 13.1 − 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 10.9         Q3 − 18.8 + 2.4 + 9.1 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 26.5 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 22.6         Q4 + 2.0 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 2.6 + 3.5 − 1.5 + 2.1 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.6
2014          Q1 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3
 Short-term lending
2013          Q1 + 16.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.6
         Q2 + 6.5 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 9.8         Q3 − 23.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 23.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 21.4         Q4 − 6.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9
2014          Q1 + 2.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.1
 Medium-term lending
2013          Q1 − 1.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1
         Q2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5         Q3 − 0.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1         Q4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
2014          Q1 + 1.3 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
 Long-term lending
2013          Q1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3
         Q2 + 5.7 − 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.0         Q4 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.7
2014          Q1 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5 2012
649.4 184.6 38.5 178.7 387.3 51.3 1,043.6 821.3 222.3 146.5 12.6 13.3 3.5 2013          Mar 
651.2 186.7 38.5 178.1 388.0 51.1 1,048.6 825.8 222.9 147.7 12.4 13.5 3.6          June649.1 187.4 37.4 176.0 388.7 50.7 1,056.2 832.6 223.6 147.0 12.5 13.4 3.5          Sep 652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5          Dec 
651.5 192.1 37.1 175.9 387.5 49.4 1,059.4 836.8 222.6 148.0 12.0 13.5 3.5 2014          Mar 
Short-term lending
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0 2012
57.3 9.0 8.2 12.8 30.1 7.8 35.9 3.9 32.0 2.0 12.6 1.0 0.0 2013          Mar 
57.1 9.4 7.8 12.5 29.9 7.6 35.8 4.0 31.8 1.9 12.4 1.0 0.0          June56.0 9.2 7.4 12.3 28.8 7.4 36.6 4.1 32.5 1.7 12.5 1.0 0.0          Sep 54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
54.0 8.9 6.6 12.4 27.8 7.0 35.4 4.2 31.2 1.8 12.0 1.0 0.0 2014          Mar 
Medium-term lending
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0 2012
65.9 8.6 7.2 19.9 31.9 3.6 72.6 23.3 49.3 43.8 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Mar 
66.2 8.7 7.1 19.8 32.0 3.7 73.4 23.3 50.0 44.7 − 0.5 0.0          June
65.9 9.1 7.0 19.5 32.2 3.6 74.0 23.4 50.7 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
66.8 9.9 6.7 20.1 32.1 3.5 73.6 22.6 51.0 45.8 − 0.4 0.0 2014          Mar 
Long-term lending
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5 2012
526.3 167.0 23.1 146.0 325.3 39.9 935.1 794.1 141.0 100.7 − 11.9 3.5 2013          Mar 
527.9 168.6 23.6 145.7 326.1 39.8 939.4 798.4 141.0 101.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
527.2 169.1 23.0 144.2 327.6 39.6 945.6 805.1 140.5 99.9 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5          Dec 
530.6 173.3 23.9 143.4 327.6 38.9 950.4 810.0 140.4 100.4 − 12.0 3.5 2014          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.8 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 4.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q2− 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3+ 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 3.3 + 4.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
Short-term lending
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2013          Q1
− 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2− 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Q3− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 2013          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − − 0.0          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2013          Apr 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 333.6 724.7 32.3 692.5 612.3 85.1 34.6 30.2 95.6
         May 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 332.0 726.2 32.9 693.4 610.7 83.0 34.5 30.1 96.8
         June 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 344.8 724.4 32.2 692.3 609.7 81.0 34.4 30.1 110.9
         July 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 322.8 719.9 31.2 688.8 608.1 79.6 34.4 30.4 88.5
         Aug 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 254.9 709.5 29.2 680.3 607.5 78.8 34.4 30.4 1.2
         Sep 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 251.2 705.7 29.0 676.7 606.4 78.0 33.5 30.2 1.2
         Oct 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 247.6 703.0 29.4 673.6 606.4 77.3 33.4 30.1 3.1
         Nov 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 246.4 701.4 29.6 671.7 606.3 76.9 33.3 30.1 1.0
         Dec 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014          Jan 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 250.8 695.9 29.0 666.9 609.1 75.4 32.9 29.1 2.5
         Feb 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 255.8 694.0 29.1 664.9 609.8 74.4 32.7 29.0 3.1
         Mar 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 257.3 691.5 28.8 662.7 608.6 73.7 32.5 28.8 1.9
Changes*
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2013          Apr + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 4.6 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.2         June + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 + 12.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 14.1
         July − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 21.9 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5
         Aug + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.1         Sep − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Oct + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9
         Nov + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0         Dec + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 8.3 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 4.2 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 4.4
2014          Jan − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.9
         Feb + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.6         Mar − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.2
Domestic government End of year or month*
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2013          Apr 184.1 51.5 128.1 71.7 56.4 5.2 51.2 3.3 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.3
         May 190.2 52.1 133.4 76.0 57.4 5.5 51.9 3.5 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.1
         June 194.8 54.0 135.9 78.9 57.1 5.5 51.5 3.5 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.5
         July 189.8 49.2 135.7 78.5 57.2 5.1 52.1 3.6 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.3
         Aug 185.1 50.7 129.3 77.9 51.4 5.1 46.3 3.7 1.4 32.1 5.8 0.2
         Sep 184.4 49.5 129.9 78.9 51.0 5.1 45.9 3.7 1.4 31.2 5.8 0.8
         Oct 177.5 46.8 125.5 74.4 51.2 5.4 45.8 3.7 1.4 31.1 5.8 1.5
         Nov 184.7 49.6 130.0 78.6 51.3 5.4 46.0 3.7 1.5 31.1 5.8 0.5
         Dec 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014          Jan 172.1 43.4 123.7 75.3 48.4 5.6 42.8 3.5 1.4 30.7 4.8 0.8
         Feb 178.1 47.1 125.9 76.9 49.0 6.1 43.0 3.6 1.5 30.6 4.8 1.5
         Mar 180.5 47.3 128.2 79.4 48.8 6.1 42.7 3.5 1.5 30.5 4.7 0.7
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2013          Apr − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0         May + 6.1 + 0.6 + 5.3 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2         June + 4.6 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6
         July − 5.0 − 4.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 4.0 + 1.6 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Oct − 7.0 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 7.2 + 2.8 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Dec − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 4.2
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9
         Feb + 5.5 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7
         Mar + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.0
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.82013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2013          Apr 2,916.2 1,293.0 930.2 261.9 668.4 27.1 641.3 609.0 83.9 2.3 24.4 93.3
         May 2,925.1 1,311.3 924.8 256.0 668.8 27.3 641.5 607.3 81.7 2.3 24.4 94.7         June 2,934.9 1,315.7 933.3 265.9 667.4 26.6 640.7 606.2 79.7 2.3 24.3 110.4
         July 2,915.4 1,325.6 907.0 244.3 662.7 26.1 636.7 604.5 78.2 2.3 24.6 88.2
         Aug 2,838.5 1,322.2 835.1 177.0 658.1 24.1 634.0 603.8 77.5 2.3 24.6 1.1         Sep 2,836.2 1,329.9 827.0 172.3 654.7 23.9 630.7 602.7 76.6 2.3 24.5 0.4
         Oct 2,849.7 1,346.0 825.0 173.3 651.8 24.0 627.8 602.7 75.9 2.3 24.3 1.6
         Nov 2,859.7 1,363.8 817.8 167.8 650.0 24.3 625.8 602.7 75.4 2.2 24.3 0.5         Dec 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014          Jan 2,875.1 1,372.6 822.9 175.5 647.4 23.4 624.1 605.6 74.0 2.2 24.3 1.7
         Feb 2,878.5 1,375.5 823.9 178.9 644.9 23.0 621.9 606.2 72.9 2.1 24.2 1.6         Mar 2,867.4 1,369.6 820.6 177.9 642.7 22.7 620.0 605.0 72.2 2.1 24.1 1.2
Changes*
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2013          Apr + 5.8 + 12.5 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 8.9 + 18.3 − 5.4 − 5.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.4         June + 10.1 + 4.4 + 8.8 + 9.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 19.5 + 9.8 − 26.2 − 21.5 − 4.7 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug + 4.1 + 11.7 − 6.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0         Sep − 2.4 + 7.6 − 8.0 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 13.5 + 16.2 − 2.0 + 1.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov + 10.0 + 17.8 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1         Dec + 5.9 − 2.2 + 4.5 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 9.4 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.0
         Feb + 4.0 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Mar − 11.1 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2013          Apr 1,108.9 424.0 662.5 185.6 476.8 11.1 465.8 6.9 15.5 2.3 17.0 93.3
         May 1,110.2 430.2 657.4 180.5 476.9 11.5 465.4 7.1 15.5 2.3 17.1 94.7
         June 1,116.9 426.8 667.6 192.0 475.6 11.4 464.2 7.2 15.3 2.3 17.1 110.4
         July 1,096.9 430.4 644.1 172.1 472.0 11.6 460.4 7.3 15.2 2.3 17.4 88.2
         Aug 1,013.2 417.2 573.4 106.0 467.4 10.0 457.4 7.4 15.3 2.3 17.5 1.1
         Sep 1,013.2 424.3 566.4 102.4 464.0 10.1 453.9 7.4 15.2 2.3 17.3 0.4
         Oct 1,017.9 430.3 565.0 104.3 460.8 10.2 450.5 7.5 15.1 2.2 17.2 1.6
         Nov 1,007.5 427.8 557.4 99.3 458.0 10.4 447.7 7.4 15.0 2.2 17.3 0.5
         Dec 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014          Jan 1,016.9 434.6 559.6 107.6 452.1 9.9 442.2 7.4 15.2 2.2 17.5 1.7
         Feb 1,011.5 429.4 559.6 110.8 448.8 9.7 439.1 7.4 15.0 2.1 17.4 1.6
         Mar 1,004.6 426.1 555.9 109.7 446.2 9.6 436.6 7.5 15.1 2.0 17.5 1.2
Changes*
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2013          Apr + 4.4 + 6.3 − 1.9 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 1.3 + 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4         June + 7.0 − 3.4 + 10.5 + 11.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 20.0 + 3.6 − 23.5 − 19.8 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug − 2.6 + 1.9 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.0         Sep − 0.2 + 7.0 − 7.1 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 4.7 + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.9 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov − 10.4 − 2.5 − 7.7 − 4.9 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.1         Dec + 3.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 5.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 1.9 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
         Feb − 4.7 − 4.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar − 6.9 − 3.3 − 3.7 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2013          Oct 1,831.8 915.7 887.2 161.4 597.0 128.9 28.5 260.0 244.7 16.4 212.4 15.9
         Nov 1,852.2 936.0 908.4 163.0 614.3 131.1 27.7 260.5 245.5 16.4 213.2 15.9
         Dec 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014          Jan 1,858.3 938.0 908.7 164.4 613.0 131.3 29.2 263.3 248.2 16.4 216.4 15.3
         Feb 1,867.0 946.1 916.9 165.1 619.6 132.2 29.2 264.2 249.1 16.6 217.5 15.1
         Mar 1,862.8 943.5 914.6 161.1 621.5 132.0 28.9 264.7 249.4 16.6 217.8 15.0
Changes*
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2013          Oct + 8.8 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 4.7 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3
         Nov + 20.4 + 20.3 + 21.1 + 1.6 + 17.3 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0
         Dec + 2.2 − 3.5 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.0 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2014          Jan + 4.2 + 5.7 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1
         Feb + 8.8 + 8.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.2
         Mar − 4.2 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2013          Oct 177.5 13.9 2.9 2.7 8.2 0.1 16.2 45.9 11.1 11.7 22.9 0.2 14.6
         Nov 184.7 14.3 3.1 2.8 8.3 0.1 16.2 43.2 10.1 10.0 22.9 0.2 14.5
         Dec 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014          Jan 172.1 11.7 3.2 3.1 5.4 0.1 15.7 40.7 9.8 7.8 22.9 0.2 14.6
         Feb 178.1 12.0 3.2 3.3 5.4 0.1 15.6 43.6 10.3 10.2 23.0 0.2 14.6
         Mar 180.5 11.7 3.3 3.0 5.3 0.1 15.6 48.1 11.6 13.4 23.0 0.2 14.5
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2013          Oct − 7.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − − 3.1 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 7.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 1.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 4.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.2 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb + 5.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 3.2 − 0.0 − − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 2011
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 201215.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
15.3 69.0 191.0 13.7 177.2 595.2 585.2 10.1 60.8 0.0 7.1 − 2013          Oct 
15.0 68.5 192.0 13.9 178.1 595.2 585.5 9.7 60.4 0.0 7.0 −          Nov 15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 −          Dec 
15.1 68.0 195.3 13.5 181.8 598.2 588.5 9.7 58.8 0.0 6.8 − 2014          Jan 
15.1 68.1 196.1 13.3 182.8 598.8 589.1 9.7 57.9 0.0 6.7 −          Feb 15.3 68.2 196.5 13.2 183.4 597.6 587.9 9.7 57.1 0.0 6.6 −          Mar 
Changes*
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
+ 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2013          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2014          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 201244.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
41.7 20.1 10.9 6.6 4.1 0.4 75.9 12.7 49.0 13.4 0.7 0.0 2013          Oct 
44.2 22.4 11.1 6.7 4.1 0.4 83.0 14.0 54.7 13.5 0.8 0.0          Nov 44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
39.2 18.1 10.5 6.6 4.0 0.4 80.5 12.3 53.9 13.6 0.7 0.0 2014          Jan 
42.1 20.5 10.7 6.8 4.1 0.4 80.4 13.1 52.7 13.8 0.7 0.0          Feb 41.4 19.7 11.0 6.6 4.1 0.4 79.3 12.7 52.0 13.9 0.7 0.0          Mar 
Changes*
+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013
− 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 2013          Oct 
+ 2.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Nov + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 4.3 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 5.7 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.9 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2014          Jan 
+ 2.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 1.5 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Feb − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2013          Nov 616.2 606.3 528.3 411.2 78.0 65.7 9.9 7.8 0.3 92.5 76.9 59.7 15.6
         Dec 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 4.4 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014          Jan 618.9 609.1 531.8 411.6 77.3 64.8 9.8 7.8 0.3 90.9 75.4 58.6 15.5
         Feb 619.6 609.8 532.3 411.0 77.5 65.0 9.8 7.8 0.2 89.8 74.4 58.0 15.4
         Mar 618.3 608.6 531.1 408.9 77.5 64.9 9.7 7.7 0.2 87.5 73.7 57.5 13.7
Changes*
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2013          Nov − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Dec + 3.9 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
2014          Jan − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0
         Feb + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.2
         Mar − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2013          Nov 1,169.1 318.1 28.3 341.0 67.6 83.4 2.6 36.2 4.8 1,049.5 0.6 0.2 37.6 1.1
         Dec 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014          Jan 1,149.7 312.3 25.7 336.2 71.4 84.8 2.0 30.0 4.6 1,034.9 0.8 0.2 36.8 1.1
         Feb 1,138.2 309.4 27.9 331.1 66.6 82.9 2.2 29.6 4.9 1,025.7 0.8 0.2 35.2 1.1
         Mar 1,126.5 306.5 26.2 320.9 63.7 78.2 2.3 28.3 5.0 1,020.0 0.8 0.2 35.2 1.1
Changes*
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2013          Nov − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 6.5 − 4.5 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         Dec − 26.4 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 19.8 − 12.8 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 10.5 − + 0.0 − 0.6 −
2014          Jan + 7.0 − 3.6 − 0.6 + 15.1 + 16.6 + 15.9 − 0.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Feb − 11.5 − 2.9 + 2.3 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 9.2 + 0.1 − − 1.6 −         Mar − 11.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 10.2 − 2.9 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014          Jan 22 205.5 43.6 0.0 16.9 20.9 82.7 17.0 17.9 1.6 21.2 149.7 5.5 4.0 9.2 7.6
         Feb 22 206.0 44.2 0.0 16.9 20.6 82.9 17.1 18.0 1.6 20.8 150.5 5.4 4.0 9.1 7.5
         Mar 22 207.3 45.1 0.0 16.9 20.5 83.5 17.1 18.1 1.6 21.5 151.0 5.3 4.0 9.1 7.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Jan 12 144.8 26.2 0.0 10.2 14.4 65.2 14.7 8.5 1.1 17.8 99.0 5.4 4.0 6.2 4.9         Feb 12 145.0 26.8 0.0 10.2 14.3 65.3 14.7 8.4 1.1 17.6 99.5 5.3 4.0 6.1 4.7         Mar 12 146.1 27.7 0.0 10.2 14.2 65.8 14.7 8.3 1.1 18.2 99.8 5.2 4.0 6.1 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Jan 10 60.8 17.3 0.0 6.7 6.4 17.5 2.4 9.4 0.5 3.4 50.7 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Feb 10 61.0 17.5 0.0 6.7 6.4 17.6 2.4 9.6 0.5 3.3 51.0 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Mar 10 61.2 17.5 0.0 6.7 6.3 17.7 2.4 9.7 0.5 3.2 51.2 0.1 − 3.0 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014          Jan 2.6 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.3 3.2 1.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.3 13.9 8.0 0.8 0.0
         Feb 2.5 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.4 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.2 14.2 8.3 0.8 0.0
         Mar 2.5 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.3 3.5 1.5 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.4 14.2 8.1 0.8 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Jan 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 9.2 4.5 0.6 0.0
         Feb 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.4 2.1 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 9.3 4.5 0.6 0.0         Mar 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.6 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.5 4.6 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Jan 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.5 0.3 0.0         Feb 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.7 0.2 0.0         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.6 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2013          May 55 208 2,003.3 534.1 518.7 160.6 358.2 15.3 595.4 468.8 13.0 455.7 126.6 873.8 613.0
         June 55 207 1,909.3 528.0 512.8 162.1 350.6 15.2 563.0 446.7 12.8 433.9 116.3 818.3 605.9
         July 54 206 1,845.8 511.4 497.0 156.7 340.3 14.5 540.5 431.2 12.0 419.2 109.3 793.9 544.3
         Aug 54 206 1,812.6 506.8 492.3 147.6 344.6 14.6 533.5 422.8 12.2 410.6 110.7 772.3 508.3
         Sep 55 206 1,720.0 471.0 457.5 143.2 314.3 13.6 560.5 449.8 12.1 437.7 110.7 688.4 492.6
         Oct 55 204 1,779.4 475.8 462.5 145.6 317.0 13.2 549.2 439.7 10.7 429.0 109.5 754.4 487.0
         Nov 55 206 1,787.6 485.8 472.0 146.7 325.3 13.8 540.5 428.9 10.3 418.6 111.6 761.4 494.0
         Dec 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014          Jan 56 209 1,814.4 480.7 466.8 146.1 320.7 13.9 543.7 433.4 10.3 423.1 110.3 790.1 457.6
         Feb 56 210 1,769.7 485.5 472.1 147.8 324.3 13.5 543.5 436.9 9.9 426.9 106.7 740.7 433.8
Changes *
2012 − 1 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2013          June − − 1 − 89.8 − 4.0 − 3.9 + 1.6 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 30.5 − 20.6 − 0.2 − 20.4 − 9.9 − 55.3 − 7.1
         July − 1 − 1 − 54.0 − 12.0 − 11.4 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 0.8 − 10.9 − 6.3 − 24.0 − 61.6
         Aug − − − 36.5 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 9.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 0.2 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 21.8 − 36.0
         Sep + 1 − − 82.9 − 30.1 − 29.2 − 4.4 − 24.7 − 0.9 + 30.3 + 29.6 − 0.1 + 29.8 + 0.7 − 83.1 − 15.7
         Oct − − 2 + 67.0 + 7.8 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 5.8 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 0.5 + 66.3 − 5.6
         Nov − + 2 + 7.1 + 9.9 + 9.3 + 1.1 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 11.8 − 0.4 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Dec + 1 + 3 − 52.4 − 45.8 − 45.7 − 5.1 − 40.6 − 0.1 − 17.1 − 14.6 + 0.7 − 15.3 − 2.5 + 10.6 − 8.52014          Jan − − + 76.2 + 40.0 + 40.0 + 4.5 + 35.5 + 0.1 + 18.1 + 17.1 − 0.7 + 17.8 + 0.9 + 18.1 − 28.0
         Feb − + 1 − 31.8 + 11.1 + 11.4 + 1.7 + 9.7 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 8.1 − 0.4 + 8.5 − 2.6 − 48.5 − 23.8
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2013          May 35 83 438.4 193.0 161.6 96.5 65.1 31.4 196.2 154.3 28.9 125.4 41.9 49.2 −
         June 34 81 436.5 189.5 158.7 94.8 63.9 30.8 193.9 153.7 28.4 125.3 40.1 53.1 −
         July 33 78 430.7 190.0 159.2 97.3 61.9 30.8 187.8 148.6 28.6 119.9 39.3 52.8 −
         Aug 33 78 435.0 193.9 163.3 97.8 65.5 30.6 187.4 148.2 28.5 119.7 39.2 53.7 −
         Sep 32 77 430.6 190.9 159.9 97.8 62.2 31.0 187.8 149.6 28.3 121.3 38.2 51.9 −
         Oct 33 77 427.3 190.3 160.1 97.5 62.6 30.2 187.1 148.8 27.9 120.9 38.3 50.0 −
         Nov 33 76 425.6 189.4 160.0 95.1 64.9 29.4 184.0 146.8 27.7 119.1 37.2 52.2 −
         Dec 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014          Jan 33 74 425.9 187.3 159.3 92.2 67.1 28.0 181.2 145.8 25.5 120.2 35.4 57.4 −
         Feb 33 74 408.3 170.0 142.7 75.9 66.8 27.4 181.5 145.5 25.5 120.0 35.9 56.8 −
Changes *
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2013          June − 1 − 2 − 1.6 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 3.8 −
         July − 1 − 3 − 4.6 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 −
         Aug − − + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 −
         Sep − 1 − 1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 1.8 −         Oct + 1 − − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.8 −
         Nov − − 1 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.9 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 2.2 −
         Dec − − 1 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 −
2014          Jan − − 1 − 1.2 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 5.0 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 2.8 − 1.7 + 5.4 −
         Feb − − − 15.8 − 16.2 − 15.7 − 16.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.6 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2014
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,079.0 692.0 338.8 353.2 387.0 28.7 21.6 7.1 358.3 140.3 41.0 743.0 614.7 2013          May1,012.4 675.9 351.9 324.0 336.5 27.8 21.2 6.5 308.7 133.5 40.7 722.8 603.3          June
1,008.1 651.8 323.6 328.2 356.4 27.8 21.4 6.4 328.6 134.3 40.1 663.2 544.5          July
1,010.3 652.1 324.2 327.8 358.3 24.2 19.0 5.2 334.1 125.7 40.1 636.4 528.9          Aug 
940.7 603.9 315.4 288.5 336.8 26.4 21.7 4.7 310.4 125.1 39.9 614.3 502.5          Sep 
1,004.8 649.5 329.4 320.1 355.4 27.7 23.2 4.5 327.6 127.0 39.9 607.6 498.5          Oct 1,010.6 674.3 347.7 326.6 336.2 28.1 23.4 4.7 308.1 126.8 39.4 610.9 501.1          Nov 
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1          Dec 
1,011.7 672.1 342.4 329.7 339.5 26.8 21.7 5.1 312.7 127.3 40.9 634.6 469.6 2014          Jan 1,008.5 664.1 336.0 328.1 344.4 28.0 23.0 5.0 316.4 130.1 40.4 590.6 450.4          Feb 
Changes *
− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013
− 63.8 − 14.6 + 13.0 − 27.7 − 49.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 48.3 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 18.9 − 11.4 2013          June
+ 1.9 − 20.8 − 28.3 + 7.5 + 22.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 56.1 − 58.8          July
+ 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 1.2 + 4.4 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 28.2 − 15.6          Aug − 62.6 − 44.1 − 8.8 − 35.3 − 18.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 20.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 19.4 − 26.4          Sep 
+ 69.0 + 48.0 + 14.0 + 34.1 + 21.0 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.1          Oct 
+ 4.9 + 24.5 + 18.3 + 6.2 − 19.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 2.6          Nov − 114.0 − 74.7 − 20.7 − 54.0 − 39.3 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 35.4 − 1.4 + 1.8 + 61.2 − 16.9          Dec 
+ 113.2 + 71.6 + 15.4 + 56.2 + 41.6 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 39.0 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 38.6 − 14.6 2014          Jan 
+ 5.5 − 3.2 − 6.4 + 3.2 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 2.8 − 0.4 − 39.7 − 19.2          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
340.1 189.5 111.0 78.6 150.6 22.0 17.7 4.3 128.6 23.7 32.6 41.9 − 2013          May
341.5 190.0 108.8 81.2 151.4 20.5 16.2 4.3 130.9 23.1 32.1 39.8 −          June
336.8 188.4 109.8 78.6 148.4 21.4 17.3 4.1 127.1 22.5 31.8 39.6 −          July
341.8 191.8 112.4 79.3 150.0 22.5 18.4 4.1 127.6 22.4 32.0 38.8 −          Aug 
337.3 195.4 114.8 80.6 141.9 21.2 17.2 4.0 120.7 22.1 32.0 39.1 −          Sep 
337.9 193.3 111.5 81.8 144.6 22.7 18.7 4.0 121.9 21.9 30.1 37.4 −          Oct 
336.6 193.7 109.7 84.0 142.9 23.0 19.0 4.0 119.9 21.6 29.9 37.5 −          Nov 
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 −          Dec 
333.9 197.0 109.9 87.1 136.9 20.5 18.5 2.0 116.4 21.3 30.4 40.2 − 2014          Jan 
320.7 186.5 94.5 92.0 134.2 19.8 17.8 2.0 114.3 21.0 28.9 37.7 −          Feb 
Changes *
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
+ 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.1 + 2.8 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 2013          June
− 3.6 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 −          July
+ 4.7 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 −          Aug 
− 3.4 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.8 − 7.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 −          Sep 
+ 1.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 −          Oct 
− 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Nov 
− 1.5 + 7.9 + 3.7 + 4.2 − 9.5 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 −          Dec 
− 1.7 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 2014          Jan 
− 11.8 − 9.6 − 15.4 + 5.8 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.2 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2014
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2013          Sep 10,422.7 104.2 0.5 103.8 268.4 164.7 0.0
         Oct 10,423.3 104.2 0.5 103.8 244.9 141.1 0.0
         Nov 10,379.0 103.8 0.5 103.3 220.2 116.9 0.0
         Dec  8 10,385.9 103.9 0.5 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014          Jan 10,408.1 104.1 0.5 103.6 216.0 112.4 0.0
         Feb 10,330.4 103.3 0.5 102.8 201.1 98.3 0.0
         Mar 10,403.5 104.0 0.5 103.6 195.2 91.6 0.0
         Apr  p 10,397.5 104.0 0.5 103.5 ... ... ...
         May p ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2013          Sep 2,749,459 27,495 178 27,317 92,920 65,603 20
         Oct 2,759,639 27,596 178 27,419 78,384 50,965 0
         Nov 2,741,870 27,419 177 27,241 67,149 39,908 0
         Dec 2,743,933 27,439 177 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014          Jan 2,772,133 27,721 178 27,544 64,060 36,516 1
         Feb 2,733,718 27,337 178 27,159 61,004 33,845 3
         Mar 2,765,104 27,651 178 27,473 58,580 31,107 0
         Apr  p 2,769,221 27,692 178 27,515 ... ... ...
         May p 2,759,990 27,600 178 27,422 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank the lump-sum allowance. 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio allowance, including required reserves of Estonia ( €0.187 billion). Required reserves
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios of the euro area up to 31 December 2013 amounted to € 103.2 billion. 
to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2014
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2009 Jan                1 1.62         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 0.12
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2011 July                1 0.37
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          July                1 −0.38
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 1.95 2014 Jan                1 −0.63         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2014 Apr                  9 104,619 104,619 0.25−−−7
         Apr                16 112,165 112,165 0.25−−−7
         Apr                23 121,816 121,816 0.25−−−7
         Apr                30 172,621 172,621 0.25−−−7
         May                  7 129,140 129,140 0.25−−−7
         May                14 137,302 137,302 0.25−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2014 Mar                27 11,617 11,617 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr                  9 28,023 28,023 0.25−−− 3 5
         May                  2 13,193 13,193 2 ... − − − 90
         May                14 32,335 32,335 0.25−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2013          Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.17 0.10 0.13 0.23 0.34 0.54
         Nov 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.11 0.13 0.22 0.33 0.51         Dec 0.17 0.16 0.18 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.17 0.21 0.27 0.37 0.54
2014          Jan 0.20 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.17 0.16 0.19 0.22 0.29 0.40 0.56
         Feb 0.16 0.18 0.16 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.19 0.22 0.29 0.39 0.55         Mar 0.19 0.18 0.18 0.16 0.16 0.15 0.20 0.23 0.31 0.41 0.58
         Apr 0.25 0.23 0.21 0.19 0.16 0.15 0.22 0.25 0.33 0.43 0.60
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Mar 1.43 112,731 2.10 226,940 0.64 79,303 3.30 21,000
         Apr 1.38 110,618 2.09 226,550 0.60 80,849 3.25 20,869
         May 1.35 108,839 2.06 225,847 0.58 78,814 3.23 20,652
         June 1.30 106,091 2.04 225,027 0.57 77,887 3.23 20,352
         July 1.22 103,026 2.03 224,111 0.55 79,887 3.16 20,464
         Aug 1.16 101,003 2.02 223,993 0.52 80,986 3.14 20,406
         Sep 1.12 99,321 2.01 223,867 0.53 79,626 3.11 20,467
         Oct 1.07 97,939 2.00 223,989 0.50 80,517 3.11 20,505
         Nov 1.05 97,422 1.98 224,581 0.49 79,894 3.10 20,486
         Dec 1.03 96,913 1.97 226,745 0.48 81,898 3.07 20,531
2014          Jan 1.01 95,966 1.95 227,207 0.48 83,425 3.04 20,595
         Feb 0.99 95,572 1.94 227,617 0.44 86,581 3.02 20,561
         Mar 0.97 95,257 1.92 227,607 0.45 85,749 3.01 20,226
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Mar 3.32 5,380 3.34 28,892 4.19 959,296 7.59 61,732 5.19 75,792 5.19 308,862
         Apr 3.35 5,429 3.31 28,943 4.17 960,434 7.57 60,887 5.17 76,405 5.17 309,418
         May 3.34 5,513 3.28 28,887 4.15 962,645 7.51 60,234 5.15 76,791 5.15 309,610
         June 3.33 5,484 3.26 28,964 4.12 965,019 7.56 61,368 5.13 76,634 5.14 308,931
         July 3.28 5,653 3.22 28,977 4.09 968,047 7.53 59,608 5.12 77,021 5.12 309,175
         Aug 3.25 5,525 3.20 28,947 4.07 971,598 7.49 58,961 5.10 77,302 5.10 309,848
         Sep 3.29 5,599 3.18 29,073 4.05 973,593 7.64 60,893 5.08 77,444 5.08 308,291
         Oct 3.23 5,786 3.15 29,061 4.02 976,282 7.64 59,053 5.07 77,656 5.06 308,891
         Nov 3.17 5,644 3.13 29,027 4.01 979,253 7.55 56,483 5.03 77,800 5.05 309,729
         Dec 3.29 5,683 3.12 28,778 3.98 978,740 7.61 59,488 5.01 77,624 5.01 307,844
2014          Jan 3.16 5,704 3.10 28,563 3.96 977,215 7.66 57,235 4.99 77,651 5.00 308,100
         Feb 3.20 5,602 3.08 28,337 3.94 979,347 7.61 56,749 4.97 77,550 4.98 308,406
         Mar 3.22 5,707 3.06 28,267 3.92 980,210 7.75 58,723 4.97 77,679 4.97 307,181
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Mar 3.14 138,467 3.00 125,754 3.33 580,544
         Apr 3.13 135,048 2.96 125,073 3.32 582,836
         May 3.09 135,366 2.93 125,949 3.31 583,258
         June 3.14 136,903 2.92 124,651 3.30 582,718
         July 3.10 133,507 2.89 125,709 3.29 583,497
         Aug 3.05 132,912 2.87 125,631 3.28 581,882
         Sep 3.12 135,674 2.87 123,701 3.28 580,155
         Oct 3.08 132,962 2.86 124,612 3.27 581,133
         Nov 3.07 133,346 2.85 124,895 3.26 584,312
         Dec 3.13 131,319 2.86 124,094 3.24 585,809
2014          Jan 3.10 129,373 2.86 124,931 3.24 585,957
         Feb 3.11 131,524 2.84 125,835 3.23 586,261
         Mar 3.23 133,290 2.84 126,844 3.22 582,768
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Mar 
0.50 862,900 0.79 7,753 1.37 620 1.52 1,501 0.96 529,260 1.33 85,257
         Apr 0.47 869,149 0.80 7,655 1.37 796 1.38 1,567 0.90 528,646 1.26 83,717
         May 0.46 881,098 0.82 7,485 1.47 868 1.53 1,545 0.90 528,835 1.21 81,737
         June 0.44 888,922 0.77 6,939 1.41 633 1.46 1,345 0.87 528,594 1.18 80,868
         July 0.43 895,155 0.74 8,578 1.26 765 1.37 1,475 0.86 527,971 1.14 79,828
         Aug 0.42 904,740 0.75 7,310 1.17 546 1.36 1,130 0.85 528,142 1.12 78,869
         Sep 0.41 905,458 0.73 7,130 1.16 586 1.45 1,237 0.85 527,842 1.09 78,103
         Oct 0.40 915,399 0.71 7,583 1.06 883 1.44 1,553 0.82 527,870 1.06 78,030
         Nov 0.39 935,789 0.74 7,097 1.09 869 1.58 1,750 0.83 527,862 1.02 77,998
         Dec 0.39 931,980 0.66 7,630 1.06 700 1.48 1,406 0.79 532,012 0.99 77,698
2014          Jan 0.38 937,354 0.75 8,957 1.10 837 1.58 1,785 0.77 531,516 0.96 77,239
         Feb 0.38 945,510 0.78 7,933 0.99 810 1.34 1,514 0.80 531,906 0.94 77,471
         Mar 0.37 942,553 0.69 7,426 0.98 583 1.33 1,496 0.72 530,731 0.92 77,451
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Mar 
0.20 298,710 0.19 19,875 0.77 507 1.30 266
         Apr 0.19 305,231 0.22 16,608 0.77 417 1.17 526
         May 0.18 308,618 0.19 23,572 0.74 508 1.53 202
         June 0.17 300,393 0.21 14,370 0.60 408 1.21 247
         July 0.16 305,708 0.20 15,631 0.96 460 1.60 538
         Aug 0.16 312,892 0.17 16,639 0.73 516 1.62 191
         Sep 0.16 318,355 0.17 17,489 0.72 463 1.38 224
         Oct 0.16 321,180 0.15 18,642 0.71 381 1.48 277
         Nov 0.16 322,015 0.16 17,258 0.72 383 1.46 232
         Dec 0.16 328,291 0.23 23,419 0.79 367 1.63 428
2014          Jan 0.15 320,229 0.24 25,407 0.66 391 1.36 417
         Feb 0.15 315,847 0.23 22,970 0.65 371 2.07 265
         Mar 0.17 313,214 0.22 22,601 0.67 525 1.03 389
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Mar 
1.90 4,698 3.80 900 2.88 2,574 2.10 2,636 3.95 717 2.88 1,432
         Apr 1.99 5,235 3.57 1,181 2.95 2,815 2.33 2,916 3.70 882 2.88 1,734
         May 1.80 3,726 3.62 864 2.91 2,318 2.04 2,255 3.80 670 2.88 1,325
         June 1.84 4,485 3.65 886 2.81 2,651 2.01 2,768 3.85 657 2.76 1,497
         July 1.92 5,623 3.30 1,332 3.01 3,583 2.20 3,201 3.41 999 3.00 2,019
         Aug 1.93 4,052 3.55 961 3.03 2,398 2.04 2,464 3.75 628 2.97 1,568
         Sep 1.93 4,695 3.56 900 3.03 2,472 2.08 2,756 3.67 669 2.96 1,331
         Oct 1.85 5,116 3.48 1,047 3.09 2,141 2.05 2,979 3.62 760 3.04 1,271
         Nov 1.89 3,676 3.61 909 2.99 2,024 2.11 2,160 3.78 666 2.92 1,275
         Dec 1.87 6,139 3.45 1,098 2.90 2,922 2.01 3,261 3.57 858 2.85 1,729
2014          Jan 1.98 5,139 3.38 1,102 2.91 2,188 2.31 2,887 3.49 806 2.83 1,438
         Feb 1.89 3,836 3.32 902 2.94 2,153 2.21 2,252 3.63 622 2.85 1,223
         Mar 2.06 4,627 3.50 1,162 2.89 2,841 2.32 2,832 3.68 694 2.86 1,427
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2013          Mar 6.33 6.15 5,186 4.56 488 5.00 2,503 7.81 2,195
         Apr 6.30 6.18 5,658 4.89 554 4.94 2,725 7.91 2,379
         May 6.39 6.29 5,325 5.60 697 5.00 2,401 7.89 2,227
         June 6.41 6.29 5,396 5.46 618 5.03 2,399 7.77 2,379
         July 6.52 6.42 5,990 5.28 480 5.15 2,708 7.84 2,802
         Aug 6.44 6.34 5,253 5.40 554 5.09 2,288 7.73 2,411
         Sep 6.40 6.32 4,759 5.79 379 5.02 2,195 7.71 2,185
         Oct 6.40 6.33 5,232 5.95 504 5.02 2,417 7.77 2,311
         Nov 6.31 6.22 4,766 5.78 592 5.01 2,218 7.73 1,956
         Dec 5.97 5.87 4,327 5.32 588 5.00 2,254 7.41 1,485
2014          Jan 6.56 6.47 5,445 5.73 538 5.20 2,478 7.93 2,429
         Feb 6.40 6.32 5,076 5.87 591 5.09 2,300 7.73 2,185
         Mar 6.19 6.12 5,954 5.72 832 4.99 2,702 7.51 2,420
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Mar . 4.10 278 3.43 49 4.70 140 3.52 89
         Apr . 3.92 316 2.96 60 4.55 165 3.40 91
         May . 3.95 273 3.19 41 4.57 141 3.32 91
         June . 4.15 274 3.65 43 4.66 155 3.41 76
         July . 4.09 334 3.27 60 4.74 171 3.48 103
         Aug . 4.16 259 3.49 44 4.69 137 3.60 78
         Sep . 4.28 246 3.47 33 4.67 143 3.87 70
         Oct . 4.37 250 3.63 38 4.70 146 4.07 66
         Nov . 4.40 221 3.64 35 4.71 133 4.12 53
         Dec . 4.24 247 3.48 42 4.63 149 3.79 56
2014          Jan . 4.04 245 2.65 61 4.73 122 4.06 62
         Feb . 4.35 217 3.11 33 4.84 119 4.10 65
         Mar . 4.23 261 3.41 53 4.75 138 3.84 70
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Mar 2.87 2.81 15,659 2.75 2,291 2.54 2,045 2.77 6,235 2.99 5,088
         Apr 2.90 2.83 18,191 2.87 2,887 2.50 2,364 2.74 7,590 3.08 5,350
         May 2.79 2.71 15,740 2.91 2,281 2.38 2,004 2.64 6,498 2.84 4,957
         June 2.71 2.64 16,804 2.79 2,317 2.31 2,054 2.57 6,758 2.78 5,675
         July 2.78 2.71 21,404 2.80 3,304 2.39 2,727 2.67 9,161 2.85 6,212
         Aug 2.87 2.79 16,749 2.81 2,302 2.45 2,166 2.74 7,027 2.97 5,254
         Sep 2.92 2.86 15,567 2.86 2,266 2.46 2,017 2.82 6,594 3.07 4,690
         Oct 2.97 2.89 17,153 2.75 3,065 2.53 2,373 2.91 7,044 3.14 4,671
         Nov 2.98 2.90 14,279 2.82 2,106 2.51 1,912 2.91 5,686 3.09 4,575
         Dec 2.90 2.83 14,896 2.75 2,436 2.45 2,119 2.85 6,169 3.04 4,172
2014          Jan 2.94 2.84 16,675 2.70 3,082 2.54 2,460 2.86 6,752 3.07 4,381
         Feb 2.90 2.83 15,089 2.85 2,762 2.43 2,061 2.81 5,540 3.02 4,726
         Mar 2.82 2.75 16,442 2.75 2,449 2.36 2,266 2.73 6,455 2.94 5,272
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Mar . 2.71 7,343 2.56 929 2.34 1,012 2.70 2,980 2.95 2,422
         Apr . 2.79 8,545 2.73 1,170 2.39 1,181 2.66 3,591 3.16 2,603
         May . 2.61 7,361 2.69 907 2.23 998 2.58 3,117 2.80 2,339
         June . 2.53 8,137 2.49 958 2.18 1,039 2.51 3,326 2.70 2,814
         July . 2.60 10,324 2.65 1,236 2.27 1,392 2.58 4,435 2.76 3,261
         Aug . 2.69 7,910 2.51 979 2.33 1,045 2.68 3,307 2.91 2,579
         Sep . 2.76 7,391 2.65 860 2.36 1,045 2.76 3,193 2.99 2,293
         Oct . 2.84 8,293 2.64 1,219 2.49 1,268 2.87 3,471 3.09 2,335
         Nov . 2.83 6,718 2.68 801 2.45 969 2.85 2,709 3.03 2,239
         Dec . 2.74 6,812 2.55 895 2.34 1,066 2.80 2,849 2.95 2,002
2014          Jan . 2.79 7,816 2.68 1,079 2.48 1,271 2.80 3,255 3.01 2,211
         Feb . 2.80 7,211 2.87 1,276 2.37 1,011 2.76 2,664 2.99 2,260
         Mar . 2.69 7,808 2.69 954 2.31 1,152 2.66 3,125 2.90 2,577
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Mar 
9.55 45,946 9.60 39,869 14.69 3,774 4.24 72,271 4.26 72,031
         Apr 9.52 45,107 9.62 38,827 14.70 3,846 4.25 69,020 4.26 68,777
         May 9.50 45,021 9.60 38,709 14.70 3,891 4.18 69,112 4.20 68,890
         June 9.50 46,126 9.52 39,588 14.65 4,127 4.32 69,789 4.34 69,530
         July 9.55 44,772 9.51 38,381 14.58 4,136 4.30 66,621 4.31 66,406
         Aug 9.44 44,307 9.49 37,586 14.60 4,183 4.22 66,681 4.24 66,472
         Sep 9.48 46,356 9.54 39,542 14.63 4,254 4.31 69,234 4.33 68,982
         Oct 9.43 44,775 9.44 38,011 14.63 4,258 4.26 66,570 4.28 66,316
         Nov 9.35 42,848 9.30 36,099 14.64 4,288 4.21 67,193 4.23 66,944
         Dec 9.30 45,730 9.41 38,335 14.62 4,358 4.28 66,825 4.30 66,572
2014          Jan 9.36 43,888 9.38 37,050 14.51 4,288 4.27 65,336 4.29 65,106
         Feb 9.31 43,418 9.29 36,571 14.55 4,259 4.28 66,556 4.31 66,281
         Mar 9.33 45,617 9.34 38,706 14.58 4,313 4.39 68,638 4.41 68,379
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Mar 2.92 7,360 3.58 1,322 2.88 1,144 1.83 38,944 2.63 2,000 2.81 4,220
         Apr 2.92 7,813 3.50 1,509 2.85 1,170 1.80 37,523 2.85 1,491 2.77 4,495
         May 3.00 7,028 3.51 1,197 2.67 1,076 1.68 33,009 2.77 1,239 2.52 4,020
         June 2.97 7,849 3.62 902 2.67 1,260 1.75 41,928 2.58 2,153 2.80 5,651
         July 2.95 8,387 3.57 1,131 2.80 1,489 1.71 43,328 2.84 2,497 3.00 6,045
         Aug 2.80 6,715 3.66 830 2.80 1,275 1.70 32,698 2.51 1,386 2.83 4,394
         Sep 2.97 7,696 3.69 822 2.82 1,074 1.80 38,460 2.84 1,757 2.87 4,817
         Oct 2.92 8,264 3.61 992 2.95 1,181 1.79 42,301 2.86 2,872 3.03 4,462
         Nov 2.99 6,860 3.69 903 2.85 1,022 1.70 32,900 2.43 1,180 2.70 5,032
         Dec 3.01 7,750 3.59 1,032 2.74 1,380 1.86 44,537 2.62 3,368 2.75 8,311
2014          Jan 2.92 7,777 3.50 995 2.93 1,164 1.85 40,304 2.41 1,534 2.82 4,479
         Feb 2.97 6,822 3.67 726 2.87 1,009 1.71 32,393 2.14 1,285 2.91 3,721
         Mar 3.01 8,295 3.54 1,018 2.80 1,121 1.91 37,920 2.51 1,289 2.76 4,529
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Mar 2.86 1,027 3.04 127 2.78 319 2.04 7,793 2.45 861 2.70 1,161
         Apr 2.70 1,305 3.03 175 2.71 337 2.19 7,219 2.61 560 2.98 1,458
         May 2.85 961 2.79 134 2.48 321 2.04 5,488 2.82 474 2.78 1,322
         June 2.82 948 2.82 124 2.50 336 2.10 6,829 2.51 1,058 2.55 1,344
         July 2.83 1,301 2.85 184 2.63 468 2.20 7,145 2.98 985 2.95 1,621
         Aug 2.82 799 3.08 130 2.61 404 2.14 4,994 2.60 459 2.86 1,245
         Sep 2.87 904 2.80 138 2.65 318 2.10 5,972 3.08 926 2.71 1,439
         Oct 2.67 1,133 2.88 153 2.79 326 2.22 8,531 2.99 1,523 2.92 1,288
         Nov 2.88 746 2.97 114 2.77 274 2.11 4,596 2.75 415 2.65 1,445
         Dec 2.83 912 2.75 154 2.55 449 2.24 6,744 2.35 1,542 2.73 3,014
2014          Jan 2.71 1,122 2.69 161 2.85 324 2.16 8,627 2.65 519 2.87 1,224
         Feb 2.86 772 2.72 105 2.66 316 2.16 4,281 2.39 300 2.73 796
         Mar 2.81 1,000 2.72 145 2.70 320 2.27 5,620 2.68 408 2.66 994
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013 2,229.4 2,158.3 540.1 322.5 285.3 224.3 656.7 64.9 64.5 71.1
2011          Q4 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012          Q1 2,058.3 1,994.4 572.5 248.3 275.5 222.1 549.8 62.4 63.8 63.9
         Q2 2,078.0 2,013.1 568.9 259.6 275.6 221.0 561.3 62.6 64.0 64.9
         Q3 2,124.8 2,059.2 566.1 277.5 277.0 223.5 588.0 62.9 64.3 65.6
         Q4 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013          Q1 2,196.3 2,129.1 559.9 304.0 280.3 225.2 629.3 64.9 65.6 67.2
         Q2 2,190.5 2,122.6 554.2 306.4 280.5 224.6 626.6 64.7 65.6 67.9
         Q3 2,207.7 2,138.3 546.9 311.8 284.0 224.3 641.8 64.6 64.9 69.4
         Q4 2,229.4 2,158.3 540.1 322.5 285.3 224.3 656.7 64.9 64.5 71.1
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,743.4 1,697.0 382.9 274.2 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2011          Q4 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012          Q1 1,620.6 1,578.7 415.4 211.4 249.4 210.3 381.3 58.6 52.5 41.9
         Q2 1,635.4 1,592.7 412.5 220.6 249.3 209.0 389.9 58.7 52.6 42.7
         Q3 1,671.2 1,628.1 409.4 236.7 250.6 211.3 408.6 58.8 52.7 43.0
         Q4 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013          Q1 1,726.1 1,682.3 402.1 261.5 253.5 212.5 438.2 60.7 53.8 43.8
         Q2 1,719.6 1,675.3 397.2 262.2 253.8 211.9 436.1 60.5 53.7 44.3
         Q3 1,730.7 1,685.2 390.1 266.6 256.8 211.3 447.2 60.4 52.8 45.5
         Q4 1,743.4 1,697.0 382.9 274.2 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013 486.0 461.3 157.2 48.3 27.4 13.2 198.5 4.3 12.3 24.6
2011          Q4 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012          Q1 437.7 415.7 157.1 36.9 26.1 11.8 168.5 3.9 11.3 22.0
         Q2 442.6 420.4 156.4 39.0 26.2 12.0 171.4 3.9 11.4 22.2
         Q3 453.6 431.1 156.7 40.9 26.4 12.2 179.4 4.0 11.5 22.5
         Q4 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013          Q1 470.3 446.8 157.8 42.5 26.8 12.7 191.1 4.2 11.8 23.4
         Q2 470.9 447.3 157.0 44.2 26.7 12.8 190.6 4.2 11.9 23.6
         Q3 477.0 453.1 156.8 45.2 27.3 12.9 194.6 4.3 12.0 23.9
         Q4 486.0 461.3 157.2 48.3 27.4 13.2 198.5 4.3 12.3 24.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013 2,229.4 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,786.4 1,507.9 278.6 73.8 74.4
2011          Q4 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012          Q1 2,058.3 19.4 72.9 134.6 1,652.9 1,383.4 269.6 71.8 106.6
         Q2 2,078.0 18.7 75.5 123.0 1,667.9 1,398.2 269.7 71.5 121.3
         Q3 2,124.8 19.3 77.2 141.1 1,684.5 1,414.5 270.0 71.4 131.3
         Q4 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013          Q1 2,196.3 21.4 78.1 169.7 1,739.0 1,460.7 278.3 72.8 115.3
         Q2 2,190.5 17.8 79.0 172.1 1,751.6 1,474.0 277.6 73.1 97.0
         Q3 2,207.7 16.5 79.6 177.0 1,766.0 1,488.6 277.3 73.4 95.3
         Q4 2,229.4 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,786.4 1,507.9 278.6 73.8 74.4
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2011          Q4 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012          Q1 1,620.6 19.4 69.1 128.8 1,245.0 975.9 269.1 69.9 88.4
         Q2 1,635.4 18.7 71.5 117.7 1,256.4 987.1 269.3 69.7 101.4
         Q3 1,671.2 19.3 73.2 135.0 1,268.5 998.9 269.6 69.6 105.6
         Q4 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013          Q1 1,726.1 21.4 74.0 162.3 1,308.8 1,031.0 277.8 70.9 88.6
         Q2 1,719.6 17.8 74.8 164.5 1,317.7 1,040.5 277.2 71.2 73.7
         Q3 1,730.7 16.5 75.4 169.2 1,326.8 1,050.0 276.9 71.4 71.4
         Q4 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013 486.0 − 4.3 8.9 448.2 447.7 0.5 2.0 22.6
2011          Q4 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012          Q1 437.7 − 3.9 5.8 407.9 407.5 0.5 1.9 18.2
         Q2 442.6 − 3.9 5.3 411.5 411.1 0.5 1.9 19.9
         Q3 453.6 − 4.0 6.1 416.0 415.6 0.4 1.9 25.7
         Q4 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013          Q1 470.3 − 4.1 7.4 430.1 429.7 0.5 1.9 26.7
         Q2 470.9 − 4.2 7.5 433.9 433.5 0.5 1.9 23.3
         Q3 477.0 − 4.2 7.8 439.1 438.7 0.5 2.0 23.9
         Q4 486.0 − 4.3 8.9 448.2 447.7 0.5 2.0 22.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing pro- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
visions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2014
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 36,638 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 23,064 − 17,173 − 94,793 36,805 40,814 53,811
2012 54,965 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,382 7,184 − 42,017 − 3,573 52,774 47,781
2013 − 11,172 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 90,443 24,158 − 25,778 − 12,708 62,646 − 35,330
2013          May 17,279 − 2,884 − 9,809 421 6,504 20,162 1,838 − 3,962 − 1,050 6,850 15,441
         June − 13,132 − 17,431 − 9,542 − 5,473 − 2,416 4,298 12,255 3,451 − 1,280 10,084 − 25,387
         July − 19,574 − 28,318 − 12,903 − 2,594 − 12,821 8,744 − 3,454 − 3,106 − 796 448 − 16,120
         Aug 929 − 6,470 − 12,968 70 6,428 7,399 − 2,952 1,447 − 1,568 − 2,831 3,881
         Sep − 4,645 − 4,784 − 560 − 1,743 − 2,481 139 − 5,965 − 6,077 − 351 463 1,320
         Oct 7,451 5,582 − 5,401 5,716 5,266 1,869 6,018 − 3,717 − 751 10,486 1,433
         Nov 19,214 4,316 − 8,410 − 1,251 13,977 14,898 6,386 7,717 − 167 − 1,164 12,828
         Dec − 38,456 − 39,871 − 24,847 − 4,973 − 10,051 1,415 − 4,338 − 4,647 − 1,215 1,524 − 34,1182014          Jan 6,649 2,476 3,705 3,516 − 4,744 4,173 − 4,128 − 4,149 − 1,511 1,532 10,777
         Feb 4,135 691 − 8,978 409 9,260 3,444 − 9,808 − 1,895 − 560 − 7,353 13,943
         Mar 5,280 − 14,577 − 12,262 − 1,890 − 425 19,857 15,721 641 − 203 15,283 − 10,441
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 23,718 21,713 2,005 38,558 670 37,888 − 14,838
2012 19,164 5,120 14,044 18,022 10,259 7,763 1,142
2013 30,015 10,106 19,910 24,994 11,991 13,003 5,022
2013          May 10,682 5,560 5,122 − 4,921 − 10,712 5,791 15,603
         June 2,296 1,544 752 − 5,635 − 8,772 3,137 7,931
         July 7,986 109 7,877 6,613 4,697 1,916 1,373
         Aug 790 158 632 − 408 − 855 447 1,198
         Sep 1,609 188 1,421 249 3,053 − 2,804 1,361
         Oct 1,847 181 1,666 5,545 − 242 5,787 − 3,698
         Nov − 1,327 153 − 1,480 − 4,640 347 − 4,987 3,312
         Dec − 2,573 1,042 − 3,615 − 7,874 − 2,257 − 5,617 5,301
2014          Jan 3,931 115 3,816 11,526 8,586 2,940 − 7,595
         Feb − 4,284 599 − 4,883 − 9,985 − 11,608 1,623 5,701
         Mar 5,095 111 4,984 9,180 10,246 − 1,066 − 4,086
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2013          Aug 112,069 71,290 2,809 2,970 50,358 15,153 3,725 37,054 −
         Sep 110,040 61,322 1,038 644 45,215 14,426 3,476 45,242 −
         Oct 128,631 81,762 1,466 1,003 67,675 11,617 7,351 39,518 −
         Nov 128,109 79,061 1,435 1,276 63,765 12,585 7,094 41,954 −
         Dec 87,498 64,466 2,593 83 52,602 9,189 3,694 19,338 −
2014          Jan 139,700 84,157 3,375 739 67,865 12,178 8,279 47,264 −
         Feb 124,699 75,356 1,798 1,693 56,175 15,689 6,962 42,382 −
         Mar 106,104 67,913 1,311 1,140 51,987 13,474 6,396 31,795 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −
2013          Aug 28,577 11,793 1,891 2,931 1,909 5,062 1,789 14,996 −
         Sep 31,256 13,633 474 401 6,944 5,814 2,127 15,496 −
         Oct 37,193 15,712 894 1,003 9,319 4,496 5,682 15,799 −
         Nov 34,143 9,962 995 1,266 2,947 4,754 3,910 20,271 −         Dec 15,389 5,600 1,003 83 1,140 3,375 3,013 6,775 −
2014          Jan 47,766 19,040 1,966 678 11,913 4,483 5,450 23,277 −
         Feb 37,065 14,515 1,456 1,193 4,557 7,309 5,831 16,718 −         Mar 30,525 14,067 1,025 555 8,299 4,188 4,175 12,283 −
Net sales  6 
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,057
2013          Aug 1,865 − 11,635 − 2,962 − 1,543 423 − 7,552 346 13,154 −
         Sep − 5,438 − 3,138 − 1,208 − 1,649 5,047 − 5,328 − 1,167 − 1,134 − 994
         Oct − 491 − 6,757 − 1,376 − 2,986 5,398 − 7,793 5,348 918 −
         Nov 13,485 − 6,268 − 452 − 1,779 − 1,315 − 2,722 1,627 18,127 − 15         Dec − 38,645 − 26,745 − 258 − 2,089 − 14,217 − 10,180 − 3,261 − 8,639 − 264
2014          Jan − 16,657 669 1,245 − 6,460 14,678 − 8,795 1 − 17,327 −
         Feb 12,134 − 8,752 − 1,965 − 703 − 3,936 − 2,149 4,413 16,473 − 4         Mar − 16,495 − 14,777 − 862 − 956 − 9,313 − 3,646 505 − 2,223 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2014
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2013          Sep 3,170,979 1,328,110 129,728 116,145 580,270 501,968 218,137 1,624,732 10,702
         Oct 3,170,488 1,321,353 128,352 113,159 585,668 494,175 223,485 1,625,650 10,702
         Nov 3,183,974 1,315,085 127,900 111,379 584,353 491,453 225,112 1,643,777 10,687
         Dec 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014          Jan 3,128,671 1,289,009 128,887 102,830 584,815 472,477 221,852 1,617,811 10,422
         Feb 3,140,805 1,280,256 126,922 102,127 580,879 470,329 226,265 1,634,283 10,419
         Mar 3,124,310 1,265,480 126,060 101,171 571,566 466,683 226,770 1,632,060 10,419
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2014 
1,190,303 570,337 50,763 49,931 225,807 243,835 49,033 570,934 4,062    less than 2
666,363 299,542 39,947 26,974 140,543 92,078 36,566 330,254 2,800 2 to less than 4
441,912 183,329 19,254 14,326 103,446 46,299 36,602 221,981 306 4 to less than 6
279,933 90,043 10,267 3,770 51,552 24,452 20,356 169,534 341 6 to less than 8
215,948 42,697 4,242 3,312 16,192 18,950 16,022 157,230 1,332 8 to less than 10
75,772 24,390 1,446 2,240 12,767 7,936 7,341 44,042 579 10 to less than 15
41,400 10,790 11 248 5,133 5,399 2,564 28,046 30 15 to less than 20
212,680 44,354 128 369 16,125 27,732 58,286 110,041 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2013          Sep 171,651 163 149 113 1 − − 56 − 24 − 20 1,291,028
         Oct 171,643 − 8 88 8 − − − 60 − 18 − 26 1,358,708
         Nov 171,811 167 63 5 127 − 2 − 13 − 16 1,410,435
         Dec 171,741 − 70 280 − 0 − − 8 − 317 − 27 1,432,658
2014          Jan 171,660 − 81 65 1 − − 49 − 32 − 164 1,382,182
         Feb 171,638 − 22 131 0 17 − − 3 − 143 − 24 1,439,031
         Mar 171,576 − 62 96 200 0 − − 81 − 246 − 30 1,435,810
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2013          Nov 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.7 1.3 2.1 3.6 133.97 107.47 460.21 9,405.30
         Dec 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.2 3.5 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014          Jan 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.3 3.4 134.32 108.06 455.15 9,306.48
         Feb 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.2 2.1 3.4 134.67 107.99 474.14 9,692.08         Mar 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.2 2.1 3.4 134.70 108.16 467.04 9,555.91
         Apr 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.1 2.0 3.3 134.91 108.60 465.58 9,603.23
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,497 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,277 39,401 − 7,576 − 694 46,977 1,970 7,0952012 111,639 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,696 115,438 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,500 23,257 − 3,7992013 122,652 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,315 116,651 771 100 115,880 31,214 6,001
2013          Sep 6,111 4,206 498 − 88 419 19 3,708 1,905 5,451 − 14 435 5,465 1,470 660         Oct 12,755 5,849 1,824 − 105 2,156 − 470 4,025 6,906 10,848 1,332 1,608 9,516 5,298 1,907
         Nov 9,710 8,784 − 2,882 − 94 − 3,139 313 11,666 926 6,776 737 418 6,039 508 2,934         Dec 14,437 13,930 520 15 − 40 398 13,410 507 13,927 − 1,662 − 1,537 15,589 2,044 510
2014          Jan 7,048 4,613 750 124 − 15 479 3,863 2,435 6,350 − 365 − 451 6,715 2,886 698
         Feb 12,757 8,445 2,163 − 52 2,426 114 6,282 4,312 12,737 − 99 243 12,836 4,069 20         Mar 13,527 10,588 − 173 − 205 − 558 192 10,761 2,939 14,325 121 322 14,204 2,617 − 798
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2012 2013 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 66.7 86.4 68.3 21.1 22.2 19.9 23.3 9.1 17.3 10.3 31.6
Debt securities 2 − 1.9 − 17.0 − 15.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 3.8
Shares 16.1 − 3.4 − 5.7 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 2.6 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 3.5
Other equity 3.0 3.1 3.0 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.6
Mutual funds shares − 14.5 0.2 20.3 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 5.0 10.5 3.9 2.8 3.1
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 45.7 69.8 70.4 24.3 16.5 12.8 16.2 24.7 17.0 12.6 16.1
short-term claims 0.6 2.3 2.8 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.7
longer-term claims 45.2 67.5 67.6 23.6 16.0 12.2 15.7 23.9 16.3 12.0 15.5
Claims from companypension commitments 11.1 11.9 10.9 2.9 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.8
Other claims 
4 17.6 1.2 − 4.5 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.7 1.2 1.3 7.9 − 14.9
Total 143.8 152.1 147.7 49.8 38.5 30.0 33.8 47.0 36.9 31.9 31.9
  II Financing
Loans 11.6 14.9 11.5 − 1.1 6.7 6.1 3.2 − 3.7 5.8 8.6 0.7
short-term loans − 2.1 − 1.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.3
longer-term loans 13.6 16.0 14.6 − 1.0 5.9 7.0 4.0 − 2.1 6.1 8.7 2.0
Other liabilities 1.6 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1
Total 13.1 15.6 11.8 − 0.7 6.8 6.2 3.3 − 3.5 5.9 8.7 0.7
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 14.0 6.6 − 4.8 − 21.4 − 10.2 4.7 33.5 − 46.0 − 16.2 43.5 13.8
Debt securities 2 4.9 − 2.6 − 0.2 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 1.4 − 2.1 1.2 − 0.7
Financial derivatives 14.8 9.3 6.8 − 0.2 3.9 2.2 3.4 1.3 2.9 0.7 1.9
Shares 19.6 20.9 15.6 6.4 − 6.5 5.5 15.5 10.7 0.9 8.6 − 4.6
Other equity 43.8 25.2 15.8 9.4 13.3 13.4 − 10.8 12.8 − 1.1 4.2 − 0.2
Mutual funds shares 8.2 − 0.2 7.4 − 5.2 1.0 0.7 3.3 4.5 − 1.0 2.1 1.9
Loans 5.3 26.5 − 10.6 10.4 12.1 0.6 3.4 5.3 − 1.2 4.3 − 19.1
short-term loans 10.2 16.3 10.4 7.2 11.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 10.3 − 1.8 2.8 − 0.9
longer-term loans − 4.9 10.2 − 21.0 3.2 1.0 2.4 3.6 − 5.0 0.7 1.5 − 18.2
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.6 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
short-term claims 0.6 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 25.4 48.9 81.2 8.2 − 23.7 37.3 27.1 25.9 − 0.4 48.2 7.6
Total 136.7 136.0 112.7 8.1 − 9.8 64.1 73.6 16.2 − 17.8 113.2 1.0
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 7.6 18.7 12.8 3.1 3.9 7.1 4.7 9.1 3.2 − 0.5 0.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.4 2.9 1.5 0.6 1.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 0.1 − 0.3 1.0
Other equity 19.3 9.3 10.6 2.4 1.5 − 4.0 9.4 1.0 2.1 1.7 5.8
Loans 27.6 19.1 6.3 − 0.1 14.8 26.0 − 21.7 19.7 11.6 − 15.3 − 9.7
short-term loans 19.1 7.4 − 3.5 1.7 7.5 3.8 − 5.6 12.1 10.2 − 16.3 − 9.4
longer-term loans 8.5 11.7 9.7 − 1.8 7.3 22.3 − 16.1 7.6 1.5 1.0 − 0.3
Claims from companypension commitments 5.8 6.6 5.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4
Other liabilities 45.2 28.0 − 12.3 − 8.5 6.3 14.5 15.7 − 1.1 − 16.9 17.0 − 11.2
Total 112.9 84.6 24.6 − 0.8 29.1 45.6 10.7 30.8 1.6 4.0 − 11.8
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2012 2013 
Item
2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,927.5 2,014.9 2,082.2 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9 2,023.1 2,040.4 2,050.6 2,082.2
Debt securities 2 247.1 238.2 216.0 249.6 245.4 244.8 238.2 231.7 221.9 220.0 216.0
Shares 221.5 259.2 299.5 252.4 229.9 250.0 259.2 267.8 264.4 279.5 299.5
Other equity 188.5 198.4 198.7 189.5 195.1 195.2 198.4 199.3 197.4 197.1 198.7
Mutual funds shares 394.9 420.1 449.5 410.9 401.7 414.8 420.1 435.0 430.8 439.7 449.5
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,401.1 1,476.9 1,551.7 1,420.7 1,437.7 1,455.2 1,476.9 1,503.2 1,521.3 1,534.6 1,551.7
short-term claims 71.4 73.7 76.5 72.0 72.6 73.2 73.7 74.5 75.2 75.8 76.5
longer-term claims 1,329.6 1,403.2 1,475.2 1,348.6 1,365.1 1,382.0 1,403.2 1,428.7 1,446.1 1,458.8 1,475.2
Claims from company
pension commitments 295.4 307.3 318.2 298.3 301.4 304.3 307.3 310.0 312.8 315.5 318.2
Other claims 4 38.4 37.1 36.5 38.3 38.2 37.9 37.1 37.0 37.0 36.7 36.5
Total 4,714.3 4,952.0 5,152.4 4,808.2 4,820.9 4,893.6 4,952.0 5,007.2 5,025.9 5,073.6 5,152.4
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,538.6 1,552.5 1,563.1 1,536.7 1,543.0 1,549.0 1,552.5 1,548.9 1,554.7 1,562.6 1,563.1
short-term loans 73.9 72.6 67.7 73.8 74.4 73.1 72.6 70.2 69.9 69.8 67.7
longer-term loans 1,464.8 1,479.9 1,495.5 1,463.0 1,468.7 1,475.9 1,479.9 1,478.6 1,484.7 1,492.8 1,495.5
Other liabilities 13.4 14.5 15.2 15.3 15.1 15.0 14.5 16.7 15.7 15.8 15.2
Total 1,552.0 1,567.0 1,578.3 1,552.0 1,558.1 1,564.0 1,567.0 1,565.6 1,570.4 1,578.5 1,578.3
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 460.5 506.5 505.4 452.6 453.1 468.3 506.5 459.9 449.5 488.3 505.4
Debt securities 2 52.6 51.9 51.1 53.9 53.6 53.9 51.9 53.0 50.3 51.9 51.1
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 811.4 946.7 1,077.2 904.7 838.6 894.1 946.7 981.1 945.4 1,002.3 1,077.2
Other equity 401.2 441.6 451.3 411.0 434.9 446.8 441.6 454.7 447.5 449.0 451.3
Mutual funds shares 123.1 129.0 138.1 120.5 119.6 123.9 129.0 134.1 131.9 135.6 138.1
Loans 369.3 395.8 385.2 379.7 391.8 392.5 395.8 401.1 399.9 404.3 385.2
short-term loans 252.3 268.6 278.9 259.5 270.6 268.9 268.6 278.9 277.0 279.9 278.9
longer-term loans 117.0 127.2 106.2 120.2 121.2 123.6 127.2 122.3 122.9 124.4 106.2
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.9 43.3 44.7 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3 44.7
short-term claims 41.9 43.3 44.7 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3 44.7longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 809.9 846.7 875.8 816.9 819.6 836.9 846.7 877.9 856.2 868.3 875.8
Total 3,070.0 3,361.4 3,528.8 3,181.6 3,153.8 3,259.3 3,361.4 3,405.4 3,324.7 3,443.9 3,528.8
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 110.7 130.9 138.9 115.6 117.2 124.6 130.9 139.6 141.3 137.5 138.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,664.7 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6 1,430.9 1,389.6 1,503.6 1,664.7
Other equity 741.4 750.7 761.4 743.8 745.3 741.3 750.7 751.8 753.9 755.6 761.4
Loans 1,367.1 1,397.4 1,425.0 1,367.5 1,381.6 1,401.5 1,397.4 1,415.8 1,428.3 1,421.9 1,425.0
short-term loans 421.1 427.6 437.0 422.5 429.3 433.0 427.6 439.3 449.6 445.7 437.0
longer-term loans 946.0 969.8 988.0 945.0 952.3 968.5 969.8 976.4 978.7 976.2 988.0
Claims from companypension commitments 235.0 241.5 247.2 236.6 238.2 239.9 241.5 243.0 244.4 245.8 247.2
Other liabilities 879.6 907.8 904.1 880.6 900.8 911.9 907.8 925.5 888.9 905.7 904.1
Total 4,444.3 4,802.0 5,141.3 4,626.6 4,549.5 4,714.2 4,802.0 4,906.6 4,846.3 4,970.1 5,141.3
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 73.7 − 38.6 − 18.4 − 2.5 − 14.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 104.2 − 82.9 − 20.1 − 5.2 + 4.1 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 22.0 − 27.3 − 11.3 + 1.4 + 15.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.4 − 14.4 − 6.8 + 5.2 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 pe + 0.2 − 6.7 − 3.2 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
2012          H1  p + 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 11.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  p − 5.8 − 6.5 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
2013          H1  pe + 7.6 − 3.7 + 1.0 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3
         H2  pe − 7.3 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 2.7 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2008 1,652.8 1,007.8 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,770.7 1,076.7 578.5 130.0 1.3 74.6 45.3 24.4 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,059.2 1,315.5 625.1 135.1 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,087.7 1,324.5 640.2 139.3 1.3 80.0 50.7 24.5 5.3 0.1
2012 p 2,161.0 1,369.1 664.7 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013 pe 2,147.0 1,372.8 647.1 143.6 1.3 78.4 50.1 23.6 5.2 0.0
2012          Q1 p 2,117.7 1,345.3 647.0 142.6 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 p 2,163.5 1,374.2 666.1 141.9 1.3 81.9 52.0 25.2 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,154.1 1,357.4 672.3 141.3 1.3 81.1 51.1 25.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 p 2,161.0 1,369.1 664.7 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,149.3 1,369.3 656.7 144.0 1.2 80.5 51.3 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,148.8 1,377.2 646.2 143.0 1.1 79.8 51.2 24.0 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,129.6 1,362.5 639.2 143.4 1.1 78.5 50.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,147.0 1,372.8 647.1 143.6 1.3 78.4 50.1 23.6 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 1,072.7 548.1 410.8 113.8 1,146.3 623.6 191.0 63.5 41.6 226.6 − 73.6 969.1
2010 p 1,089.8 549.9 421.2 118.7 2 1,194.1 633.2 195.7 63.5 41.6 2 260.2 2 − 104.3 981.3
2011 p 1,157.2 592.8 437.0 127.4 1,178.7 633.2 199.5 65.7 43.6 236.7 − 21.5 1,040.3
2012 p 1,193.8 617.7 448.9 127.1 1,191.5 643.4 203.8 63.8 41.4 239.1 + 2.3 1,077.3
2013 pe 1,223.4 636.4 459.1 127.9 1,223.1 663.9 208.4 59.1 42.8 248.9 + 0.3 1,106.2
as a percentage of GDP
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 45.2 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.3 26.3 8.0 2.7 1.8 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.7 22.0 16.9 4.8 2 47.9 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.4 2 − 4.2 39.3
2011 p 44.3 22.7 16.7 4.9 45.2 24.3 7.6 2.5 1.7 9.1 − 0.8 39.9
2012 p 44.8 23.2 16.8 4.8 44.7 24.1 7.6 2.4 1.6 9.0 + 0.1 40.4
2013 pe 44.7 23.2 16.8 4.7 44.7 24.3 7.6 2.2 1.6 9.1 + 0.0 40.4
Percentage growth rates
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 − 1.5 − 4.3 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 7.2 + 7.7 . − 2.5
2010 p + 1.6 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 4.9 − 9.0 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.2 + 4.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 1.0 . + 3.6
2013 pe + 2.5 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.7 + 3.2 + 2.2 − 7.4 + 3.5 + 4.1 . + 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2007 642.8 538.2 18.1 644.0 176.5 256.5 66.0 33.7 9.5 − 1.2 475.3 466.5 + 8.8 1,023.6 1,016.0 + 7.6
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.7
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.5 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.6 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 pe 745.2 600.0 14.6 769.9 217.9 285.3 70.3 43.3 25.5 − 24.7 536.1 518.8 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,178.6 − 7.5
2013 pe 761.5 619.7 14.7 771.3 224.4 286.6 66.2 42.5 23.8 − 9.8 537.4 531.7 + 5.7 1,198.4 1,202.5 − 4.1
2011          Q1 p 162.3 134.9 4.1 182.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 19.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.4 280.0 − 19.6
         Q2 p 189.4 145.6 18.6 171.3 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 18.0 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.3 270.2 + 22.1
         Q3 p 162.5 136.6 2.7 181.4 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 18.9 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.2 281.1 − 16.9
         Q4 p 196.0 156.3 5.0 195.3 55.8 72.6 8.9 15.3 5.0 + 0.7 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.6 298.7 + 8.9
2012          Q1 p 173.9 142.9 2.5 191.4 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 17.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.7 291.5 − 16.9
         Q2 p 190.3 150.4 2.7 178.5 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 11.8 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.1 280.2 + 16.0
         Q3 p 177.9 147.5 4.3 181.3 53.7 66.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 3.4 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.4 284.5 − 2.1
         Q4 p 200.2 159.4 4.9 212.5 58.7 73.6 7.2 16.5 14.9 − 12.3 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 314.4 316.6 − 2.2
2013          Q1 p 177.7 148.6 2.6 186.1 53.5 74.8 22.5 5.9 2.9 − 8.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.0 293.2 − 12.2
         Q2 p 193.4 155.3 4.8 182.9 54.4 68.6 14.2 8.4 8.0 + 10.5 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 301.6 290.6 + 11.0
         Q3 p 183.2 151.8 2.4 190.2 54.9 70.8 20.1 11.4 3.2 − 7.0 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 299.8 297.8 + 2.0
         Q4 p 204.8 164.1 4.6 205.9 60.6 70.9 10.5 15.5 8.3 − 1.1 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 322.0 314.6 + 7.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2007 278.1 292.8 − 14.7 273.1 265.5 + 7.6 169.7 161.5 + 8.2
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.4
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 320.3 − 8.3 199.8 198.5 + 1.3
2013 pe 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.2 324.6 − 0.4 207.8 206.3 + 1.5
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.2 87.5 − 6.3 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.8 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.3 + 3.3
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.0 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 89.0 − 3.3 60.4 57.9 + 2.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that government sector, excluding special purpose associations. Annual figures up to and
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts andcluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and special purpose associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 ... 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 ... ... 6,638
2013          Feb . 40,955 19,915 15,692 5,347 . . 2,165
         Mar . 48,091 25,799 20,088 2,204 . . 2,165
2014          Feb . 40,798 18,539 16,019 6,239 . . 2,213
         Mar . 51,512 27,439 21,628 2,445 . . 2,213
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
2013          Feb 43,188 12,931 11,859 − 79 2 1,148 19,658 15,216 4,442 232 8,753 1,190 424 2,233
         Mar 51,634 28,202 11,312 10,115 5,334 1,440 14,002 10,238 3,764 6 7,720 1,363 340 3,543
2014          Feb 43,159 13,460 12,710 − 80 − 389 1,220 19,746 15,552 4,195 160 8,034 1,356 403 2,362
         Mar 55,358 30,269 12,165 11,028 5,436 1,640 14,797 10,889 3,908 6 8,255 1,673 357 3,846
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2013: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2013: 22.3:77.7. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,377
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 ... ... ...
2013          Feb 1,265 819 803 4,226 579 641 219 200 . 688 304 198 . . .
         Mar 2,954 840 1,625 637 727 616 155 166 . 686 368 309 . . .
2014          Feb 1,276 721 847 3,883 422 461 224 199 . 783 352 221 . . .
         Mar 3,061 962 1,667 1,157 536 571 135 166 . 845 510 318 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 
p 260,076 181,981 77,044 258,010 219,877 15,521 + 2,066 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 46 3,666 9,583 4,157 685 2,255 − 186 1,205 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 − 5 1,605 8,246 3,477 353 2,134 − 175 1,213 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 − 4 305 7,450 3,177 168 1,857 26 187 1,229 + 17 −
         Q4 11,036 7,017 − 1 2,470 12,245 2,965 119 2,122 4,484 134 1,443 − 1,210 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 p 196,182 182,152 11,500 194,493 62,904 30,146 32,833 12,569 12,100 9,748 9,929 + 1,689
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 p 24,955 24,863 24,329 3,365 10,058 5,688 873 1,150 + 626
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,900
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 399,900 21 385,270 942,900
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,600 102 412,134 979,200
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,406 4,440 426,700 70 290,796 1,069,400
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 pe 1,818,818 4,440 442,800 53 267,825 1,103,700
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 1,750,580 4,440 412,800 87 370,653 962,600
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 1,763,413 4,440 404,900 82 361,591 992,400
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 1,759,638 4,440 388,400 82 380,516 986,200
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 1,752,476 4,440 356,600 102 412,134 979,200
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,766,324 4,440 398,800 91 353,993 1,009,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,780,408 4,440 410,600 92 324,376 1,040,900
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,772,573 4,440 430,100 92 284,442 1,053,500
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,791,406 4,440 426,700 70 290,796 1,069,400
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 4,440 429,900 20 265,513 1,101,900
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 p 1,805,465 4,440 424,200 23 289,603 1,087,200
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 p 1,793,464 4,440 422,700 28 276,996 1,089,300
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 pe 1,818,818 4,440 442,800 53 267,825 1,103,700
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,396 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,179 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,766,324 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 647,077 2,134 303,188 91 109,759 4,440 2
         Q2 1,780,408 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,695 2,137 295,910 92 116,431 4,440 2
         Q3 1,772,573 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,513 1,893 286,823 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,791,406 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,364 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 288,855 20 111,515 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,805,465 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,394 1,516 294,488 23 111,634 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,793,464 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,115 1,464 278,690 28 111,886 4,440 2
         Q4 pe 1,818,818 50,128 422,776 245,372 4,488 684,728 1,397 295,243 53 110,190 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
State government
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 535,494 2,531 283,629 .... 153,643 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2 536,354 2,814 287,249 .... 143,830 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,322 1,949 302,720 .... 137,141 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,301 1,425 303,722 .... 133,278 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 p 537,836 270 307,046 .... 130,521 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 p 549,774 125 312,747 .... 138,524 35 98,343 . 1
Local government11
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 375 . 121,695 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 381 . 128,331 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q1 137,001 . − . . 381 . 131,651 40 4,930 . .
         Q2 136,603 . − . . 381 . 131,252 40 4,930 . .
         Q3 135,922 . − . . 381 . 130,571 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 137,552 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,195 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,881 . − . . 423 . 134,245 18 3,195 . .
         Q2 p 136,111 . − . . 423 . 132,475 18 3,195 . .
         Q3 p 136,559 . − . . 423 . 132,923 18 3,195 . .
         Q4 pe 136,538 . − . . 423 . 132,902 18 3,195 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2012   2013
  2011   2012   2013   2011   2012   2013   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.8 112.3 112.3 5.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 4.3 0.7 1.0 2.6Construction 106.7 104.2 103.7 4.6 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 7.3 − 0.7 1.4 4.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.0 104.6 105.6 2.7 0.6 0.9 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 2.4 1.4 2.3 2.2Information and communication 146.9 149.9 151.7 8.4 2.0 1.2 2.2 2.7 0.5 1.2 1.5 0.9 1.0Financial and insuranceactivities 117.9 120.0 114.4 2.2 1.8 − 4.7 0.3 1.1 6.5 1.1 − 5.3 − 5.9 − 8.5Real estate activities 110.8 112.6 113.6 3.5 1.6 0.9 1.8 1.8 1.2 0.7 1.0 1.0 1.0Business services 
1 107.0 110.1 113.9 3.1 2.9 3.5 3.0 3.1 2.0 1.6 4.0 4.2 4.1
Public services, education and
health 110.5 111.5 111.7 1.5 0.9 0.2 1.0 1.0 0.6 − 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.5Other services 105.2 106.7 105.7 0.2 1.4 − 0.9 2.0 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.3
Gross value added 111.1 112.0 112.5 3.3 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 0.8 1.1 1.5Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.6 3.3 0.7 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 1.3
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 105.7 106.5 107.5 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.5 − 0.4 1.2 1.6 1.0
Government consumption 111.3 112.3 113.2 1.0 1.0 0.7 0.5 1.1 0.6 0.4 0.4 1.0 1.0
Machinery and equipment 114.2 109.6 106.9 5.8 − 4.0 − 2.4 − 4.1 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 8.9 − 1.1 − 0.2 0.0Premises 112.3 110.8 110.9 7.8 − 1.4 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 3.1 − 7.0 0.6 2.4 3.3Other investment 
4 129.7 134.1 138.1 5.1 3.4 3.0 3.6 3.9 3.3 2.1 3.2 3.3 3.1
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.1 − 0.7
Domestic use 108.9 108.6 109.1 2.8 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 1.1 0.9 1.6 0.4Net exports 
6 . . . 0.7 0.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5 0.9
Exports 136.0 140.3 141.4 8.0 3.2 0.8 4.6 3.2 0.5 − 2.9 1.1 0.9 4.1Imports 135.8 137.8 139.1 7.4 1.4 0.9 2.2 0.7 − 1.0 − 2.2 1.2 1.9 2.7
Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.6 3.3 0.7 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 1.3
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,498.4 1,533.9 1,572.4 4.4 2.4 2.5 2.1 1.7 2.2 1.1 3.0 3.3 2.5
Government consumption 499.6 514.4 533.0 2.5 3.0 3.6 2.4 3.1 3.1 3.5 3.6 4.3 3.2Machinery and equipment 181.2 175.0 170.9 6.2 − 3.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 5.9 − 5.5 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.0Premises 263.3 266.1 271.3 11.1 1.1 2.0 0.6 1.5 − 0.9 − 5.3 2.5 4.3 5.2Other investment 
4 28.6 29.4 30.0 4.5 2.6 2.1 2.7 2.8 2.8 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.0
Changes in inventories 5 3.2 − 10.3 − 13.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,474.3 2,508.5 2,563.9 5.1 1.4 2.2 0.7 0.8 1.1 0.6 2.8 3.4 1.9Net exports 135.7 157.9 173.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,321.4 1,381.0 1,385.5 11.2 4.5 0.3 6.0 4.5 1.7 − 2.9 0.8 0.0 3.4Imports 1,185.8 1,223.1 1,211.8 13.1 3.1 − 0.9 3.9 2.3 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 0.3 0.2
Gross domestic product 
2 2,609.9 2,666.4 2,737.6 4.6 2.2 2.7 1.9 1.9 1.8 0.4 3.4 3.4 3.4
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 108.4 110.2 112.0 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.5Gross domestic product 106.3 107.9 110.3 1.2 1.5 2.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.5 2.2 2.1Terms of trade 97.3 96.9 98.2 − 2.3 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 1.6 1.4 1.7
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,325.9 1,377.6 1,416.1 4.4 3.9 2.8 4.1 3.9 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.9 2.6Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 686.1 676.6 702.7 5.3 − 1.4 3.9 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 7.2 4.9 8.9
National income 2,012.0 2,054.3 2,118.8 4.7 2.1 3.1 2.3 1.8 1.5 0.4 4.1 3.6 4.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,668.9 2,730.1 2,804.6 4.7 2.3 2.7 2.3 2.0 1.9 0.5 3.5 3.2 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2014. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy 3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2010 99.4 99.2 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.5 99.3 99.3 99.2
2011 106.7 107.0 95.6 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.8 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 r 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.7 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
 
2013          Q1 r 101.2 77.1 104.9 104.2 102.6 108.3 100.7 97.5 105.4 104.6 105.9 112.3
         Q2 r 106.0 108.7 90.0 107.7 105.5 113.8 98.1 98.1 109.2 105.0 113.7 115.9
         Q3 r 107.3 117.4 91.1 108.0 106.0 112.9 98.8 101.3 109.4 106.1 112.2 114.0
         Q4 r 111.0 119.4 99.7 111.2 103.6 121.0 102.8 105.8 109.2 108.3 123.1 116.8
2014          Q1 x 105.4 88.1 100.8 108.5 106.7 113.4 102.2 100.3 111.0 106.2 107.6 123.1
 
2013          Mar r 112.0 93.5 109.1 115.0 111.1 123.2 110.3 103.0 114.5 117.6 122.1 127.8
         Apr r 105.0 104.9 94.3 106.4 103.5 112.9 97.7 97.4 107.4 101.2 111.5 118.3
         May r 103.5 106.9 88.0 105.0 105.1 108.2 91.9 98.5 107.0 102.8 106.8 110.6
         June r 109.5 114.4 87.7 111.6 107.9 120.2 104.8 98.4 113.1 110.9 122.9 118.9
         July r 107.7 119.8 91.1 108.1 108.0 111.7 97.0 100.4 110.9 105.2 113.1 109.2
         Aug r 101.7 113.1 89.3 101.7 101.2 104.2 85.3 99.1 102.5 101.8 102.7 104.8
         Sep r 112.6 119.3 92.8 114.2 108.8 122.7 114.2 104.4 114.9 111.3 120.7 128.0
         Oct r 112.3 120.0 99.1 112.9 110.9 116.9 107.1 108.2 115.5 110.4 112.9 120.4
         Nov r 116.2 121.4 99.4 117.6 110.1 128.1 111.7 109.1 117.5 115.5 122.9 134.0
         Dec r 104.5 116.7 100.6 103.2 89.7 117.9 89.7 100.1 94.6 99.1 133.6 96.1
2014          Jan x 98.2 73.4 104.0 100.9 101.8 101.4 93.6 98.6 104.9 98.0 97.1 108.3
         Feb x 102.7 85.4 96.6 106.0 104.0 111.6 101.0 96.3 108.0 104.1 103.7 124.0
         Mar x,p 5 115.4 5 105.6 101.9 118.5 114.4 127.3 112.0 106.1 120.0 116.5 122.0 137.0
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 10.2 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.4 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.3 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 9.7 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 r + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
 
2013          Q1 r − 2.1 − 5.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 5.0 − 4.0
         Q2 r − 0.3 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 1.7
         Q3 r + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.8
         Q4 r + 3.0 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 4.4 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 8.0
2014          Q1 x + 4.2 + 14.4 − 3.9 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 4.7 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 9.6
 
2013          Mar r − 2.3 − 12.4 + 3.7 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 7.1 − 0.6
         Apr r + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 2.1 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
         May r − 2.1 − 1.5 − 4.1 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 7.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 5.2 − 2.0
         June r + 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 3.0
         July r − 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 4.2 − 5.5
         Aug r + 0.5 + 2.2 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 1.0 + 2.2 − 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 8.8
         Sep r + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 3.2
         Oct r + 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.0
         Nov r + 3.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 6.0 + 4.5 + 3.4 + 6.0 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 10.7
         Dec r + 3.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 9.7
2014          Jan x + 5.0 + 14.0 − 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 7.2 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 5.6 + 1.2 + 6.2 + 12.6
         Feb x + 4.7 + 16.5 − 3.1 + 4.5 + 5.4 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 3.4 + 5.6 + 4.8 − 0.5 + 9.7
         Mar x,p 5 + 3.0 5 + 12.9 − 6.6 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 3.0 + 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 7.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to sector in the base year 2010. 5Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December to the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- Statistical Office (on average +3%). xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal
ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Sur-
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from vey or the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.6 + 28.0 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.5 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.5 − 5.5 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 2.0
2013          Mar 119.6 + 0.1 115.3 + 1.1 124.1 − 0.2 109.5 − 3.1 111.3 − 0.7 108.9 − 3.9
         Apr 106.2 − 0.3 103.0 − 3.3 109.0 + 0.9 102.2 + 7.0 100.8 + 1.9 102.7 + 8.8
         May 105.2 − 2.1 102.9 − 3.9 107.4 − 1.2 101.1 + 0.6 98.5 − 0.5 102.0 + 1.0
         June 115.9 + 5.1 104.4 − 1.5 125.9 + 10.1 102.3 + 0.0 108.3 + 7.5 100.2 − 2.5
         July
108.9 + 1.6 104.3 − 1.1 111.9 + 3.4 111.5 + 1.5 99.1 − 1.0 115.9 + 2.5
         Aug 99.8 + 2.0 95.7 − 2.0 102.1 + 5.4 103.8 − 1.2 91.6 − 1.2 107.9 − 1.4
         Sep 112.3 + 7.4 102.0 + 1.5 119.6 + 11.6 111.9 + 4.4 111.5 + 0.0 112.2 + 6.1
         Oct 
111.3 + 3.0 107.7 + 3.7 113.8 + 2.4 112.0 + 3.9 110.0 + 7.3 112.8 + 2.8
         Nov 114.5 + 6.8 106.0 + 2.7 120.7 + 9.1 112.8 + 8.6 107.6 + 9.9 114.6 + 8.0
         Dec 107.7 + 5.6 90.2 + 0.7 121.9 + 8.7 94.8 + 2.5 88.5 + 6.2 97.1 + 1.5
2014          Jan 111.4 + 6.3 108.0 + 2.8 113.8 + 8.4 112.6 + 10.7 100.8 + 1.9 116.7 + 13.6
         Feb 113.0 + 5.9 106.0 + 4.1 117.4 + 6.6 116.8 + 8.7 97.6 + 2.2 123.5 + 10.7
         Mar p 120.2 + 0.5 113.9 − 1.2 125.7 + 1.3 113.3 + 3.5 113.4 + 1.9 113.2 + 3.9
From the domestic market
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.5 + 2.0 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2013          Mar 115.5 − 0.8 113.1 + 0.2 119.3 − 1.6 106.5 − 1.7 114.3 − 1.8 103.7 − 1.7
         Apr 102.6 − 3.5 101.6 − 5.7 104.7 − 2.1 95.5 + 1.6 102.3 + 2.0 93.1 + 1.4
         May 100.1 − 4.5 101.2 − 4.7 99.7 − 5.1 95.2 + 0.1 95.6 − 0.8 95.1 + 0.4
         June 106.5 + 1.1 102.5 − 1.3 112.2 + 3.4 96.9 + 2.5 103.0 + 8.9 94.7 + 0.2
         July 106.6 + 0.9 104.1 − 0.9 109.5 + 2.3 104.7 + 2.0 99.0 + 0.6 106.7 + 2.5
         Aug 100.1 + 3.8 96.5 − 1.1 103.6 + 9.7 101.4 + 0.1 92.8 − 4.0 104.4 + 1.5
         Sep 106.0 + 3.6 100.9 + 0.0 111.2 + 7.3 105.1 + 2.1 113.6 − 1.0 102.1 + 3.4
         Oct 
105.5 + 2.2 103.7 + 1.0 107.2 + 3.7 105.5 + 1.0 117.3 + 4.6 101.4 − 0.4
         Nov 109.6 + 5.3 105.4 + 1.4 114.6 + 9.0 104.5 + 5.9 108.7 + 4.9 103.0 + 6.2
         Dec 94.0 + 1.6 87.9 + 1.7 101.7 + 1.3 84.5 + 3.3 81.4 + 1.2 85.6 + 4.0
2014          Jan 106.2 + 3.3 106.2 + 1.2 106.5 + 5.0 104.9 + 6.3 102.6 − 1.8 105.7 + 9.3
         Feb 107.0 + 3.3 104.2 + 2.8 109.4 + 3.8 109.7 + 3.6 99.9 − 1.9 113.1 + 5.3
         Mar p 116.7 + 1.0 109.5 − 3.2 124.8 + 4.6 111.2 + 4.4 113.7 − 0.5 110.3 + 6.4
From abroad
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.5 + 8.9 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.7 − 0.5 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2013          Mar 123.0 + 0.8 117.8 + 2.2 127.0 + 0.6 112.1 − 4.3 108.6 + 0.2 113.3 − 5.6
         Apr 109.1 + 2.3 104.7 − 0.3 111.6 + 2.8 107.9 + 11.5 99.5 + 1.9 110.8 + 14.7
         May 109.4 − 0.3 104.8 − 3.1 112.2 + 1.1 106.2 + 1.0 101.0 − 0.3 107.9 + 1.4
         June 123.5 + 8.0 106.7 − 1.6 134.3 + 13.7 106.9 − 1.8 113.0 + 6.5 104.8 − 4.6
         July 110.8 + 2.1 104.6 − 1.4 113.3 + 4.0 117.4 + 1.3 99.1 − 2.5 123.8 + 2.6
         Aug 99.5 + 0.6 94.8 − 3.2 101.2 + 2.8 105.8 − 2.3 90.6 + 1.6 110.9 − 3.5
         Sep 117.4 + 10.2 103.4 + 3.4 124.8 + 14.0 117.8 + 6.3 109.6 + 0.8 120.7 + 8.2
         Oct 116.0 + 3.5 112.4 + 6.6 117.8 + 1.7 117.6 + 6.2 103.6 + 10.1 122.5 + 5.2
         Nov 118.5 + 7.9 106.8 + 4.4 124.5 + 9.2 119.9 + 10.6 106.6 + 14.7 124.5 + 9.4
         Dec 118.8 + 8.3 92.9 − 0.4 134.3 + 12.6 103.7 + 2.0 94.6 + 10.3 106.8 − 0.3
2014          Jan 115.7 + 8.6 110.1 + 4.5 118.3 + 10.3 119.2 + 14.3 99.2 + 5.4 126.0 + 16.9
         Feb 117.9 + 7.9 108.1 + 5.7 122.4 + 8.3 122.9 + 13.0 95.6 + 6.1 132.3 + 14.8
         Mar p 123.1 + 0.1 119.1 + 1.1 126.2 − 0.6 115.1 + 2.7 113.1 + 4.1 115.7 + 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.4 − 5.2 94.2 − 12.2 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.3 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.3 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.8 + 13.1 96.0 − 3.8
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.6 − 0.2 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.1 103.3 + 7.6
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.4 + 4.1 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.3 111.7 + 3.8 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.2
 
2013          Feb 98.2 + 2.1 100.8 − 1.3 108.3 − 3.6 104.3 + 3.2 75.6 − 10.7 95.6 + 5.8 104.3 + 5.2 87.9 + 1.3
         Mar 130.9 − 3.6 133.1 − 9.8 151.2 + 2.5 131.2 − 17.7 103.3 − 7.6 128.7 + 3.7 129.8 − 8.2 124.0 − 1.0
         Apr 123.6 − 0.5 130.2 + 2.8 145.2 + 2.1 125.5 − 4.1 114.4 + 36.7 117.1 − 3.9 117.8 − 3.6 120.9 + 1.6
         May 125.5 + 5.6 135.3 + 14.0 142.2 + 9.6 140.4 + 16.6 106.7 + 16.1 115.7 − 2.9 127.2 + 6.4 117.0 + 2.8         June 145.9 + 11.7 157.6 + 15.3 182.0 + 12.0 158.1 + 22.0 108.0 + 0.8 134.2 + 7.8 151.3 + 18.5 125.9 + 4.2
         July 142.5 + 14.5 141.9 + 14.6 158.2 + 14.1 142.3 + 12.2 108.8 + 26.7 143.0 + 14.3 133.1 + 9.5 145.8 + 19.7
         Aug 123.8 − 1.2 124.1 − 11.8 144.8 + 5.9 121.1 − 19.3 92.4 − 23.3 123.4 + 12.2 119.3 − 10.8 119.9 + 7.1         Sep 125.9 + 4.9 135.7 + 4.9 152.8 + 10.1 132.8 + 1.3 110.8 + 4.5 116.1 + 5.1 130.5 + 3.0 110.4 + 4.6
         Oct 117.5 − 11.1 128.6 − 2.4 141.4 + 3.9 134.6 − 2.2 85.6 − 19.2 106.5 − 19.7 125.3 − 9.3 100.0 − 19.7
         Nov 106.6 + 16.6 119.6 + 18.4 122.9 + 0.7 132.4 + 34.1 75.0 + 12.4 93.6 + 14.4 123.1 + 30.8 83.2 + 8.9         Dec 106.2 + 13.7 120.0 + 11.0 136.8 + 11.7 121.3 + 6.9 82.9 + 29.9 92.5 + 17.5 113.6 + 8.0 86.5 + 24.3
2014          Jan 93.1 + 13.4 106.5 + 17.8 112.9 + 10.8 113.3 + 22.4 73.7 + 20.8 79.7 + 7.8 110.7 + 27.8 67.1 − 3.7
         Feb 102.3 + 4.2 112.9 + 12.0 134.0 + 23.7 114.3 + 9.6 67.0 − 11.4 91.7 − 4.1 106.4 + 2.0 85.3 − 3.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 100.0 + 2.2 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.9 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.6 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.2 105.1 + 2.5 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 4 106.1 + 1.5 101.2 + 0.3 109.0 + 3.7 103.6 + 1.3 95.5 − 3.5 102.5 − 1.9 103.4 + 3.0 104.9 − 0.9
 
2013          Mar 108.0 + 0.7 102.7 − 0.7 111.6 + 4.6 98.4 − 9.8 96.1 + 0.4 107.8 − 6.4 105.4 + 1.0 114.0 − 8.4
         Apr 106.9 + 1.5 101.5 + 0.1 108.4 + 1.6 110.3 + 5.1 85.6 − 5.5 108.3 − 1.5 102.1 + 0.5 111.6 − 0.6
         May 107.5 + 2.5 102.0 + 1.1 110.3 + 2.9 103.8 + 2.0 83.3 − 3.4 107.8 + 0.9 101.5 + 0.8 110.1 + 0.0
         June 104.4 + 1.3 99.1 − 0.6 110.0 + 4.4 100.8 + 5.8 84.6 − 11.0 101.6 − 0.1 98.9 + 0.3 110.5 − 0.3
         July 106.1 + 2.0 101.4 + 0.3 111.7 + 6.6 103.0 + 0.4 86.4 − 6.8 103.2 − 1.6 106.1 + 3.3 106.6 − 1.3
         Aug 103.2 + 1.6 98.7 + 0.4 108.0 + 4.1 97.7 + 4.5 88.5 − 2.1 97.9 − 6.0 99.3 + 3.2 98.0 + 0.5         Sep 104.8 + 1.4 99.7 + 0.4 103.8 + 1.4 115.5 + 2.0 95.2 + 2.0 102.2 − 1.4 101.7 + 6.0 105.3 − 0.5
         Oct 109.5 + 0.9 103.9 +
 0.0 110.9 + 3.8 118.0 − 0.3 95.7 − 3.2 109.0 − 2.7 106.7 + 4.6 115.9 + 2.9
         Nov 111.4 + 1.9 105.9 + 1.0 112.0 + 4.8 110.7 + 6.8 105.8 − 2.4 110.1 − 1.6 106.4 + 3.0 112.9 + 3.5
         Dec 121.1 − 0.2 115.5 − 1.1 124.0 + 1.5 119.8 − 1.9 138.3 − 6.4 104.0 − 2.4 115.3 + 6.6 98.1 + 4.5
2014          Jan 99.3 + 1.8 94.8 + 0.6 101.4 + 1.7 91.4 + 3.5 97.7 − 3.1 87.7 − 1.8 105.4 + 4.8 92.5 + 8.2
         Feb 95.8 + 2.7 91.1 + 1.8 100.7 + 2.9 83.3 + 7.8 83.0 − 2.8 90.3 + 2.0 102.4 + 6.4 96.6 + 6.6
         Mar 110.6 + 2.4 104.3 + 1.6 116.0 + 3.9 110.4 + 12.2 85.9 − 10.6 110.4 + 2.4 107.7 + 2.2 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2013 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to esti-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from mates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2009 40,372 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,905 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,587 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2011 41,152 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012 41,607 + 1.1 28,991 + 1.9 8,731 19,250 775 4,805 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013
r 41,847 r + 0.6 9 29,360 9 + 1.3 9 8,778 9 19,601 9 743 9 4,797 ... 9 77 2,950 970 6.9 434
2011          Q1 40,588 + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412         Q2 41,064 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,343 + 1.4 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,611 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,145 + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 41,545 + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 41,779 + 1.1 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 41,961 + 0.8 29,391 + 1.4 8,835 19,550 767 4,823 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1
r 41,394 r + 0.6 29,016 + 1.3 8,689 19,405 702 4,765 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 427
         Q2 r 41,749 r + 0.5 29,214 + 1.2 8,737 19,508 726 4,779 99 87 2,941 945 10 6.8 438
         Q3 r 42,029 r + 0.6 29,451 + 1.3 8,807 19,626 772 4,810 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 445
         Q4 r 42,214 r + 0.6 9 29,760 9 + 1.3 9 8,880 9 19,867 9 772 9 4,833 ... 9 61 2,827 891 6.6 428
2014          Q1 11 41,738 11 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,109 1,078 7.2 426
2010          Dec 40,931 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 3802011          Jan 40,527 + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,345 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,559 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,679 + 1.5 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,908 + 1.5 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,092 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,192 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,209 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,303 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,518 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,656 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,679 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,498 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,140 + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,091 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473         Mar 41,203 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 41,395 + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499         May 41,584 + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 41,655 + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 41,689 + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 41,740 + 1.1 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 41,908 + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,044 + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,034 + 0.9 29,424 + 1.4 8,840 19,580 767 4,851 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 41,804 + 0.7 29,143 + 1.2 8,739 19,471 715 4,854 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 
r 41,380 r + 0.6 28,965 + 1.3 8,678 19,372 699 4,762 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
         Feb r 41,368 r + 0.7 28,981 + 1.4 8,674 19,387 700 4,736 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 431
         Mar r 41,433 r + 0.6 29,062 + 1.2 8,692 19,439 700 4,740 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 444
         Apr r 41,599 r + 0.5 29,201 + 1.3 8,735 19,505 719 4,761 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 441
         May r 41,787 r + 0.5 29,277 + 1.2 8,752 19,542 734 4,796 86 74 2,937 935 10 6.8 437
         June r 41,862 r + 0.5 29,269 + 1.2 8,757 19,517 748 4,819 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 437
         July r 41,939 r + 0.6 29,266 + 1.2 8,765 19,484 773 4,829 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 444
         Aug r 41,966 r + 0.5 29,548 + 1.4 8,826 19,701 775 4,795 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 445
         Sep r 42,182 r + 0.7 29,810 + 1.3 8,903 19,868 785 4,795 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 446
         Oct r 42,298 r + 0.6 29,807 + 1.1 8,895 19,879 783 4,805 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 439
         Nov r 42,271 r + 0.6 9 29,805 9 + 1.3 9 8,897 9 19,894 9 775 9 4,862 ... 9 67 2,806 881 6.5 431
         Dec r 42,073 r + 0.6 9 29,530 9 + 1.3 9 8,795 9 19,786 9 730 9 4,867 ... 9 45 2,873 923 6.7 414
2014          Jan r 41,701 r + 0.8 9 29,370 9 + 1.4 9 8,739 9 19,690 9 723 9 4,796 ... 9 68 3,136 1,104 7.3 401
         Feb r 41,709 r + 0.8 9 29,417 9 + 1.5 9 8,748 9 19,720 9 725 9 4,772 ... 9 60 3,138 1,105 7.3 429
         Mar 11 41,805 11 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,055 1,026 7.1 447
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,943 938 6.8 455
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employ-
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- ment Agency. In 2011 and 2012, the estimated values for Germany deviated from
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: the final data by a maximum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions,
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal by a maximum of 1.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions,
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given and by a maximum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From May
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding 2013, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary esti-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located mate by the Federal Statistical Office. abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 99.1 98.5 88.1 97.0 93.4 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.0 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.0 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 121.1 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
 
2012          June 103.7 105.8 101.9 114.2 102.0 102.4 106.6 113.3 104.8 107.7 124.5 108.9
         July 104.1 105.2 101.2 115.4 103.6 102.5 106.6 114.4 105.0 108.2 136.5 116.8
         Aug 104.5 105.1 101.6 118.0 103.5 102.6 106.0 107.0 117.9 105.2 109.2 149.1 114.2
         Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 107.3 121.4 105.2 108.5 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 107.4 122.7 105.0 108.0 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 106.3 107.4 125.2 105.1 108.0 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 107.1 124.4 104.8 107.4 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 107.7 124.0 104.8 107.3 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 107.1 107.5 124.5 104.7 107.6 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 124.1 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 125.0 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 125.3 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 123.1 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 120.7 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 120.4 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 121.4 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 121.4 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 122.1 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 122.4 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 p 120.2 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 p 120.1 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 p 121.3 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 ... ... ... ... 126.2 99.3
Annual percentage change  
  
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.5 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.0 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
 
2012          June + 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 7.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 9.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 10.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 11.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 9.2 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 6.4 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 6.7 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 9.1 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.6 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 p − 3.1 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 p − 3.5 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 2.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... − 1.3 − 4.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2006
935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,003.8 0.1 667.7 0.6 384.1 7.8 1,051.8 3.1 1,562.9 − 0.4 170.3 − 5.5 10.9
2010 1,033.2 2.9 696.7 4.4 387.8 1.0 1,084.5 3.1 1,609.9 3.0 174.9 2.7 10.9
2011 1,081.7 4.7 723.4 3.8 384.2 − 0.9 1,107.6 2.1 1,672.0 3.9 173.6 − 0.7 10.4
2012 1,126.6 4.2 751.9 3.9 389.2 1.3 1,141.1 3.0 1,710.3 2.3 176.5 1.6 10.3
2013 1,160.9 3.0 772.8 2.8 397.4 2.1 1,170.2 2.6 1,746.7 2.1 174.2 − 1.3 10.0
2012          Q3 277.9 4.1 189.1 3.8 97.4 1.7 286.6 3.1 431.3 1.6 37.9 1.1 8.8
         Q4 311.7 4.0 207.9 3.7 97.3 1.6 305.2 3.0 429.5 1.9 38.0 − 1.1 8.8
2013          Q1 270.1 3.3 180.2 3.1 100.2 2.4 280.4 2.8 428.2 0.6 56.3 − 3.0 13.2
         Q2 283.5 2.9 184.8 2.6 99.0 2.5 283.8 2.6 434.3 2.5 41.5 − 2.4 9.6
         Q3 286.8 3.2 195.1 3.1 99.4 2.1 294.5 2.8 444.4 3.0 37.8 − 0.2 8.5
         Q4 320.4 2.8 212.7 2.3 98.8 1.5 311.5 2.1 439.8 2.4 38.6 1.5 8.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2014. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2006 101.0 1.0 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8
2007 102.2 1.2 102.5 1.4 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.6 2.0 107.7 2.3 108.1 2.4 104.5 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.4 1.7 109.4 1.7 110.0 1.8 106.9 2.3
2011 110.7 1.8 111.4 1.8 111.5 1.9 112.0 1.8 110.4 3.32012 113.7 2.7 114.3 2.6 114.7 2.9 115.2 2.9 113.6 2.92013 116.5 2.4 117.1 2.4 117.5 2.5 118.0 2.5 116.1 2.2
2012          Q4 127.2 3.1 127.9 3.0 128.3 3.0 116.2 3.0 124.3 3.0
2013          Q1 107.8 2.8 108.4 2.9 108.8 2.9 117.0 2.9 109.1 2.4
         Q2 109.0 2.1 109.6 2.1 109.9 2.1 117.3 2.1 113.7 2.1         Q3 118.7 2.3 119.4 2.3 119.8 2.4 118.7 2.4 114.5 2.4         Q4 130.3 2.4 131.0 2.4 131.5 2.5 118.9 2.4 126.8 2.0
2014          Q1 111.4 3.3 112.0 3.3 111.9 2.8 120.3 2.8 . .
2013          Sep 109.5 2.4 110.1 2.5 110.5 2.5 118.9 2.5 . .
         Oct 109.5 2.4 110.1 2.4 110.5 2.4 118.9 2.4 . .
         Nov 169.0 2.4 169.9 2.4 170.5 2.4 118.9 2.3 . .
         Dec 112.3 2.4 113.0 2.5 113.4 2.7 119.0 2.4 . .
2014          Jan 112.4 4.3 113.0 4.3 111.6 2.6 120.0 2.6 . .
         Feb 110.6 2.6 111.3 2.7 111.7 2.7 120.1 2.6 . .
         Mar 111.3 3.1 111.9 3.1 112.3 3.2 120.8 3.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2014. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2013 r 2014
Item 2011 r 2012 r 2013 r Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb p
Current account + 12,059 + 133,091 + 227,675 + 60,073 + 51,420 + 87,577 + 32,909 + 6,989 + 13,870 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,792,948 1,921,514 1,935,783 489,641 479,571 495,962 153,633 152,643 157,146
Imports (fob) 1,792,075 1,832,463 1,770,587 439,783 441,505 447,981 140,950 151,899 141,385
Balance + 874 + 89,048 + 165,198 + 49,859 + 38,066 + 47,981 + 12,683 + 744 + 15,762
2 Services
Receipts 590,798 633,551 662,929 166,460 176,763 173,217 61,660 53,002 49,737
Expenditure 512,900 538,515 549,686 136,164 143,283 142,711 50,240 44,251 40,944
Balance + 77,897 + 95,037 + 113,242 + 30,295 + 33,480 + 30,507 + 11,420 + 8,751 + 8,794
3 Income + 39,571 + 56,262 + 70,296 + 9,967 + 13,990 + 24,004 + 10,941 + 7,503 + 6,536
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 95,827 98,623 99,740 19,793 17,610 34,607 18,783 10,529 11,517
Transfers to non-residents 202,112 205,881 220,799 49,841 51,725 49,522 20,918 20,538 28,739
Balance − 106,284 − 107,257 − 121,059 − 30,047 − 34,115 − 14,915 − 2,135 − 10,009 − 17,222
Capital account + 10,687 + 6,477 + 20,129 + 5,553 + 4,554 + 7,913 + 2,576 + 975 + 2,696 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 50,943 − 165,046 − 246,926 − 72,188 − 55,863 − 95,643 − 46,522 − 4,680 − 12,200 C)
1 Direct investment − 101,719 − 71,566 − 24,922 + 21,968 − 12,654 − 9,063 − 9,656 − 9,053 + 31,945
By resident units abroad − 500,864 − 410,125 − 324,169 − 69,670 − 50,361 − 151,875 + 31,047 − 25,020 + 46,603
By non-resident units in the euro area + 399,147 + 338,559 + 299,246 + 91,638 + 37,707 + 142,812 − 40,703 + 15,966 − 14,658
2 Portfolio investment + 238,594 + 95,440 + 105,833 + 43,967 + 4,920 + 54,558 + 3,918 + 19,309 + 24,262
By resident units abroad + 53,663 − 194,261 − 250,188 − 24,391 − 69,144 − 50,351 − 20,628 − 17,636 − 14,622
Equity + 66,257 − 57,983 − 163,421 − 14,172 − 45,940 − 39,380 − 14,540 − 6,827 + 4,826
Bonds and notes + 21,785 − 133,895 − 78,869 − 10,396 − 21,027 − 12,628 + 338 − 2,876 − 10,490
Money market instruments − 34,379 − 2,384 − 7,897 + 178 − 2,177 + 1,657 − 6,426 − 7,933 − 8,958
By non-resident units in the euro area + 184,930 + 289,703 + 356,019 + 68,356 + 74,065 + 104,908 + 24,546 + 36,945 + 38,883
Equity + 64,393 + 164,940 + 236,623 + 66,687 + 44,426 + 58,372 + 41,532 + 14,817 + 7,792
Bonds and notes + 165,290 + 128,769 + 80,597 + 3,839 − 14,157 + 90,370 + 8,356 − 4,538 + 51,903
Money market instruments − 44,752 − 4,009 + 38,800 − 2,170 + 43,796 − 43,834 − 25,342 + 26,665 − 20,812
3 Financial derivatives − 5,552 + 5,294 + 18,226 − 1,879 + 7,593 + 4,296 + 1,819 − 123 + 2,696
4 Other investment − 171,998 − 179,260 − 341,652 − 135,057 − 52,862 − 145,126 − 41,259 − 12,094 − 71,939
Eurosystem + 137,861 + 13,179 − 58,988 − 10,782 − 16,362 − 9,354 + 253 − 3,216 − 13,374
General government + 69,918 − 3,712 + 6,293 + 4,784 + 6,910 − 14,848 − 3,940 + 2,739 − 242
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 341,608 − 111,858 − 268,528 − 103,460 − 36,496 − 113,678 − 56,647 − 21,420 − 47,978
Long-term − 16,768 + 6,476 + 43,213 + 20,505 + 5,264 + 19,622 + 21,948 + 4,210 + 1,823
Short-term − 324,842 − 118,337 − 311,743 − 123,966 − 41,761 − 133,300 − 78,595 − 25,629 − 49,801
Other sectors − 38,172 − 76,872 − 20,433 − 25,600 − 6,915 − 7,248 + 19,075 + 9,803 − 10,345
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,266 − 14,957 − 4,409 − 1,187 − 2,861 − 308 − 1,344 − 2,719 + 837
Errors and omissions + 28,197 + 25,477 − 878 + 6,563 − 111 + 154 + 11,038 − 3,284 − 4,366 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,857
2001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 140,724 + 138,697 − 16,917 − 7,220 + 59,355 − 33,191 + 28 − 156,416 + 3,200 + 15,664
2010 + 159,329 + 154,863 − 12,408 + 337 + 54,836 − 38,299 − 575 − 124,952 − 1,613 − 33,802
2011 + 178,427 + 158,702 − 20,296 + 3,353 + 70,530 − 33,863 + 634 − 174,729 − 2,836 − 4,331
2012 + 198,571 + 189,841 − 33,187 + 3,289 + 76,376 − 37,749 + 16 − 222,705 − 1,297 + 24,118
2013 + 205,952 + 197,654 − 28,986 + 2,400 + 76,921 − 42,037 + 1,810 − 250,599 − 838 + 42,836
2011          Q2 + 36,123 + 38,562 − 4,993 − 139 + 7,422 − 4,730 − 290 − 57,077 − 438 + 21,243
         Q3 + 40,415 + 39,609 − 6,581 − 4,305 + 21,358 − 9,665 + 97 − 13,384 − 639 − 27,127         Q4 + 53,348 + 39,630 − 6,657 + 3,626 + 22,565 − 5,816 − 116 − 33,476 − 366 − 19,756
2012          Q1 + 50,009 + 46,229 − 4,457 + 2,034 + 21,251 − 15,047 + 184 − 42,696 − 963 − 7,496
         Q2 + 43,491 + 48,058 − 10,911 + 2,676 + 10,090 − 6,421 + 387 − 48,159 − 769 + 4,281         Q3 + 48,302 + 50,775 − 8,677 − 5,830 + 21,431 − 9,397 + 59 − 50,859 − 59 + 2,497         Q4 + 56,768 + 44,780 − 9,142 + 4,408 + 23,605 − 6,883 − 614 − 80,991 + 494 + 24,837
2013          Q1 + 47,441 + 49,289 − 7,694 + 48 + 21,756 − 15,959 + 387 − 40,042 − 86 − 7,786
         Q2 + 50,358 + 48,634 − 3,838 + 1,276 + 12,295 − 8,010 + 345 − 70,438 − 72 + 19,735         Q3 + 45,237 + 49,784 − 8,451 − 5,118 + 19,423 − 10,402 + 77 − 64,747 + 784 + 19,433         Q4 + 62,916 + 49,946 − 9,004 + 6,194 + 23,447 − 7,666 + 1,001 − 75,372 − 1,464 + 11,454
2014          Q1 
p + 48,455 + 47,678 − 7,664 + 4,566 + 19,591 − 15,716 + 1,817 − 66,173 + 565 + 15,902
2011          Oct + 12,409 + 11,000 − 2,199 − 511 + 7,623 − 3,504 − 184 − 15,212 + 55 + 2,987
         Nov + 18,586 + 16,110 − 1,924 + 733 + 7,315 − 3,647 + 118 − 8,401 + 263 − 10,303         Dec + 22,354 + 12,520 − 2,534 + 3,405 + 7,627 + 1,335 − 50 − 9,863 − 684 − 12,441
2012          Jan + 12,820 + 13,536 − 1,564 − 1,071 + 6,185 − 4,266 − 37 − 12,795 − 140 + 13
         Feb + 15,099 + 15,418 − 1,945 + 1,454 + 7,468 − 7,296 + 212 − 8,194 − 547 − 7,117         Mar + 22,091 + 17,275 − 948 + 1,652 + 7,597 − 3,485 + 8 − 21,707 − 276 − 393
         Apr + 13,016 + 14,358 − 3,456 + 2,139 + 2,651 − 2,675 + 309 − 16,585 − 581 + 3,261
         May + 9,987 + 15,702 − 4,485 − 311 + 551 − 1,470 + 233 − 19,675 − 207 + 9,455         June + 20,488 + 17,998 − 2,970 + 848 + 6,889 − 2,276 − 155 − 11,898 + 19 − 8,435
         July + 15,779 + 17,169 − 3,148 − 2,783 + 7,072 − 2,532 − 228 + 122 + 48 − 15,673
         Aug + 14,662 + 16,747 − 2,864 − 2,581 + 7,029 − 3,668 + 166 − 19,055 − 389 + 4,227         Sep + 17,862 + 16,859 − 2,665 − 465 + 7,330 − 3,197 + 122 − 31,926 + 281 + 13,943
         Oct + 16,663 + 15,967 − 2,816 − 980 + 7,964 − 3,472 − 192 − 18,726 − 176 + 2,256
         Nov + 19,015 + 16,872 − 2,841 + 763 + 7,623 − 3,402 + 148 − 30,196 + 308 + 11,033         Dec + 21,090 + 11,941 − 3,485 + 4,625 + 8,018 − 9 − 570 − 32,069 + 362 + 11,548
2013          Jan + 10,633 + 13,622 − 2,433 − 1,507 + 6,690 − 5,740 + 24 + 9,792 − 493 − 20,450
         Feb + 15,668 + 16,809 − 1,940 + 383 + 7,418 − 7,002 + 19 − 16,820 + 321 + 1,133         Mar + 21,139 + 18,858 − 3,321 + 1,171 + 7,648 − 3,218 + 344 − 33,014 + 86 + 11,531
         Apr + 17,521 + 17,995 − 1,302 + 894 + 2,528 − 2,595 + 182 − 23,748 − 56 + 6,045
         May + 13,933 + 13,622 − 569 − 287 + 3,613 − 2,446 + 109 − 15,267 + 23 + 1,225         June + 18,904 + 17,017 − 1,967 + 668 + 6,155 − 2,969 + 54 − 31,423 − 38 + 12,465
         July + 15,131 + 16,253 − 2,658 − 1,753 + 6,772 − 3,483 + 39 − 10,458 + 654 − 4,711
         Aug + 9,823 + 13,255 − 2,943 − 3,353 + 6,662 − 3,798 − 77 − 28,991 − 425 + 19,244         Sep + 20,283 + 20,276 − 2,849 − 12 + 5,989 − 3,121 + 116 − 25,298 + 556 + 4,899
         Oct + 19,288 + 17,867 − 2,105 − 659 + 7,283 − 3,098 + 527 − 19,789 + 212 − 26
         Nov + 22,530 + 18,208 − 3,046 + 2,462 + 7,562 − 2,656 + 270 − 23,293 − 407 + 494         Dec + 21,098 + 13,870 − 3,853 + 4,391 + 8,602 − 1,912 + 204 − 32,289 − 1,269 + 10,987
2014          Jan  
r + 15,181 + 15,045 − 2,478 + 1,734 + 5,662 − 4,782 + 1,009 − 1,720 + 375 − 14,469
         Feb + 13,779 + 16,210 − 2,860 + 1,656 + 6,216 − 7,443 + 446 − 25,996 + 898 + 11,772
         Mar  p + 19,495 + 16,423 − 2,326 + 1,176 + 7,713 − 3,491 + 362 − 38,456 − 708 + 18,599
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2014
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2013  2014
Country / group of countries  2011  2012  2013 Oct Nov Dec Jan  r Feb r Mar p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,061,225 1,095,766 1,093,811 99,118 94,669 82,104 90,747 92,362 95,991
Imports 902,523 905,925 896,157 81,251 76,461 68,233 75,703 76,151 79,568Balance + 158,702 + 189,841 + 197,654 + 17,867 + 18,208 + 13,870 + 15,045 + 16,210 + 16,423
I Exports 752,295 751,071 748,833 68,399 64,349 54,880 63,586 64,022 ... European countries
Imports 622,870 629,305 633,693 57,845 54,796 48,935 53,145 55,420 ...
Balance + 129,425 + 121,766 + 115,140 + 10,554 + 9,553 + 5,945 + 10,441 + 8,602 ...
Exports 629,953 622,674 623,113 57,379 53,460 46,377 54,498 54,691 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 506,211 504,494 514,693 47,792 44,387 39,982 42,667 45,090 ...
Balance + 123,742 + 118,180 + 108,419 + 9,588 + 9,073 + 6,395 + 11,832 + 9,600 ...
Euro-area (18) Exports 421,845 407,666 403,578 36,854 34,421 30,282 35,095 34,899 ...
countries Imports 338,988 339,072 343,964 31,646 29,289 26,854 28,536 29,816 ...
Balance + 82,857 + 68,593 + 59,613 + 5,208 + 5,133 + 3,428 + 6,559 + 5,083 ...
of which
Austria Exports 57,671 56,591 56,178 5,179 4,824 4,151 4,611 4,619 ...
Imports 37,028 36,419 36,834 3,343 3,151 2,900 2,886 3,014 ...
Balance + 20,643 + 20,172 + 19,344 + 1,835 + 1,673 + 1,251 + 1,725 + 1,604 ...
Belgium and Exports 53,161 49,424 47,828 4,144 3,902 3,648 4,074 3,898 ...
Luxembourg Imports 41,302 40,528 41,910 3,897 3,635 3,136 3,390 3,547 ...
Balance + 11,859 + 8,896 + 5,919 + 246 + 267 + 512 + 683 + 351 ...
France Exports 101,444 102,911 100,320 9,428 8,633 7,411 8,662 8,889 ...
Imports 65,948 64,035 64,073 6,271 5,330 5,000 5,395 5,777 ...
Balance + 35,496 + 38,875 + 36,247 + 3,158 + 3,303 + 2,411 + 3,266 + 3,112 ...
Italy Exports 62,044 55,529 53,321 4,824 4,572 3,749 4,711 4,560 ...
Imports 47,844 47,957 47,540 4,377 3,953 3,728 3,891 4,225 ...
Balance + 14,200 + 7,572 + 5,781 + 446 + 619 + 21 + 819 + 335 ...
Netherlands Exports 69,423 70,381 70,947 6,327 5,985 5,663 6,273 6,107 ...
Imports 81,804 85,738 89,065 7,827 7,498 7,079 7,712 7,526 ...
Balance − 12,382 − 15,357 − 18,119 − 1,500 − 1,512 − 1,415 − 1,439 − 1,420 ...
Spain Exports 34,811 31,047 31,331 2,940 2,736 2,298 2,939 2,977 ...
Imports 22,491 23,206 23,758 2,181 1,994 1,865 1,878 2,164 ...
Balance + 12,320 + 7,841 + 7,574 + 760 + 742 + 432 + 1,061 + 813 ...
Other EU member Exports 208,108 215,008 219,535 20,525 19,038 16,095 19,404 19,791 ...
states Imports 167,223 165,421 170,729 16,145 15,098 13,128 14,131 15,274 ...
Balance + 40,885 + 49,587 + 48,806 + 4,380 + 3,940 + 2,966 + 5,273 + 4,517 ...
of which
United Exports 65,570 73,283 75,642 6,863 6,413 5,855 6,808 7,324 ...
Kingdom Imports 44,741 42,820 42,278 3,778 3,591 3,499 3,152 3,849 ...
Balance + 20,829 + 30,462 + 33,364 + 3,086 + 2,822 + 2,355 + 3,656 + 3,476 ...
Exports 122,342 128,398 125,720 11,019 10,889 8,503 9,088 9,331 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,660 124,811 119,000 10,053 10,409 8,953 10,478 10,330 ... countries
Balance + 5,683 + 3,586 + 6,721 + 966 + 480 − 450 − 1,390 − 999 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 47,875 48,933 47,323 4,250 4,216 3,257 3,875 3,773 ...
Imports 36,996 37,775 38,211 3,532 3,420 2,601 3,172 3,391 ...
Balance + 10,879 + 11,158 + 9,112 + 718 + 796 + 657 + 704 + 383 ...
II Exports 308,193 340,980 342,492 30,408 30,097 26,979 26,868 28,102 ... Non-European
Imports 279,653 276,620 262,465 23,406 21,665 19,298 22,557 20,731 ... countries
Balance + 28,541 + 64,360 + 80,027 + 7,002 + 8,432 + 7,681 + 4,310 + 7,371 ...
Exports 20,717 21,920 22,047 1,745 1,642 1,758 1,582 1,850 ... 1 Africa
Imports 21,944 24,145 22,865 1,908 1,697 1,529 1,775 1,640 ...
Balance − 1,227 − 2,224 − 817 − 164 − 55 + 228 − 193 + 211 ...
Exports 110,424 128,703 130,924 12,082 11,897 9,323 10,286 10,989 ... 2 America
Imports 80,568 80,549 74,982 6,942 6,374 5,586 5,771 5,982 ...
Balance + 29,856 + 48,154 + 55,942 + 5,139 + 5,523 + 3,737 + 4,515 + 5,007 ...
of which
Exports 73,776 86,971 88,375 8,449 7,974 6,431 7,223 7,634 ... United States
Imports 48,531 51,070 48,497 4,330 4,190 3,492 3,754 4,138 ...
Balance + 25,244 + 35,901 + 39,878 + 4,119 + 3,784 + 2,939 + 3,469 + 3,496 ...
Exports 167,574 179,630 179,539 15,733 15,735 15,190 14,313 14,466 ... 3 Asia
Imports 173,115 167,873 161,258 14,349 13,373 11,968 14,717 12,898 ...
Balance − 5,541 + 11,757 + 18,281 + 1,383 + 2,362 + 3,222 − 404 + 1,568 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,711 32,503 32,854 2,928 3,349 3,214 2,276 2,835 ...
Imports 8,874 8,134 8,647 837 664 754 663 663 ...
Balance + 19,837 + 24,369 + 24,207 + 2,090 + 2,684 + 2,460 + 1,613 + 2,173 ...
Japan Exports 15,115 17,138 17,125 1,588 1,515 1,440 1,608 1,368 ...
Imports 23,595 21,910 19,487 1,679 1,698 1,417 1,619 1,485 ...
Balance − 8,480 − 4,772 − 2,361 − 91 − 184 + 23 − 11 − 117 ...
Exports 64,863 66,746 67,025 5,936 5,890 5,371 5,644 5,401 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,528 78,529 73,557 6,681 6,171 5,572 6,923 6,012 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 14,665 − 11,783 − 6,531 − 745 − 282 − 200 − 1,279 − 611 ...
Exports 41,569 45,651 46,042 3,936 3,760 3,719 3,597 3,517 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,546 37,428 36,632 3,269 3,054 2,631 3,337 2,813 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 2,023 + 8,223 + 9,410 + 668 + 706 + 1,088 + 260 + 703 ...
Exports 9,479 10,727 9,982 849 823 707 687 797 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,026 4,054 3,361 206 221 214 295 212 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,453 + 6,672 + 6,621 + 643 + 602 + 493 + 392 + 586 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Latvia. 1Including fuel and other supplies Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2009 − 7,220 − 33,341 + 7,048 + 4,320 + 154 + 2,644 + 11,955 − 1,261 + 3,062 + 872 + 58,484
2010 + 337 − 32,775 + 8,119 + 4,305 + 3,174 + 2,863 + 14,650 − 1,158 + 3,266 + 1,557 + 53,2792011 + 3,353 − 33,755 + 9,050 + 4,081 + 3,544 + 2,939 + 17,493 − 1,207 + 3,554 + 1,787 + 68,7422012 + 3,289 − 33,566 + 9,133 + 5,133 + 4,119 + 3,117 + 15,353 − 1,333 + 2,434 + 2,594 + 73,7832013 + 2,400 − 33,646 + 8,322 + 4,775 + 7,073 + 3,063 + 12,814 − 701 + 1,231 + 2,096 + 74,825
2012          Q3 − 5,830 − 14,963 + 2,474 + 2,007 + 1,340 + 778 + 2,534 − 403 + 515 − 186 + 21,617
         Q4 + 4,408 − 5,678 + 2,060 + 1,101 + 1,884 + 738 + 4,303 − 320 + 782 + 1,455 + 22,150
2013          Q1 + 48 − 5,040 + 1,844 + 703 + 964 + 802 + 774 − 300 + 173 + 1,003 + 20,753
         Q2 + 1,276 − 8,114 + 2,225 + 707 + 1,833 + 800 + 3,825 − 367 + 275 + 446 + 11,849         Q3 − 5,118 − 15,239 + 2,191 + 1,805 + 1,570 + 763 + 3,792 − 67 + 177 − 90 + 19,513         Q4 + 6,194 − 5,253 + 2,061 + 1,560 + 2,706 + 697 + 4,423 + 32 + 606 + 737 + 22,710
2014          Q1 
p + 4,566 − 4,893 + 1,829 + 574 + 1,230 + 747 + 5,078 − 797 + 18 + 986 + 18,605
2013          May − 287 − 2,738 + 772 + 191 + 605 + 262 + 621 − 83 + 108 + 148 + 3,465
         June + 668 − 3,689 + 693 + 236 + 759 + 266 + 2,404 − 134 + 98 + 150 + 6,005
         July − 1,753 − 3,950 + 841 + 263 + 519 + 262 + 312 − 26 + 106 − 30 + 6,802
         Aug − 3,353 − 6,198 + 585 + 517 + 753 + 236 + 752 − 20 − 46 − 31 + 6,692         Sep − 12 − 5,091 + 765 + 1,024 + 297 + 265 + 2,728 − 21 + 116 − 29 + 6,019
         Oct − 659 − 3,804 + 616 + 211 + 537 + 255 + 1,526 − 25 − 31 + 212 + 7,071
         Nov + 2,462 − 1,078 + 627 + 435 + 1,406 + 255 + 817 + 24 + 112 + 212 + 7,350         Dec + 4,391 − 371 + 817 + 914 + 763 + 187 + 2,081 + 33 + 526 + 313 + 8,289
2014          Jan + 1,734 − 1,483 + 538 + 139 + 221 + 251 + 2,069 − 306 + 50 + 331 + 5,331
         Feb + 1,656 − 1,181 + 624 + 22 + 556 + 240 + 1,395 − 210 − 3 + 327 + 5,888         Mar  
p + 1,176 − 2,229 + 667 + 414 + 453 + 257 + 1,614 − 281 − 30 + 327 + 7,386
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc. 5Wages and
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts from salaries. 
foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and other
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2009 − 33,191 − 18,822 − 19,037 − 16,573 + 215 − 14,370 − 2,995 − 11,375 + 28 − 1,704 + 1,732
2010 − 38,299 − 23,354 − 22,899 − 19,474 − 456 − 14,945 − 3,035 − 11,910 − 575 − 2,039 + 1,4642011 − 33,863 − 20,199 − 22,306 − 19,108 + 2,107 − 13,663 − 2,977 − 10,686 + 634 − 2,326 + 2,9592012 − 37,749 − 23,857 − 24,453 − 21,094 + 596 − 13,891 − 3,080 − 10,812 + 16 − 2,661 + 2,6772013 − 42,037 − 28,026 − 29,000 − 25,574 + 974 − 14,010 − 3,229 − 10,781 + 1,810 − 1,437 + 3,247
2012          Q3 − 9,397 − 6,027 − 5,530 − 5,033 − 497 − 3,370 − 770 − 2,600 + 59 − 556 + 616
         Q4 − 6,883 − 2,859 − 1,561 − 800 − 1,299 − 4,024 − 770 − 3,254 − 614 − 1,332 + 718
2013          Q1 − 15,959 − 12,736 − 12,500 − 11,141 − 235 − 3,223 − 807 − 2,416 + 387 − 306 + 693
         Q2 − 8,010 − 4,660 − 7,133 − 6,381 + 2,473 − 3,350 − 807 − 2,543 + 345 − 477 + 822         Q3 − 10,402 − 7,073 − 7,148 − 6,465 + 75 − 3,329 − 807 − 2,522 + 77 − 351 + 429         Q4 − 7,666 − 3,558 − 2,220 − 1,587 − 1,339 − 4,108 − 807 − 3,301 + 1,001 − 302 + 1,303
2014          Q1 
p − 15,716 − 12,910 − 12,889 − 11,817 − 20 − 2,806 − 863 − 1,943 + 1,817 − 21 + 1,837
2013          May − 2,446 − 1,211 − 2,170 − 2,057 + 958 − 1,234 − 269 − 965 + 109 − 140 + 248
         June − 2,969 − 1,974 − 2,377 − 2,160 + 403 − 995 − 269 − 726 + 54 − 182 + 236
         July − 3,483 − 2,372 − 2,231 − 2,054 − 141 − 1,110 − 269 − 841 + 39 − 163 + 202
         Aug − 3,798 − 2,734 − 2,599 − 2,203 − 135 − 1,064 − 269 − 794 − 77 − 151 + 74         Sep − 3,121 − 1,966 − 2,318 − 2,208 + 351 − 1,155 − 269 − 886 + 116 − 37 + 153
         Oct − 3,098 − 2,084 − 1,669 − 1,524 − 415 − 1,014 − 269 − 745 + 527 − 8 + 535
         Nov − 2,656 − 1,924 − 1,419 − 1,353 − 505 − 731 − 269 − 462 + 270 − + 270         Dec − 1,912 + 450 + 869 + 1,290 − 418 − 2,363 − 269 − 2,094 + 204 − 294 + 498
2014          Jan − 4,782 − 3,776 − 3,928 − 3,236 + 151 − 1,006 − 288 − 718 + 1,009 − + 1,009
         Feb − 7,443 − 6,548 − 6,433 − 6,125 − 115 − 896 − 288 − 608 + 446 − 11 + 457         Mar  
p − 3,491 − 2,586 − 2,529 − 2,456 − 57 − 905 − 288 − 617 + 362 − 9 + 372
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 p Jan Feb Mar p
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 245,685 − 355,139 − 15,765 − 37,135 + 17,094 + 30,595 − 88,247 − 60,103 − 17,552 − 10,592
1 Direct investment 1 − 58,247 − 61,958 − 43,344 − 4,825 − 8,192 − 9,506 − 22,698 − 7,417 − 10,514 − 4,767
Equity capital − 32,898 − 37,346 − 13,158 − 5,937 − 2,338 + 1,989 − 8,502 − 5,027 − 2,187 − 1,287
Reinvested earnings 2 − 31,349 − 31,692 − 30,034 − 5,101 − 8,671 − 6,108 − 11,349 − 4,162 − 4,038 − 3,149
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 6,000 + 7,080 − 152 + 6,214 + 2,817 − 5,387 − 2,848 + 1,772 − 4,289 − 332
2 Portfolio investment − 21,627 − 109,814 − 140,964 − 39,133 − 32,642 − 23,660 − 40,603 − 8,939 − 4,058 − 27,607
Shares 3 + 2,713 − 11,736 − 19,206 − 3,263 − 8,667 + 2,861 − 3,443 − 2,331 + 3,698 − 4,810
Mutual fund shares 4 − 1,277 − 21,696 − 31,315 − 4,097 − 7,694 − 8,339 − 9,686 − 2,435 − 4,312 − 2,939
Bonds and notes 5 − 18,272 − 76,487 − 86,689 − 32,010 − 16,610 − 17,704 − 22,578 − 2,454 − 714 − 19,410
Money market instruments − 4,791 + 105 − 3,754 + 237 + 329 − 478 − 4,895 − 1,718 − 2,730 − 447
3 Financial derivatives 6 − 27,749 − 16,268 − 16,100 − 5,700 − 1,154 − 5,455 − 4,470 − 2,149 − 1,930 − 391
4 Other investment − 135,226 − 165,802 + 185,481 + 12,593 + 58,296 + 70,681 − 21,041 − 41,973 − 1,948 + 22,880
MFIs 7,8 + 44,069 + 62,182 + 56,741 + 525 + 49,718 + 6,482 − 31,746 − 46,823 − 3,831 + 18,908
Long-term − 12,958 + 47,867 + 50,524 + 13,409 + 13,222 + 12,354 − 3,222 + 1,934 − 151 − 5,005
Short-term + 57,027 + 14,315 + 6,217 − 12,884 + 36,496 − 5,872 − 28,524 − 48,757 − 3,680 + 23,913
Enterprises and households − 20,161 + 14,292 − 9,743 + 1,573 + 6,891 + 9,442 − 27,825 − 5,666 − 648 − 21,511
Long-term + 5,615 − 750 − 1,074 + 473 − 1,214 − 1,522 − 119 + 984 − 515 − 588
Short-term 7 − 25,776 + 15,043 − 8,668 + 1,100 + 8,104 + 10,964 − 27,706 − 6,649 − 133 − 20,923
General government − 21,061 − 49,597 − 7,037 − 2,751 − 3,465 − 5,411 − 2,120 + 147 + 1,406 − 3,673
Long-term − 2,232 − 49,608 − 15,786 − 8,877 − 3,054 − 3,907 + 4,424 + 275 + 2,781 + 1,368
Short-term 7 − 18,829 + 10 + 8,749 + 6,126 − 411 − 1,504 − 6,544 − 128 − 1,375 − 5,041
Bundesbank − 138,073 − 192,679 + 145,519 + 13,246 + 5,153 + 60,167 + 40,651 + 10,369 + 1,125 + 29,157
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 2,836 − 1,297 − 838 − 72 + 784 − 1,464 + 565 + 375 + 898 − 708
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 70,956 + 132,434 − 234,834 − 33,303 − 81,841 − 105,967 + 22,074 + 58,383 − 8,444 − 27,864
1 Direct investment 1 + 42,670 + 10,276 + 20,125 − 9,366 + 4,239 + 19,501 − 1,246 − 1,951 + 4,270 − 3,565
Equity capital + 16,226 + 5,059 + 2,502 − 2,235 + 748 + 5,691 − 241 + 575 − 313 − 503
Reinvested earnings 2 − 701 + 6,039 + 3,565 − 1,221 + 691 + 187 + 3,601 + 1,321 + 1,495 + 785
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 27,146 − 822 + 14,059 − 5,911 + 2,801 + 13,623 − 4,606 − 3,847 + 3,088 − 3,846
2 Portfolio investment + 49,581 + 45,076 − 24,002 − 13,185 − 5,721 − 10,326 + 8,884 + 3,852 + 19,905 − 14,872
Shares 
3 − 11,325 + 1,094 + 5,328 + 2,533 + 3,975 + 4,180 − 5,315 − 7,624 + 5,942 − 3,634
Mutual fund shares + 7,095 − 3,799 + 6,001 − 789 + 1,223 + 5,351 − 80 + 698 + 20 − 798
Bonds and notes 5 + 51,088 + 52,220 − 12,290 − 18,506 − 5,274 + 10,945 + 7,454 − 4,367 + 14,627 − 2,806
Money market instruments + 2,723 − 4,438 − 23,040 + 3,577 − 5,645 − 30,801 + 6,825 + 15,145 − 684 − 7,636
3 Other investment − 21,295 + 77,082 − 230,958 − 10,752 − 80,359 − 115,142 + 14,436 + 56,482 − 32,619 − 9,427
MFIs 7,8 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 158,453 − 14,206 − 65,025 − 70,382 + 32,528 + 54,887 − 18,161 − 4,199
Long-term − 18,368 − 10,250 − 16,955 − 2,544 − 2,678 − 1,586 − 3,213 − 3,921 − 2,486 + 3,194
Short-term − 78,340 + 61,758 − 141,498 − 11,662 − 62,347 − 68,796 + 35,741 + 58,809 − 15,675 − 7,393
Enterprises and households + 24,921 − 3,588 − 19,516 + 6,308 − 4,087 − 31,914 + 8,583 + 5,736 − 1,747 + 4,594
Long-term − 11,780 − 6,927 − 22,175 − 5,257 − 4,445 − 8,137 − 3,569 − 998 − 2,153 − 418
Short-term 7 + 36,701 + 3,339 + 2,659 + 11,565 + 357 − 23,777 + 12,152 + 6,734 + 406 + 5,012
General government + 18,539 − 30,775 − 3,714 + 8,333 − 8,062 − 4,127 − 3,909 − 890 − 2,555 − 464
Long-term + 5,104 + 36,230 + 9,441 + 6,122 + 1,894 + 656 − 1,776 − 1,824 + 122 − 73
Short-term 7 + 13,436 − 67,005 − 13,155 + 2,210 − 9,955 − 4,783 − 2,134 + 934 − 2,677 − 392
Bundesbank + 31,952 + 59,936 − 49,275 − 11,187 − 3,185 − 8,720 − 22,766 − 3,251 − 10,157 − 9,358
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 174,729 − 222,705 − 250,599 − 70,438 − 64,747 − 75,372 − 66,173 − 1,720 − 25,996 − 38,456
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including rived from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5Up to and including possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
2012, without accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, including change in reserve assets. 
and financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly de-

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between Marchbalance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,1062012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,5062013 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2013          Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 20,907 27,473 50 557,391 56,280 70,398 691,332         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 21,110 28,388 50 512,734 54,154 53,965 662,902
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 20,589 27,165 50 511,610 54,225 43,789 674,528         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 20,586 27,850 50 482,453 54,440 34,434 653,123
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 20,950 27,534 50 490,066 52,792 53,041 639,916
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013 780,219 280,295 499,924 319,864 180,060 164,767 15,293 916,415 142,433 773,982 611,659 162,323 95,260 67,063
2013          Oct 785,639 292,066 493,573 313,150 180,423 164,886 15,537 933,886 160,176 773,710 608,772 164,938 95,315 69,623
         Nov 792,236 290,570 501,666 316,214 185,452 169,885 15,567 932,475 162,642 769,833 605,310 164,523 95,812 68,711         Dec 780,219 280,295 499,924 319,864 180,060 164,767 15,293 916,415 142,433 773,982 611,659 162,323 95,260 67,063
2014          Jan 781,158 287,312 493,846 318,770 175,076 159,824 15,252 915,341 149,655 765,686 610,015 155,671 88,275 67,396
         Feb 788,014 288,560 499,454 322,367 177,087 162,230 14,857 919,203 143,531 775,672 615,749 159,923 90,283 69,640         Mar 817,202 307,559 509,643 326,530 183,113 168,171 14,942 926,968 147,767 779,201 617,703 161,498 94,794 66,704
Industrial countries 1
 
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013 690,340 276,963 413,377 291,097 122,280 108,838 13,442 829,534 141,063 688,471 574,254 114,217 79,524 34,693
2013          Oct 694,910 288,099 406,811 284,397 122,414 108,945 13,469 847,968 158,631 689,337 573,129 116,208 80,619 35,589         Nov 699,512 286,240 413,272 287,178 126,094 112,462 13,632 846,787 160,852 685,935 570,094 115,841 80,389 35,452         Dec 690,340 276,963 413,377 291,097 122,280 108,838 13,442 829,534 141,063 688,471 574,254 114,217 79,524 34,693
2014          Jan 691,988 284,012 407,976 289,546 118,430 105,175 13,255 829,875 148,290 681,585 572,729 108,856 73,816 35,040
         Feb 698,225 285,309 412,916 293,061 119,855 106,774 13,081 832,534 142,111 690,423 579,008 111,415 75,551 35,864         Mar 725,730 303,412 422,318 296,832 125,486 112,343 13,143 840,907 146,308 694,599 580,794 113,805 79,234 34,571
EU member states 1
 
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013 582,602 262,525 320,077 233,074 87,003 76,438 10,565 694,404 126,314 568,090 488,571 79,519 53,187 26,332
2013          Oct 587,412 273,218 314,194 226,596 87,598 77,207 10,391 715,489 146,426 569,063 487,361 81,702 54,398 27,304         Nov 593,005 271,654 321,351 230,198 91,153 80,436 10,717 713,716 147,484 566,232 484,065 82,167 55,081 27,086         Dec 582,602 262,525 320,077 233,074 87,003 76,438 10,565 694,404 126,314 568,090 488,571 79,519 53,187 26,332
2014          Jan 587,684 268,794 318,890 233,571 85,319 74,991 10,328 700,465 136,463 564,002 487,660 76,342 49,661 26,681
         Feb 594,118 269,999 324,119 237,452 86,667 76,407 10,260 700,601 130,594 570,007 491,074 78,933 51,780 27,153         Mar 618,808 288,192 330,616 240,234 90,382 80,096 10,286 709,172 133,358 575,814 494,374 81,440 54,701 26,739
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013 422,992 195,834 227,158 171,157 56,001 49,799 6,202 587,628 99,689 487,939 434,631 53,308 36,467 16,841
2013          Oct 427,683 206,283 221,400 165,590 55,810 49,529 6,281 611,956 120,422 491,534 436,897 54,637 36,748 17,889         Nov 430,406 203,503 226,903 168,543 58,360 51,865 6,495 608,590 122,289 486,301 431,182 55,119 37,628 17,491         Dec 422,992 195,834 227,158 171,157 56,001 49,799 6,202 587,628 99,689 487,939 434,631 53,308 36,467 16,841
2014          Jan 425,407 199,154 226,253 170,982 55,271 48,987 6,284 594,488 108,446 486,042 435,530 50,512 33,383 17,129
         Feb 433,128 202,913 230,215 174,178 56,037 49,823 6,214 595,520 104,594 490,926 438,735 52,191 34,745 17,446         Mar 446,119 212,228 233,891 175,981 57,910 51,762 6,148 600,162 105,529 494,633 440,633 54,000 36,597 17,403
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013 89,879 3,332 86,547 28,767 57,780 55,929 1,851 86,881 1,370 85,511 37,405 48,106 15,736 32,370
2013          Oct 90,729 3,967 86,762 28,753 58,009 55,941 2,068 85,918 1,545 84,373 35,643 48,730 14,696 34,034         Nov 92,724 4,330 88,394 29,036 59,358 57,423 1,935 85,688 1,790 83,898 35,216 48,682 15,423 33,259         Dec 89,879 3,332 86,547 28,767 57,780 55,929 1,851 86,881 1,370 85,511 37,405 48,106 15,736 32,370
2014          Jan 89,170 3,300 85,870 29,224 56,646 54,649 1,997 85,466 1,365 84,101 37,286 46,815 14,459 32,356
         Feb 89,789 3,251 86,538 29,306 57,232 55,456 1,776 86,669 1,420 85,249 36,741 48,508 14,732 33,776         Mar 91,472 4,147 87,325 29,698 57,627 55,828 1,799 86,061 1,459 84,602 36,909 47,693 15,560 32,133
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia. 3All countries that are not
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not regarded as industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Niederländische
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- Antillen; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao andgures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2011 St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
         Feb 1.2951 1.3477 8.3282 7.4598 124.40 7.4232 8.5083 1.2298 0.86250 1.3359         Mar 1.2537 1.3285 8.0599 7.4553 122.99 7.4863 8.3470 1.2266 0.85996 1.2964
         Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
         May 1.3133 1.3257 7.9715 7.4536 131.13 7.5589 8.5725 1.2418 0.84914 1.2982         June 1.3978 1.3596 8.0905 7.4576 128.40 7.7394 8.6836 1.2322 0.85191 1.3189
         July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
         Aug 1.4742 1.3853 8.1477 7.4580 130.34 7.9386 8.7034 1.2338 0.85904 1.3310         Sep 1.4379 1.3817 8.1690 7.4579 132.41 7.9725 8.6758 1.2338 0.84171 1.3348
         Oct 1.4328 1.4128 8.3226 7.4592 133.32 8.1208 8.7479 1.2316 0.84720 1.3635
         Nov 1.4473 1.4145 8.2221 7.4587 134.97 8.2055 8.8802 1.2316 0.83780 1.3493         Dec 1.5243 1.4580 8.3248 7.4602 141.68 8.4053 8.9597 1.2245 0.83639 1.3704
2014          Jan 1.5377 1.4884 8.2368 7.4614 141.47 8.3927 8.8339 1.2317 0.82674 1.3610
         Feb 1.5222 1.5094 8.3062 7.4622 139.35 8.3562 8.8721 1.2212 0.82510 1.3659         Mar 1.5217 1.5352 8.5332 7.4638 141.48 8.2906 8.8666 1.2177 0.83170 1.3823
         Apr 1.4831 1.5181 8.5984 7.4656 141.62 8.2506 9.0329 1.2189 0.82520 1.3813
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2014
XII  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-39  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
25 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
25 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.6 86.0 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.2 85.2 90.8 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.5 84.5 90.4 87.1 91.3 96.0 85.7 89.9 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.3 89.5 87.8 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.2 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.4 100.5 98.8 106.8 101.6 95.2 94.0 97.2 94.6 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.4 102.3 111.4 105.2 95.5 92.9 99.6 94.9 98.4 97.9 98.2
2005 102.9 103.7 101.4 100.3 109.4 102.7 94.4 91.5 98.8 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.7 100.6 99.2 109.4 102.0 93.3 90.1 98.4 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.7
2007 106.2 106.4 102.6 100.9 112.8 104.0 94.2 89.2 102.4 91.5 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.5 103.9 103.7 117.0 106.0 94.3 87.8 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.7 97.0
2009 110.6 109.1 104.8 106.0 119.8 106.9 93.9 87.9 104.0 90.5 101.7 97.8 97.3
2010 103.6 101.6 96.7 98.7 111.5 98.2 91.7 87.7 97.8 87.2 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 95.1 p 96.7 112.2 97.7 91.4 87.6 97.5 86.6 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.9 95.6 89.8 p 91.4 107.1 92.9 89.6 87.4 92.5 84.2 96.0 90.3 88.8
2013 101.7 98.9 p 93.2 p 94.6 112.0 p 96.2 p 91.8 p 87.8 p 98.0 p 86.1 98.3 92.1 p 90.8
2010          Nov 103.7 101.2 95.9 98.4 111.8 97.7 91.6 87.7 97.6 87.0 98.7 93.6 92.0
         Dec 101.6 99.2 109.4 95.6 97.9 92.7 90.9
2011          Jan 101.4 99.0 109.4 95.6 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.9 94.7 96.7 110.7 96.6 91.5 87.8 97.3 86.7 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.4 98.2 98.6 93.5 92.0
         Apr 105.8 103.4 114.1 99.8 99.5 94.3 92.8
         May 104.8 102.1 96.9 99.3 113.3 98.7 92.4 87.6 100.0 87.6 98.9 93.7 92.1
         June 104.9 102.2 113.5 98.8 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.1 112.4 97.8 98.6 93.3 91.7
         Aug 103.8 100.9 94.9 97.3 113.0 98.1 91.3 87.5 97.3 86.5 98.1 93.0 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.1 97.5 97.8 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.9 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 93.6 p 93.5 112.1 97.4 90.6 87.3 95.5 85.7 97.6 92.7 91.5
         Dec 100.8 98.2 110.3 95.8 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.4 108.1 93.8 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.3 91.4 p 93.3 108.4 94.3 89.9 87.3 93.8 84.7 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.9 97.4 108.7 94.4 96.9 91.2 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.5 94.3 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.1 95.7 90.1 p 92.2 107.3 93.1 89.6 87.4 92.7 84.4 95.9 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.4 93.2 104.3 90.7 94.8 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.2 93.1 88.0 p 90.0 104.5 90.6 88.9 87.4 90.7 83.5 95.0 89.0 87.5
         Sep 97.2 95.0 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.3 92.9 95.9 90.1 88.6
         Nov 97.2 94.9 89.6 p 90.2 106.7 92.3 89.7 87.4 93.0 84.3 95.8 89.8 88.4
         Dec 98.7 96.3 108.3 93.6 96.6 90.6 89.2
2013          Jan 100.4 98.0 109.9 94.9 97.4 91.5 89.9
         Feb 101.6 99.1 92.5 p 94.3 111.1 95.8 91.0 87.4 96.6 85.6 98.1 92.0 90.4
         Mar 100.2 97.9 109.5 94.4 97.7 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 97.9 109.8 94.4 97.5 91.2 89.5
         May 100.5 98.0 p 92.9 p 94.2 110.0 94.6 91.7 87.8 97.7 86.0 98.1 91.7 89.9
         June 101.6 98.9 112.0 96.2 98.2 92.1 90.8
         July 101.5 98.9 112.0 96.2 98.4 92.1 90.8
         Aug 102.2 99.5 p 93.3 p 94.7 113.4 97.3 91.9 87.8 98.3 86.1 98.5 92.4 91.3
         Sep 102.0 99.1 113.3 97.0 98.5 92.3 91.3
         Oct 102.8 99.7 114.2 97.4 98.8 92.6 91.5
         Nov 102.6 99.5 p 94.1 p 95.4 114.2 97.3 p 92.5 p 88.1 p 99.5 p 86.8 99.0 92.8 91.8
         Dec 103.9 100.7 115.8 p 98.6 99.2 93.2 p 92.3
2014          Jan 103.4 p 100.3 115.9 p 98.6 99.1 p 93.0 p 92.3
         Feb 103.6 p 100.5 ... ... 116.3 p 98.9 ... ... ... ... 99.0 p 93.1 p 92.4
         Mar 104.6 p 101.3 117.5 p 99.6 99.3 p 93.5 p 92.9
         Apr 104.5 p 101.1 117.0 p 99.1 p 99.3 p 93.5 p 92.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Hungary, Japan, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, EER-39 group (see footnote 2). Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis-tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2013 see the index attached 
to the January 2014 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2013
–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
–
 Household wealth and finances in Germany: r
esults of the Bundesbank survey
–
 Household finances, saving and inequality: an international perspective – conference 
held by the Bundesbank and the Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Policy
–
 Implementing Basel  III in Eur opean and na -
tional lawJuly 2013–
 Eur
opean Single Supervisory Mechanism for 
banks – a first step on the road to a banking union
–
 Estimating yield curves in the wake of the 
financial crisis
–
 Differences in money and credit growth in the euro area and in individual euro-
 ar
ea 
countries
August 2013–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
September 2013–
 The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2012
–
 The development of government interest 
 expenditure in Germany
–
 F
orecasting models in short-
 term 
business 
cycle analysis – a workshop report
October 2013–
 The determinants and regional dependen -
cies of house price increases since 2010
–
 Macroeconomic approaches to assessing 
price competitivenessDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
79•

– International cooperation in the area of 
 financial sector policy – the Financial Stabil-
ity Board (FSB)
November 2013–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
December 2013–
 Outlook for the German economy – macr
o-
economic projections for 2014 and 2015
–
 Outlook 
for European retail payments
–
 German enterprises‘ profitability and finan -
cing in 2012
–
 The financial system in transition: the new 
importance of repo markets
January 2014–
 Adjustment pr
ocesses in the member states 
of economic and monetary union
February 2014–
 The 
current economic situation in Germany
March 2014–
 The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implica-tions
–
 German 
balance of payments in 2013
–
 Manufacturing enterprises in Germany and 
their vulnerability to crises – findings of a risk 
analysis using annual financial statement 
data
April 2014–
 On the reliability of international organisa -
tions’ estimates of the output gap
–
 Implications of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
operations during the financial crisis
–
 Some approaches to explaining the behav -
iour of inflation since the last financial and 
economic crisis
May 2014–
 The 
current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh-rungsunion, April 2005
 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 2008
For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
80•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20142, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 007 to 
2012, June 20132
 5 Hochger echnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von
 
2006 bis 2012, December 20132, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2010 bis 
2011, May 20142, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments 
statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20141, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
01/ 2014  
The distribution of debt across euro area coun-tries: the role of individual characteristics, insti-tutions and credit conditions
02/
 
2014  
Filling in the blanks: network structure and 
interbank contagion03/
 
2014  
Investor fears and risk premia for rare events04/
 
2014  
Cash management and payment choices: a 
simulation model with international compari -
sons
05/ 
2014  
Earnings baths by bank CEOs during turnovers06/
 
2014  
Lucas paradox and allocation puzzle – is the 
euro area different?07/
 
2014  
Wealth shocks, credit-supply shocks, and asset 
allocation: evidence from household and firm 
portfolios08/2014  
The financial accelerator and market-based 
debt instruments: a role for maturities
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
81•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kr editwesen, January 
20083 2 a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsver ordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
tained in the German originals are available in English.2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2014  
82•

