Monthly Report
November 2014
Vol 66 
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14 60431 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Postal address 
Postfach 10 06 02 60006 Frankfurt am Main Germany
Tel
 +4
9 69 9566 0
Fax
 +4
9 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) 
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 14 November 2014.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected 
statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. The statistical data ar
e also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Fr
ankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  1 8 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German -
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The global growth forecast revisions in recent years
 
...........................................................  
12
Labour market developments in Spain, Portugal and Ireland since the beginning of the 
cyclical recovery
 .................................................................................................................  
22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  27
Money market management and liquidity needs
 
................................................................  
28
Excess liquidity and short-
 term 
money market rates
 
...........................................................  
32
Differences in dynamics of loans to non-
 financial  c
orporations in Germany and France
 
..... 
36
An international comparison of the importance of bank credit as a debt financing 
 
instrument for non-
 
financial  
corporations
 
...........................................................................  
42
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  47
Structure and activity of foreign affiliates of German  investors: 
Results of outward FATS
 
.... 
55
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  59
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  68Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1•
Key economic data for the euro area
 
..................................................................................  
5•
Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
............................................................................  
8•
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
............................................................  
16•
Banks
 
..................................................................................................................................  
20•
Minimum reserves
 
...............................................................................................................  
42•
Interest rates
 
.......................................................................................................................  
43•
Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
..........................................................................  
48•
Capital market
 
....................................................................................................................  
50•
Financial accounts
 
...............................................................................................................  
54•
Public finances in Germany
 
.................................................................................................  
58•
Economic conditions in Germany
 
........................................................................................  
65•
External sector
 
....................................................................................................................  
74•
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83•
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p
 
Provisional
pe
 P
artly estimated
r
 
Revised
…
 Data 
available at a later date
.
 Data 
unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0
 Less 
than 0.5 but more than nil
–
 
Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
4

The current economic situation 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
5

Overview
German economy slacker 
amid normal capacity 
 
utilisation
In the third quarter of 2014 the global econ -
omy probably remained on the path of moder -
ate growth it had begun to trace in the second 
quarter after overcoming the negative excep -
tional factors from the start of the year. As long 
as no major disruptions occur, the growth rate 
expected for 2014 as a whole compared with 
2013 is unchanged at 3¼% on the basis of pur -
chasing power parities or 2½% based on mar -
ket exchange rates. In contrast to the expect -
ation that prevailed in the second quarter, however, the growth rate failed to accelerate appreciably. The moderate increase in global 
gross domestic product (GDP) in the third quar -
ter was attributable to industrial countries as well as to emerging markets and developing 
countries. Of the major industrial countries, the 
United States and the United Kingdom re -
corded relatively strong expansion vis-  à-  vis the 
second quarter
. The euro area grew only mod-
erately, as it had between April and June. This muted performance was attributable to persist-
ently weak growth in parts of the euro area, 
but also to the sanctions and countermeasures 
imposed in connection with the Ukraine con-
flict as well as deteriorating sentiment in the 
wake of the crises in eastern Europe and other 
regions of the world.
The moderate global upturn appears to be con-
tinuing in the current quarter. Within the group 
of industrialised countries, the US and UK 
economies are likely to remain on a marked up-
ward growth trajectory, while the Japanese 
economy seems to have regained momentum. 
In the euro area, by contrast, the slacker 
growth dynamics probably continued into the 
start of the fourth quarter. If global growth is 
to accelerate in 2015 in line with the inter -
national institutions’ forecasts, momentum will need to strengthen a little after the turn of the year. The economies of oil-  consuming coun -
tries should be buoyed by both the ongoing expansionary monetary policy stance and the
 
steep drop in the price of oil, providing it lasts. 
A global economic view, however, also needs 
to factor in the retarding effects from oil-  
pr
oducing countries, which are for the most 
part currently experiencing falling revenues.
Developments on the international financial 
markets in recent months have been shaped by geopolitical tensions and less sanguine expect-
ations for global growth. The differing eco -
nomic and inflation outlooks in the various cur -
rency areas are reflected in the disparate mon-
etary policy approaches of the respective cen-
tral banks. Thus the ECB Governing Council 
adopted additional expansionary monetary pol-
icy measures in September in order to safe -
guard price stability in the euro area. The same applies to the Bank of Japan, which announced in October that it would further accelerate the 
expansion of the monetary base. By contrast, 
the US Federal Reserve phased out its quantita-tive easing programme at the end of October, 
as most market participants had expected. In this setting, long-
 d
ated government bond 
yields fell markedly on the major bond markets 
from the end of June onwards. By contrast, international stock markets showed divergent 
developments against the backdrop of tempor -
ary heightened volatility. European equities, in 
particular, recorded losses, while share indices 
in the United States and Japan made gains. On 
the foreign exchange markets, exchange rates 
moved in favour of the US dollar. The euro, by 
contrast, depreciated by approximately 3½% in 
trade-  weighted terms compar ed with the end 
of June. Its value against the US dollar slid 
sharply by 9%.
On 4  September 2014, the ECB Governing Council adopted an additional package of monetary policy measures against the back -
ground of slackening growth and a persistently Global economy
Financial 
 
markets
Monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
6

subdued inflation outlook in the euro area. To-
gether with the decisions taken in June 2014, 
these measures are intended to help anchor 
medium and long-
 term inflation expectations
 
and to bring the inflation rate back up to a level 
closer to 2%. As part of its package of meas -
ures, the Governing Council lowered policy 
rates by 10 basis points to 0.05% for its main 
refinancing operations, -0.20% for the deposit facility and 0.30% for the marginal lending fa-cility.
In addition to lowering interest rates, the ECB 
Governing Council also adopted purchase pro-grammes for asset-
 backed securities (ABS) and 
covered bonds. These measures are intended 
to improve monetary policy transmission, sup -
port the provision of credit to the real economy 
and contribute to an even more accommoda -
tive monetary policy stance. It is expected that 
these purchase programmes, along with the targeted longer-
 t
erm refinancing operations 
(TLTROs) adopted in June with a maturity of up to four years, will significantly expand the Euro-
system’s balance sheet towards the level seen 
at the start of 2012. However, the chief factor determining the monetary policy course going forward is and remains the inflation outlook.
Economic output in Germany rose only margin-
ally in the third quarter of 2014. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real GDP edged up by just 0.1% on the preced-
ing three-
 month 
period in seasonal and calen-
dar- adjusted terms fol lowing a first-  quarter  
boost from exceptional effects (+0.8%) and a 
second-  quarter countermovement (-0 .1%). The 
underlying growth path of the German econ -
omy has therefore been flattening off since the beginning of the year. In the reporting period, 
in particular, the slackening momentum was, 
however, more pronounced on the supply side than on the final demand side. Aggregate pro-
duction capacity utilisation remained within 
normal bounds.
The cyclical slowdown emanated from the pro-
duction sector. Industrial orders have not been growing since the beginning of the year, and business sentiment has deteriorated percep -
tibly. Industry already began scaling back its 
output slightly in the third quarter in anticipa -
tion of declining orders, even though it was 
able to increase its sales of goods again to both 
euro-  ar ea and non-  eur o-  ar ea countries, and 
the expansion of exports covered a wide range 
of goods. Goods imports in the third quarter 
largely made up for the losses sustained in the previous three months.
Investment in machinery and equipment in the 
summer half-
 year failed to continue the r
ecov-
ery trend that had started to emerge in the pre-
ceding winter half-  year . Enterprises anticipate 
that demand can be comfortably met using the available domestic capacities. This is consistent 
with the picture that loans to domestic non-  
financial corporations showed a perceptible de-
cline in the reporting quarter. Following the weather-
 induced upswings and 
downswings 
seen in the first half of the year, the construc-
tion sector was unable to match the higher 
level of activity seen in 2013. By contrast, busi-ness activity in the consumption-
 r
elated service 
sectors fared better. This was driven primarily 
by the positive sentiment of households, which was boosted by strong income growth and the persistently favourable labour market situation. 
Private consumption expanded strongly in the 
third quarter of 2014.
The ongoing buoyancy on the labour market 
has so far not been dampened by the slacken-
ing economic momentum. The growth in em -
ployment in the third quarter was once again 
solely attributable to the increase in regular 
jobs subject to social security contributions. Ac-cording to the available information, the influx of workers from other European countries over 
the course of the year so far seems to have 
been on a similar level to that recorded in 2013. 
Given the concurrent significant rise in the number of refugees and asylum seekers, the 
migration surplus for 2014 will, in all likelihood, be considerably higher than last year. The sea-
sonally adjusted number of persons registered German 
 
economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
7

as unemployed has been hovering at around 
2.9 million for the past six months. The un -
employment rate has consequently remained 
unchanged at 6.7%. The labour market is likely 
to remain stable despite the subdued cyclical 
outlook. Following the introduction of legisla -
tion on 1  July 2014 allowing long-  term con -
tributors to the statutory pension insurance sys-tem to retire prematurely at the age of 63 yet still draw a full pension, the marked rise in the 
number of vacancies cannot, however, be in -
terpreted as being purely of a cyclical nature.
The average increase in negotiated rates of pay 
in the second half of 2014 has to date not been 
quite as high as in the first six months of the year. Collective wages and salaries, including 
one- off payments and fringe benefits, went up  
by 2.8% year on year in the third quarter of 
2014, after rising by 3.3% in the second quarter.
Overall price developments in Germany were 
trending moderately upwards in the third quar -
ter of 2014. Although lower energy prices had 
a significant dampening impact on inflation, rising domestic cost trends gained in import -
ance on the back of the euro’s depreciation. As in the case of imports, the prices of intermedi-ate, capital and consumer goods at the domes-
tic producer level were moving upwards, and 
there was no further slowdown in price infla -
tion for construction services in the third quar -
ter. Not least owing to the cooling of the – in 
some cases – overheated regional property markets, prices for owner-
 occupied housing
 
are now rising only relatively moderately. The 
muted rise in consumer prices continued in the 
third quarter, although the prices of all larger 
components, excluding energy, were showing 
an upward trend. In October, however, season-ally adjusted consumer prices in Germany saw 
a perceptible month-  on-  month fal l (0.2%) for 
the first time in a long while. Despite this, the 
year-  on-  year incr ease in the consumer price 
index remained unchanged at 0.8% and de -
clined marginally to 0.7% as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices.The further deterioration in economic expect -
ations and the stagnation of new orders point to a rather sluggish course of economic devel-
opment in Germany until at least the end of 2014. Although global demand for goods is 
continuing to expand, it currently lacks strong 
stimuli. In addition, no marked recovery in im-
portant euro-  ar ea partner countries has yet 
materialised. Nonetheless, other external fac -
tors, such as the euro’s considerable depreci -
ation and the sharp fall in oil prices, could gr
adually boost economic activity. Given the 
favourable labour market situation, high levels 
of immigration and marked wage growth, the 
underlying domestic growth dynamics will re -
ceive continuing support from private con -
sumption. In the light of increased global risks 
together with uncertainty about the implica -
tions of some economic policy measures, there 
may be a delay before the recovery in corpor -
ate investment resumes.
The situation of public finances in Germany has 
remained relatively favourable this year. For the 
third consecutive year, general government is 
likely to achieve a broadly balanced budget and 
the debt ratio to decrease further. Although sharper growth in social security spending is placing a strain on the general government budget, interest expenditure is continuing to 
fall due to the extremely benign financing con-
ditions, and the Bundesbank’s dividend has 
risen significantly. However, at present, a deficit – albeit a small one – appears likely next year. This is largely because the social security funds 
are expected to run up considerable deficits, which will substantially erode their relatively 
high reserves. As things currently stand, the im-
pact of cyclical factors on the government 
budget will remain almost neutral this year and 
next, meaning that the cyclically adjusted bal -
ance will largely match the unadjusted balance.
Given the still high debt ratio and unfavourable 
demographic trends, Germany would be well 
advised to achieve a budget position that is at 
least structurally balanced in the medium term, 
too. In addition, central and state government Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
8

should build up sufficient safety margins vis-  à- 
vis the strict national deficit ceilings. Hence 
there is an ongoing need for consolidation. In 
view of the considerable uncertainties regarding 
global and European economic developments, 
however, it appears appropriate to initially 
maintain the fiscal policy course mapped out in 
the current plans. Not least given the social se-
curity funds’ dwindling reserves, the financial 
course of general government will feature a fis-
cal easing next year, though its impact on the 
fiscal balance will be partially masked by savings 
on interest expenditure. The automatic stabil -
isers should be allowed to operate freely. Thus, 
if economic activity were to pick up, a better budget outturn would be possible, whereas a downturn would result in cyclically induced higher deficits. However, an additional debt-
 
financed economic stimulus package would do little to benefit either Germany’s economic situ-ation or the rest of the euro area in view of the comparably small boost it could be expected to provide. There is enough leeway for fiscal policy 
measures aimed at strengthening the under -
lying conditions for growth without having to r
esort to borrowing by improving the budget 
structure and making government activities 
more cost-  effective. F or example, the infrastruc-ture can be better maintained and expanded as necessary without incurring new debt.
The draft central government budget for 2015, 
approved by the Federal Cabinet at the begin-
ning of July, envisaged an equal balance be -
tween revenue and expenditure without any 
new borrowing for the first time in four-  and-  a-  
half decades. Although the growth acceler -
ation foreseen in the third quarter now seems unlikely and so will cause certain revenue short-
falls compared with the draft budget, the ob -
jective of a balanced budget was maintained. 
However, this did not necessitate extra saving 
measures. Instead, reductions are expected, es-
pecially in payments to the EU budget and interest expenditure. For the medium-
 t
erm fi-
nancial planning period from 2016 to 2018, the 
tax forecast was also reduced slightly. At the 
same time, a total of €10 billion of additional 
central government investment was announced 
for this period; this is to be financed without new net borrowing. The Federal Government 
will need to factor major adjustments into the medium-
 term budget plan vis-
 à-
 vis the summer 
of 2
014 in the next benchmark figures in March 
2015 at the latest.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
In October 2014, against the backdrop of vari-
ous data releases relating to the month of Au-
gust in particular, concerns about the global 
economy were raised in many quarters. In real-
ity, however, in the third quarter the global economy probably remained on the path of 
moderate growth it had begun to trace in the 
second quarter after overcoming the negative 
one-off factors from the start of the year. Al -
though global industrial output stagnated at 
the second-  quarter level in July-  August owing  
to weak production worldwide in the middle of the quarter, a distinct countermovement is ex-pected in September. Barring any major disrup-tions in the current quarter, the rate of growth 
in global gross domestic product (GDP) ex -
pected for full-  year 2 014 is unchanged against 
2013 at 3¼% on the basis of purchasing power 
parities (PPPs) or 2½% at market exchange rates. The marked acceleration that had still 
been expected in the spring therefore failed to 
materialise, which is likely to have also added 
to the concerns about the economy mentioned at the beginning of this paragraph (see the box 
on pages 12 to 15). The moderate increase in 
global GDP in the summer was attributable to industrial countries as well as to emerging mar -
kets and developing countries. In the latter group, the Chinese economy again saw sub-
stantial growth. The growth trajectory in Rus-
sia, by contrast, remained flat in the light of the adverse consequences of the Ukraine conflict.
In the group of major industrial countries, the 
United States – as expected – was unable to 
maintain its rapid second-  quarter gr owth rate, 
which was influenced by normalisation effects, 
but it did record comparatively high quarter-  
on-
 quarter gr
owth, together with the United 
Kingdom. As this report went to press, no GDP 
data were yet available for Japan’s third quar -
ter; the economy probably rebounded, how -
ever, after having shrunk considerably in the spring owing to the drop in demand in connec-
tion with the consumption tax hike. The euro 
area saw merely muted growth, much like in 
the previous quarter. The main reason for this 
was that Italy and Germany, in particular, gen-erated only minor or no growth stimuli. In add-
ition to persistent low growth in parts of the euro area, sanctions and countermeasures in 
connection with the Ukraine conflict as well as 
the deterioration in sentiment caused by the crises in eastern Europe and other regions of 
the world are likely to have contributed to this very modest result.
In the current quarter there are no signs of any 
departure from the moderate global upturn. 
The global Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) 
for manufacturing and services, for instance, 
suggest continued distinct growth in October. 
In the group of industrial countries, the US and 
UK economies could continue their paths in the 
fourth quarter. Furthermore, the Japanese economy seems to have regained its footing, 
while in the euro area the period of low growth probably continued into the start of autumn. It is possible, however, that the steep drop in the price of oil will – if it proves permanent – con-
tribute to improving cyclical development in the oil-
 consuming countries in gener
al and in 
the euro area in particular over the course of the winter quarters by way of an increase in real purchasing power. A global economic 
view, however, also needs to factor in the re -
tarding effects from oil-  pr oducing countries, 
which are for the most part experiencing falling revenues.
Against the background of moderate global 
growth, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
again revised its forecast for this year and the 
next downwards slightly in October, to 3.3% and 3.8% aggregated at PPPs, respectively. 
Somewhat larger reductions from the July esti-
mates were made for the group of emerging 
markets and developing countries than for the Global eco -
nomy’
s pace  
of growth 
 
unchanged in 
 
summer 2014 …
… with clear 
growth differen-tials between the major indus-trial countriesSustained 
 
upward trend  
in the current quarter
IMF autumn 
forecast revised downwards slightlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
10

industrial countries, which was not least related 
to the distinct downwards revision in the case 
of Russia and the other members of the Com-
monwealth of Independent States (CIS). The 
growth forecast for the advanced economies was confirmed for 2014 at 1.8% and scaled back marginally for 2015 to 2.3%. However, this conceals quite considerable adjustments 
for major industrial countries. For example, the 
estimate for the United States for 2014 was raised significantly, while the estimate for the 
euro area for both years was cut by a quarter 
of a percentage point in each case, to +0.8% 
and +1.3%, respectively. Given the persistent economic slowdown in the euro area, which looks set to weigh on the economy’s start to 
the new year as well, this forecast is likely to be achieved only with difficulty, however, particu-larly with regard to 2015. This holds true even 
when positive growth stimuli from falling oil 
prices are taken into account, which is certainly 
appropriate as the prices of crude oil took a further steep dive after the IMF forecast was 
completed. All in all, the IMF’s prediction that 
the pace of global growth will pick up next 
year is primarily based on the expectation that 
the US economy will gather significant pace and the emerging markets and developing 
countries in Latin America, the Middle East and Africa will again see brisker growth. In this set-ting, real growth in world trade could acceler -
ate to 5.0% next year, according to the IMF. At 
the same time, this would be the largest in -
crease in trade in goods since 2012.
Crude oil prices declined across the board in 
the reporting period owing to excellent market supply in many cases. While the prices of food 
and beverages continued their downward 
trend in the summer months and have only re-
cently stabilised, industrial raw materials also became markedly cheaper in September and October. The crude oil price tumbled particu -
larly steeply due to the generous supply. Con -
cerns in connection with military conflicts, es -
pecially in the Middle East, seem to have van -
ished for now. A barrel of Brent crude oil cost 
US$88 in October, which was 18¾% cheaper than three months earlier; as this report went 
to press, the price per barrel stood at US$81¾. 
The sharp decrease in the spot price meant that distinct mark-
 ups had to 
be paid for for -
ward deliveries.
Falling energy prices were a key reason for sub-
siding consumer price inflation in the industrial countries. The inflation rate based on the entire 
basket of consumer goods (headline inflation) 
declined from 1.7% in June to 1.4% in Septem-ber. In the same period, core inflation – calcu-lated from the underlying basket of goods ex-cluding energy and food – decreased only mar -
ginally to 1.5%. From this narrower perspec -
tive, too, consumer prices adjusted for seasonal 
variations trended upwards only slightly in the 
summer months, after having risen quite sub-
stantially in the spring. However, this compari-son is distorted by the consumption tax hike in Japan in April. If Japan is left out of the group of industrial countries, the core components of the consumer price index saw the same muted Crude oil prices 
down across the boardConsumer price inflation eased somewhatWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
7 November or 1 to 12 November 2014 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201460708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
11

 The global growth forecast revisions in recent years
In its October 2014 World Economic Out-
look (WEO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects global real gross do-mestic product (GDP), aggregated on the 
basis of market exchange rates,1 to grow by 
2.6% this year. This means that the global 
economy was not able to improve percep-
tibly on its relatively subdued growth of the two preceding years (+2.4% and +2.5% re-
spectively).2 By contrast, in April the IMF 
had projected global growth for the year in progress to accelerate considerably to 3.1%. At last report, however, the Fund remained optimistic that global economic activity will pick up steam in 2015 (+3.2%).
What is notable is that global growth’s re-
cent failure to meet expectations is the lat-
est in a series of disappointments. Since 2010, the IMF has always predicted global 
output growth of between 3.3% and 3.7% one year ahead in its spring forecasts. How-
ever, according to data from the current edition of the WEO, actual growth in the years from 2011 to 2014 only ranged be-tween 2.4% and 2.9%. The actual values last reported fell short of the forecasts is-sued in April of the preceding year by an 
arithmetic average of 0.8 percentage point. The projections were generally gradually re-
vised downwards in later rounds. It is im-
portant to emphasise that the IMF projec-
tions must by no means be regarded as overly optimistic in the context of when 
they were issued. Instead, they are likely to have refl  ected a consensus of sorts.
There are three possible sources of such a 
chain of parallel forecast errors: an overesti-
mation of the longer- term supply- side growth forces, an underestimation of the stubbornness of demand weakness and a chain of unforeseeable events impacting 
adversely on economic activity. The oil price surge in the fi  rst half of 2011 or the severe 
earthquake which struck Japan that same year are examples of such shocks.
3 Some 
1 The IMF’s preferred measure of global economic ac-
tivity is real GDP as calculated by means of aggrega-
tion using exchange rates based on purchasing power 
parities (PPPs). However, the underlying PPPs are re- 
estimated at lengthy intervals. For example, since the 
July WEO update the IMF has been using a revised 
weighting system to calculate global GDP on the basis 
of PPPs. However, this means that its latest data and 
the projections based on this metric are no longer dir-
ectly comparable with those contained in earlier publi-
cations. In order to ensure comparability, global real GDP based on market exchange rates will be used 
below instead.2 By contrast, in the 1980-2007 period, which covers both booms and recessions, growth averaged 3.0%.
3 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The price of crude 
oil and its impact on economic activity in the industrial countries, Monthly Report, June 2012, pp 27-49.Evolution of IMF projectionsof global real GDP growth
*
in the indicated year
Annual percentage growth
2.22.42.62.83.03.23.43.63.8
Sources:  various  issues  of  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO) and updates between January 2010 and October 2014. * Based on market exchange rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
WEO forecast rounds2015
201420132012
2011
Memo item:
Actual result (as reportedin the October 2014 WEO)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
12

also include in this category the debt crisis 
aﬄ   icting some European countries.4
Moreover, it is now widely acknowledged 
that the long- term growth outlook for key 
emerging market economies (EMEs) has de-
teriorated perceptibly and that the global 
economy’s expansionary path has therefore 
fl  attened as well.5 Since the IMF’s medium- 
term forecast horizon is fi  ve years, data for the last year of its projections can be taken as a rough measure of the estimated poten-tial growth. In the years 2010 and 2011, the 
IMF had assumed that fi  ve- years- ahead 
economic output in the group of emerging 
market and developing economies would grow at a rate of around 6¾%. However, its latest projection for the longer- term growth rate in that group of countries is 
now down to only 5¼%.6 At the same time, 
it revised its estimate of global activity downward slightly, whereas its projection for the advanced economies remained 
largely the same.
However, the one- year- ahead growth fore-
casts will be affected not only by projec-
tions of potential growth but possibly also 
by estimates of the level of potential output 
and thus of the output gap.7 Studies for the 
G7 show that the relevant estimates made 
by international organisations are subject to 
extensive revision.8 In addition, the initial 
estimates of the output gap for the years just ended appear biased towards under-utilisation; subsequent revisions tend to raise the level of utilisation. One possible 
reason is that the persistence of the damp-
ening impact of recessions on the output 
level is initially underestimated.
What is more diffi   cult is to attribute the re-
peatedly disappointing global economic 
growth rate to stubbornly weak demand. An explanation would be needed for why 
economies remain trapped in a situation of signifi  cant capacity underutilisation. Limited 
effectiveness of monetary and fi  scal policy 
is one potential reason. However, in the 
past few years the particularly powerful im-
pact of fi  scal consolidation has been 
4 Though the concrete outbreak of the crisis and its 
individual stages of escalation were quite unforeseen, 
this was less of an exogenous event and more the cul-mination of a long build- up of unsustainable develop-ments. See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the problems of macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area, Monthly Report, July 2010, pp 17-38.5 For a comparison of various infl  uences on the global economy, particularly the weak euro- area demand and slower growth in the EMEs, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Impact of weak euro- area demand on the global econ-omy, Monthly Report, November 2012, pp 11-14.
6 This is based on IMF data on aggregates for each 
group of countries. As they were calculated using PPP 
weighting, they are likewise subject to a statistical 
break caused by the re- estimation of PPPs.7 The output gap is the difference between actual and potential output and should be closed in the long run. 
In a situation of underutilisation of aggregate eco-
nomic capacity, therefore, growth above the trend rate is to be expected; this will ultimately return actual out-put to its potential path.8 See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the reliability of inter-
national organisations’ estimates of the output gap, 
Monthly Report, April 2014, pp 13-35.Evolution of IMF forecasts of real GDP growth five years ahead
Annual percentage growth
2.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.0
Sources:  various  issues  of  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO) between April 2010 and October 2014. 1 Aggregated 
on the basis of purchasing power parities; purchasing power parities were revised in the October 2014 WEO.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
WEO forecast roundsWorld (at market exchange rates)
Advanced economies1World (at purchasing power parities)1Emerging market and developing economies1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
13

stressed in many quarters. For instance, the 
IMF attributed its forecast errors for growth in the industrial countries in 2010 and 2011 to an underestimation of the GDP effects of 
fi  scal policy (fi  scal multipliers).9 The slower 
pace of public budget consolidation was accordingly a major factor as to why eco-nomic activity in the advanced economies 
had been expected to improve signifi  cantly in 2014. The disappointing growth recorded 
this year could re- ignite the debate on the 
size of fi  scal multipliers.
One hypothesis in this area, which steers the focus towards monetary policy, is 
known as “secular stagnation”. This notion holds that, if the long- term equilibrium real 
interest rate is considerably negative, the 
central bank will no longer be able to per-
form its stabilising role. In connection with 
the zero bound on nominal interest rates, 
the central bank might be unable to cut the 
real interest rate far enough to rescue the economy from capacity underutilisation. However – leaving aside the debate on 
temporary liquidity traps – there is contro-
versy as to whether the long- term equilib-rium real interest rate can actually go as far into negative territory as is assumed in this hypothesis.
10
A more precise breakdown of projections 
by country could possibly provide more in-formation on the exact factors that actually 
explain growth forecast errors. According 
to the IMF’s analysis, its overoptimistic pro-
jections of global economic growth in the 
past few years were due to the forecasts for a relatively small group of countries.
11 
Chief among these are the BRIC nations (Brazil, Russia, India and China). In these 
catching- up economies, in particular, struc-
tural barriers to growth have increasingly come to the fore in the past few years. 
However, some industrial countries, mainly 
Japan and several euro- area economies, 
9 See International Monetary Fund, Are We Underesti-
mating Short- Term Fiscal Multipliers?, World Economic Outlook, October 2012, pp 41-43.10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Secular stagnation and 
economic growth, Monthly Report, April 2014, pp 16-19.
11 See International Monetary Fund, The Origins of 
IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011, World Eco-nomic Outlook, October 2014, pp 39-43.Revision* of the International Monetary Fund’s growth projections
Percentage points
Economic area 2011 2012 2013 2014Average, 
2011 to 2014Memo item Average con-tribution,
3
2011 to 2014
World 1 – 0.5 – 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.8 –
United States – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.14
Euro area 0.1 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 – 0.17
Germany 1.7 – 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.01
France 0.3 – 1.5 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.02
Italy – 0.7 – 3.7 – 1.6 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.05
Spain – 0.9 – 3.3 – 1.3 0.6 – 1.2 – 0.02
Japan – 2.4 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.08
United Kingdom – 1.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 1.7 – 0.5 – 0.02
Canada – 0.7 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.01
BRIC countries 1 – 0.6 – 2.1 – 1.6 – 1.6 – 1.5 – 0.29
Brazil – 1.4 – 3.1 – 1.7 – 3.7 – 2.5 – 0.08
Russia 1.0 – 1.1 – 2.6 – 3.6 – 1.6 – 0.04
India 2 – 0.9 – 2.6 – 2.3 – 0.8 – 1.6 – 0.04
China – 0.6 – 1.9 – 1.1 – 0.9 – 1.1 – 0.12
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from various issues of the IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) between April 2010 and October 2014. * Difference between the data from the October 2014 WEO for the indicated years and the forecast published in the WEO in the spring of the previous year. 1 Aggregated on the basis of market exchange rates. 2 Data are trans-formed approximately from a fi  scal year basis (October 2014 WEO) to a calendar year basis. 3 Contribution to revision of global growth projection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
14

also need to be mentioned. By contrast, 
the average forecast error reported for the 
United States is near zero. On the whole, 
this analysis would suggest that the key 
factors in the global forecast errors are the overestimation of the long- run growth out-
look in key EMEs and unforeseen events 
such as the severe earthquake in Japan or 
the debt crisis aﬄ   icting some European 
countries.
Nonetheless, the outcome of the IMF an-
alysis has to be seen in terms of its spe-
cifi  c construction. For instance, global 
growth was measured in terms of na-tional data aggregated using PPP- weighted exchange rates. This gives the EMEs a relatively large weight in the global economy. Moreover, the analysis 
also included forecasts from the previous years’ autumn rounds, thus omitting earl-ier revisions. However, if global growth is 
measured using market exchange rates and the projections from each previous year’s April round, the growth forecast error is distributed much more broadly across countries. Even the arithmetic average of US economic growth was 
0.6 percentage point lower than the fore-casted fi  gure. Tightly calculated, the aver-age US contribution to the overstatement 
of the global growth rate was only mar-
ginally smaller than that of the euro area. In the same vein, the group of advanced 
economies as a whole made a slightly more signifi  cant contribution to the global forecast error than the emerging 
market and developing economies.
Plausible calculations show that, especially 
for the US economy, the growth and level of potential output could have been over-
estimated in the past.12 In particular, 
demographic change and longer- term la-
bour force participation trends among cer-tain segments of the population have sig-nifi  cantly restrained labour supply growth. This is consistent with the fact that the US 
unemployment rate has fallen consider-ably in the past few years despite only 
moderate real GDP growth. In actual fact, 
various institutions’ projections often 
united overly optimistic aggregate growth 
forecasts with overly pessimistic forecasts 
regarding the decline in the unemploy-
ment rate.13
All in all, the overestimation of the global growth rate in the past few years is based 
on overly optimistic forecasts for a large number of countries. The forecast errors 
are likely to be due not only to unforesee-able events but also to excessively high ex-
pectations regarding key economies’ 
longer- term outlook for growth. Resolving structural problems and averting a fl  atten-ing of the potential growth path, however, 
are beyond the powers of monetary pol-
icy.
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the 
current economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, 
pp  15-37, and, in particular, Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Determining aggregate trend output in the USA, 
Monthly Report, April 2013, pp 31-35.
13 According to recently published data, the US un-
employment rate fell in October 2014 to 5.8% – the 
average level for the year 2016 predicted by the IMF in 
its latest WEO (October 2014). The Fund projects the 
unemployment rate to average 5.9% in the coming year. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Labour market developments in the United States and the United 
Kingdom in the context of their central banks’ forward guidance strategy, Monthly Report, May 2014, pp 17-20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
15

increase over the summer as in the previous 
three-  month period.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In the third quarter, the Chinese economy re-
mained on a growth path which, by its stand-
ards, was moderate. According to the official 
estimate, real GDP went up by 2% in seasonally-  
adjusted terms, as in the second quarter; it was 
up by 7¼% year-  on-  year at the end of the  
period under review. For the first three quarters 
altogether, there was year-
 on-
 year GDP gr
owth 
of 7½%. According to output-
 side calculations, 
in 
this period – separate data for the third quar -
ter are not recorded – real value added rose by 8% in the services sector and by 7% in industry 
(excluding construction). The growth in indus -
try was boosted by fairly lively foreign demand. 
For example, Chinese goods exports increased 
by 8½% in the first nine months of the year, on 
a US dollar basis and excluding trade with Hong Kong.
1 Industrial activity, by contrast, 
was adversely affected by subdued demand for intermediate goods for the construction sector as a result of the ongoing downturn in the real estate market. In this connection, the increase 
in housing prices also tailed off and hence weakened the general upward pressure on 
consumer prices. The average inflation rate for the third quarter amounted to 2.1%.
In India, the economy gained momentum in the second quarter, the latest for which na -
tional accounts data are available. Real gross 
value added – India’s preferred indicator of ag-
gregate output – grew by 5¾% year-  on-  year . 
This is the largest increase since the beginning 
of 2012. However, the sustainability of this stronger growth is debatable. For the quarter just ended, there are already indications of a slower pace again, for industry at least. Pres -
sure on consumer prices has been continually 
easing since the end of 2013. The average in -
flation rate in the third quarter was 7.4%, com-pared with 10.4% in the final quarter of 2013. Weaker inflation in food prices, which consti -
tute roughly half of the statistical basket of 
goods, played a particular role.
In Brazil, the economy slid into recession ac -
cording to the common interpretation in the first half of the year
, as quarterly real GDP 
growth, seasonally adjusted, continued its slide 
in the second quarter. The fact that economic 
activity had been hampered in connection with 
the FIFA World Cup was also a factor in the 
contraction in the spring. Thus there may have been a certain countermovement once again in the quarter just ended. The underlying growth 
momentum in the overall economy is unlikely 
to have strengthened yet, however, owing to 
the unresolved structural problems. The coun -
try’s president, who was re-  elected in October, 
and the new government are therefore facing 
the task of carrying out massive reforms. Des -
pite the recessionary tendencies, consumer 
price inflation again increased somewhat in the past few months, rising to 6.7% on the year in 
September. Against this backdrop, the central 
bank once again lifted its policy rate in October.
Aggregate output in Russia rose by ¾% year-  
on- year in the quarter just ended, accor ding to 
an initial estimate issued by the Russian Federal 
State Statistics Service. This represents a con -
tinuation of the fairly sluggish growth. The ad-
verse consequences of the Ukraine conflict, particularly increased uncertainty, are likely to 
have been key factors in this. The full economic 
braking effect of the sanctions imposed on 
Russia by the western states in August and in-tensified in September will probably only be felt after some time. An additional dampening fac-tor is the sharp drop in oil prices from the mid-dle of the year onwards. If this proves to be a 
long-  term corr ection, the Russian economy is 
likely to lose export revenues on a large scale. Sustained 
 
moderate growth in China
Probably only 
temporary 
 
recovery in 
 activity 
in IndiaBrazil in reces-
sion in the first half of the year
Economic 
 
situation and 
outlook for 
 
Russia deterior-ated further
1 Exports to Hong Kong are excluded from the calculation as the data are not considered to be very reliable. There are indications that the figures are too high, especially for last 
year. This is apparently because exporters have submitted 
incorrect invoices to the customs authorities in order to 
channel money into China’s strictly regulated capital mar -
ket.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
16

The inflation rate went up significantly in the 
past few months, amounting to 8.0% in Sep -
tember. Alongside the persistently weak rou -
ble, this was also because food prices rose 
sharply as Russian authorities have blocked the 
import of a number of products from western countries in retaliation for the sanctions. Given the increased inflation and in order to stabilise 
the rouble, the Russian central bank again 
raised its policy rate substantially at the end of October.
United States
In the summer, the US economy was unable to fully maintain its high pace of growth from the spring. Adjusted for the usual seasonal effects, 
real GDP grew by just under 1% from the 
second quarter, in which it had expanded by a 
little over 1%. The renewed favourable per -
formance in the third quarter is due to one-  off 
factors, much 
like in the previous quarter; how-
ever, the driving forces on the expenditure side 
have shifted. Real foreign trade alone contrib -
uted ¼ percentage point to growth in aggre-
gate output in the third quarter by way of a significant increase in exports on the back of 
falling imports. However, inventory movements did have a marginally dampening effect, but, at 
the same time, there was an unusually strong 
increase in public demand, especially for mili -
tary purposes. By contrast, private real con -
sumer spending and gross fixed capital forma-tion saw only moderate growth in the summer. Their higher pace of growth in the spring was 
probably attributable to the normalisation of activity following the weather-
 induced short -
falls at the beginning of the year.2 Despite the 
fluctuations in volatile demand components, the pattern of private domestic final demand 
shows that the underlying pace of the US econ-
omy is moderate, as before. This is also sug -
gested by the fact that real GDP grew by 2¼% year-
 on-
 year in the summer
. This annual rate of 
change is consistent with the average annual -
ised growth rate since the beginning of the up-
swing in mid-2009. Within the context of demographic change, in particular, this moder -
ate growth in aggregate output was sufficient, 
however, to push the unemployment rate 
down by 4.2 percentage points in the space of five years to 5.8% in October 2014.
3 Owing to 
the progress made in the labour market, the US central bank recently decided to taper its asset 
purchases. Inflation as measured by the con -
sumer price index (CPI) fell over the course of 
the summer months. At 1.7% each in Septem-
ber, headline and core inflation were both 
down from June, by 0.4 percentage point and 0.2 percentage point respectively.Underlying pace 
of economic 
 
activity probably 
exaggerated by renewed strong growthContributions to quarter-on-quarter growth in US real GDP
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Private  consumption 
and private gross fixed investment. 2 Public demand, inventory 
changes and net exports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014654321012345
––––––+++++Percentage points, seasonally adjusted, annualised
GDP (%)
All other demand 2Private domestic final demand 1
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Weather effects on real GDP growth in the USA in the first six months of 2014, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 22-24.3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the cur -
rent economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, pp 15-37, and Deutsche Bundesbank, The decline in labour force 
participation in the USA, Monthly Report, May 2012, 
pp 19-21.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
17

Japan
After the slump in domestic final demand in 
the spring due to the consumption tax hike, 
the Japanese economy is likely to have grown 
again in the quarter just ended. Initial national 
accounts data had not yet been published as this report went to press, but the indicators available on a monthly basis suggest such an 
assessment is correct. Going by retail sales, pri-
vate consumption probably broke away from 
its low second-  quarter level. F urthermore, de -
liveries of capital goods suggest an increase in 
real spending on equipment by enterprises. In 
light of merely muted growth in the volume of 
goods imports, however, the recovery in do -
mestic final demand may have been rather 
hesitant. Since, at the same time, real exports 
of goods rose more significantly, foreign trade 
once again probably gave a net boost to aggre-
gate growth. Industrial output also sank sub -
stantially on the quarter in the summer. What 
must also be considered, however, is that in -
ventory movements had initially delayed the 
adjustment of output. The labour market is re-
flecting a cyclical improvement. Following a 
temporary increase up to 3.8% in July, the un-
employment rate slipped back to the March level – before the consumption tax hike had come into effect – of 3.6% in September. As before, CPI inflation is strongly influenced by 
the tax hike.4 Headline inflation fell from 3.7% 
in May to 3.2% in September. In view of this 
subsiding inflation, the central bank decided to 
expand its unconventional monetary policy 
measures further.
United Kingdom
UK economic output continued to expand briskly in the summer. In seasonally adjusted 
terms, its quarter-  on-  quarter gr owth amounted 
to ¾% and was thus only slightly weaker than in the spring (+1%). The annual rate of change 
decreased accordingly, although the increase 
of 3% was still fairly high. As part of a compre-
hensive revision of national accounts, revised GDP figures had already been published, ac -
cording to which the recession of 2008-09 was no longer as severe, and the subsequent recov-
ery no longer as tentative, as in previous as -
sessments. According to the data currently 
available, aggregate output in the quarter just 
ended exceeded its level from the winter of 2008, the last cyclical peak, by 3½%. Broken 
down by sector, significant quarter-  on-  quarter  
increases in real gross value added were achieved in the services, production and con -
struction sectors in the summer. The slowdown in growth on the previous quarter owed solely 
to the tertiary sector. Looked at on a monthly 
basis, services output stalled in August. For September, however, the Office for National 
Statistics, in its initial GDP estimate for the third 
quarter, again expected a steep rise in activity 
in this area, meaning that the UK economy was likely to have ended the quarter buoyantly. The 
standardised unemployment rate fell by 0.3 percentage point on the previous quarter 
to 6.0% in the summer according to national 
data; this was its lowest level for six years. 
However, the central bank is still holding back 
from starting to normalise its interest rate pol-
icy given the considerably lower consumer price inflation. The inflation rate as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) decreased from 1.9% in June to 1.2% in September.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-7),5 aggre-
gate economic output saw renewed stronger 
growth in the third quarter following a season-
ally adjusted period-  on-  period incr ease of ½% 
in the second quarter. Over the period span -Macroeconomic 
recovery prob-ably resumed
Upswing 
 
remains briskModerate eco-
nomic growth in Q2-Q3 period
4 Looking at the consumer price index excluding fresh 
food, the Japanese central bank has put the influence of 
the consumption tax hike on the inflation rate at 2 percent-
age points. See Bank of Japan, The Direct Effects of the 
Consumption Tax Hike on Price Indices, Monthly Report of 
Recent Economic and Financial Developments, March 
2014, pp 21-22.
5 This group comprises the non-  eur o-  ar ea countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
18

ning the second and third quarters, economic 
momentum was somewhat weaker than in the 
past. Dwindling stimuli from the euro area and adverse impacts in connection with the Ukraine conflict were probably the primary reasons for 
this slowdown. The situation on the labour 
markets has continued to improve moderately. 
Unemployment in this group of countries as a 
whole stood at a seasonally adjusted 8.5% in 
the third quarter, as against 8.8% in spring and 
9.3% in winter. Aggregate HICP inflation, 
which had already reached a multi-  year low in 
the second quarter, fell further to 0.2% in the 
reporting period. Poland (-0.1%) and Bulgaria 
(-1.2%) saw negative annual growth rates.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro-  ar ea economic slowdown, already 
clearly visible in spring 2014, persisted in the 
third quarter. Real GDP in the summer, at a sea-
sonally adjusted ¼%, was only moderately higher than in the previous period, in which there was hardly any growth. Aggregate out -
put rose by ¾% year-  on-  year . This means that 
the perceptible economic acceleration ex -
pected as late as mid-  year virtual ly failed to ma-
terialise. Consequently, in addition to the IMF revising its autumn forecast for the euro area downwards, as mentioned earlier, the Euro -
pean Commission recently followed suit. It 
now expects growth of just 0.8% for 2014 and 
1.1% for 2015, as against +1.2% and +1.7%, 
respectively, in May.
In mid-  October the S tatistical Office of the 
European Communities (Eurostat) published ini-tial estimates of the annual and quarterly main aggregates of GDP for the euro area as a whole and its individual member states based on the 
new European System of Accounts 2010 (ESA Aggregate 
 
output grew moderately in summer 2014
Level effect 
caused by changeover to ESA 2010 but only marginal influence on growth ratesAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat. 1 According to ESA 1995, rebased so that 
2010 = 100, 2014 Q3 according to ESA 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014981001021042010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
949698100102104106
9698100102104106
969810010210410698100102104
Italy
Spain1Franceof which
GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
19

2010).6 The changes raised nominal euro-  a rea 
GDP by an average of 3.4% per annum for the 
years 1997 to 2013. The adjustments in the 
member states ranged from -0.1% in Latvia to 
+9.5% in Cyprus. The primary reason for the 
GDP corrections is that expenditure on research 
and development, which used to be classified 
as intermediate goods, is now allocated to 
gross fixed capital formation, and thus to final 
demand. Reported investment is also higher 
because it now includes that part of military procurement which used to be classified as 
government consumption. A result of the per -
ceptible upward revision of investment is that 
the aggregate investment rate has risen as well; for instance, for 2010 it was up by 1.7 percent-age points to 20.7%. The impact of the change-over to the new system on the rates of change 
of euro-  a rea GDP was very limited, however, 
despite the fact that, at the current juncture, 
seasonally adjusted real GDP growth rates for 
the first and second quarters of 2014 were in-
creased slightly to +0.3% and +0.1% respect -
ively.
The persistent sluggishness of growth in Italy and the cyclical downturn in Germany which 
began over the course of the year are the pri-mary reasons why euro-
 ar
ea economic activity 
remained unsatisfactory in the third quarter of 
the year. Real GDP in Italy contracted further, whereas in Germany aggregate output re -
bounded slightly following a marginal contrac-
tion. After shrinking slightly in the previous 
quarter, France’s economic output grew mod -
erately in summer; however, the underlying cyclical trend has probably remained weak here, too. Besides Italy, only Cyprus recorded negative quarterly growth. By contrast, the economies of Spain and Slovakia maintained 
their rather strong growth. Greece’s economy 
continued to recover, picking up where it had Sustained 
 
economic slow-down in larger member states is main factor in weak euro-
 
area 
resultNew passenger car registrationsin the euro area
Source: ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201470801002008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
80100120140of which
Germany
GreecePortugalSpainItalyEuro area
80100120France
2030405060708010050607080100
40506070801001204050607080100
6 For more on the changes to the methodology, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Key ratios for macroeconomic and 
government activity in Germany following the 2014 major 
revision of national accounts, Monthly Report, September 
2014, pp 7-12, and Eurostat news release 157/  2 014, 17 Oc-
tober 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
20

left off in the winter, with annual real GDP 
growth amounting to 1½%. The highly suc -
cessful tourist season was probably the primary reason for this.
On the output  side, the industrial sector was  
the main culprit behind the slow aggregate 
growth in the summer quarter. Seasonally ad -
justed third-  quarter industrial output was down 
by just under ½% from the second quarter, in 
which it had treaded water. This was due to a decline in the manufacture of consumer goods (-1½%) and intermediate goods (-½%). By con-
trast, energy production (+½%) and the pro -
duction of capital goods (+¼%) grew moder -
ately. An additional expression of the lack of momentum in the industrial sector fol
lowing 
mid-
 year 
is that capacity utilisation in the 
manufacturing sector remained below its long-  
run average in October. By contrast, construc -
tion output in July-  August was up by a season -
ally adjusted ½% from the depressed level of 
the second quarter, thus giving some support 
to economic activity. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for services is indicating a slight uptick in activity in this sector for the third quarter.
In the summer quarter, the stimulus for euro-  
area growth provided by foreign demand was 
probably non-  existent and that pr ovided by do-
mestic demand only moderate. In the July-  
August period, seasonally adjusted nominal ex-
ports of goods just about held steady at their 
level of the second quarter, in which they had fallen slightly. At the same time, imports picked 
up by 1% in terms of value. However, while euro-
 denominated prices of ener
gy sources 
were falling, the euro’s depreciation made other imported goods more expensive. The moderate uptick in household consumption 
was one factor which benefited domestic de -
mand. Measured in terms of real retail sales 
(excluding motor vehicles and fuels), household spending in the summer was up by a seasonally 
adjusted ¼% on the quarter and 1% on the year. New car registrations rose at the same pace period-
 o
n- p
eriod; over the reporting 
period, they were even up by 4% on the year. Another factor was that investment probably trended upwards slightly in the summer, with 
construction activity, as mentioned above, per -
ceptibly higher in July-  August than its de -
pressed second-  quarter level, and the some-
what elevated output of capital goods seeming to suggest that expenditure on new machinery 
and equipment has likewise risen, if only mar -
ginally.
The sluggish economic activity in the euro area 
is looking set to continue in the fourth quarter of the year. In October, the composite PMI re-mained above the expansion threshold. In add-
ition, the industrial confidence indicator im -
proved slightly in October after falling four 
months in succession, due chiefly to improved output expectations and a more favourable as-
sessment of order books; however, the pres -
sure from high inventories is likely to have 
mounted. At first glance, the fact that, on aver -
age across the July-  August 
period, new orders 
received by order-
 based industry wer
e down by 
¼% from their second-  quarter level after sea -
sonal adjustment is not consistent with the 
slightly improved economic picture painted by 
the survey-  based indicators. Excluding the  
manufacture of other transport equipment, a considerable share of which is accounted for by large orders, which experience has shown tend to be processed over a relatively long period of time, such new orders were also 
down slightly on the second quarter. However, 
it must be noted that the September figures 
– as was the case for industrial output – were probably a countermovement to the weak Au-gust figures and will pull the quarterly result up 
slightly. On a positive note with respect to household consumption in the last quarter of 
the year, the consumer confidence indicator re-
gained strength in October following a con -
tinuous slide since June.
In the period spanning the second and third quarters of the year, the labour market situ -
ation continued its slight improvement, which 
is quite notable considering the sluggishness of 
euro-  ar ea growth. Employment has been Weak industrial 
output
Domestic and 
foreign demand still subdued in summerLeading indica-tors signalling continuation of sluggish eco-nomic activity
Continuation of 
slight improve-ment in labour marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
21

Labour market developments in Spain, Portugal and Ireland 
since the beginning of the cyclical recovery
The economic situation in Spain, Portugal 
and Ireland has become markedly brighter 
over the past few quarters. Real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) was latterly up on the 
cyclical low reached in these three countries between the fi  nal quarter of 2009 and the second quarter of 2013; the relevant fi  gures 
were +1.7% in Spain, +1.4% in Portugal and as much as +9.8% in Ireland. At the 
same time, the unemployment rate in Spain 
was down on its most recent peak by 1.9 percentage points to 24.0%, with a 
comparable fall of 3.4 percentage points to 13.6% in Portugal and an equivalent decline 
of 3.6 percentage points to 11.2% in Ire-land.
1 Against this backdrop, the question 
arises as to how far the fall in unemploy-
ment in these three countries is due to the 
cyclical improvement and to what extent non- cyclical factors have played a part in 
this.
The unemployment rate (UR) gives the number of unemployed persons (UP) as a 
percentage of the labour force. The labour 
force consists of the working- age popula-tion (WAP) that is available to the labour market.2 The number of persons in the la-
bour force is given by the size of the work-ing- age population and its participation rate 
(PR), ie the number of persons employed 
(EP) plus the unemployed.3
UR=UP
PR⇤WAP=UP
UP+EP
A change in the unemployment rate may thus be caused by the number of un-
employed persons in the numerator and by 
the economically active population as the 
denominator. The latter is determined fi  rstly by longer- term factors. These include demo-
graphic developments, which have an im-
pact, for example, on the size of the cohorts 
entering the labour market compared with 
those reaching retirement age. Furthermore, 
trend changes in labour force participation 
– such as the steady increase in participation by females over the past few decades – play 
a major role in this context. Secondly, par-
ticipation may fl  uctuate over the short term, 
say, if previously inactive persons take up a 
job when the labour market situation is  favourable or if unemployed persons with-draw from the labour market when the 
economy is performing poorly as a result of them being discouraged and giving up look-
ing for work. The participation rate often 
1 The unemployment fi  gures published by the statis-
tical offi   ces relate to the group of persons aged be-
tween 15 and 74 years. Working persons of pension-
able age are counted as part of the labour force, but 
retired persons are not counted as unemployed. The 
unemployment rate is therefore marginally below that 
of the 15 to 64-years age group, which is the category referred to below.
2 There is no clear defi  nition for the term “working 
age population”. It is generally understood here as 
persons aged between 15 and 64 years.3 Persons in the labour force are also called the “eco-
nomically active population”. The participation rate, which gives the percentage of employed persons of 
working age, is also referred to as “labour force partici-pation”.Real GDP in Spain, Portugal and Ireland
Sources: Eurostat, INE and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Accord-
ing to ESA 1995, 2014 Q3 according to ESA 2010.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20148890929496981002008 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Comparison:
euro-area totalPortugal
Spain1
IrelandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
22

decreases especially in prolonged periods of 
high unemployment. In such cases, the un-employment fi  gure declines more sharply in percentage terms than the economically ac-tive  population, resulting in a fall in the un-
employment rate, even though no increase 
in employment has taken place.
In all three countries under consideration, in 
the second quarter of 2014 the number of unemployed persons showed a marked fall on the year (-7.0% in Spain; -15.9% in Por-
tugal; -15.3% in Ireland).4 In Portugal this 
was accompanied by a comparatively sharp 
increase in employment (+2.7%), along 
with a marked rise in employment in Spain and Ireland (+1.2% and +1.4% respectively). At the same time, the working- age popula-
tion shrank in all three countries. The key 
factors behind this were low- birth- rate co-
horts entering working life, increased emi-
gration and declining immigration since the 
outbreak of the crisis. As an outcome of 
this, aggregate labour force participation in Ireland has also declined, while contrasting 
factors have led to it remaining stable in 
Spain and rising in Portugal. The trend de-
cline in the labour force participation of younger persons continued in all three countries (especially among the 15 to 25-years age group); participation in Portu-
gal is now 7 percentage points below its 
pre- crisis level in 2007, with corresponding 
fi  gures of -12 percentage points in Spain 
and -16 percentage points in Ireland.5 With 
regard to the economy as a whole, this 
 effect in the case of younger persons was 
more than offset in Spain and Portugal by 
growing labour force participation among 
older persons, which was due, in turn, to a rise in female employment. In purely math-
ematical terms, the decline in the un-employment rate over the past four quar-ters amounting to 55% (0.9 percentage 
point) in Spain, 84% (2.2 percentage points) in Portugal and 58% (1.2 percentage points) in Ireland was due to higher employment.
4 The data used come from the Labour Force Survey 
(LFS). These are collected on a quarterly basis and are 
not offi   cially seasonally adjusted. As the latest available data relate to the second quarter of 2014, the data for 
the second quarter of each given year were used for 
the analysis.5 In this age category, the already no more than minor 
decline in the unemployment rates of all three coun-
tries under consideration is a consequence of both a 
declining population of this age and the fall in their 
participation in the labour force. The number of em-
ployed persons aged between 15 and 24 years was 
showing an annual fall in all cases up to the end of the period under review.Major labour market indicators
in thousands of persons or as a percentage; Q2 in each case
PeriodWorking-age 
population1Economically active  population
2Participation rate
3Employed  personsUnemployed personsUnemployment rate
4
Spain
2007 30,972 22,219 71.7 20,448 1,771 8.0
2013 31,083 23,059 74.2 17,018 6,040 26.2
2014 30,778 22,839 74.2 17,223 5,616 24.6
Portugal
2007 7,034 5,175 73.6 4,743 432 8.3
2013 6,870 5,010 72.9 4,147 862 17.2
2014 6,804 4,985 73.3 4,260 725 14.5
Ireland
2007 2,985 2,158 72.3 2,058 99 4.6
2013 3,018 2,117 70.2 1,818 299 14.1
2014 3,007 2,097 69.7 1,844 254 12.1
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bundesbank calculations. 1  Aged between 15 and 64 years. 2  Sum of employed and  unemployed persons. 3 Labour force as a percentage of the working-age population. 4 Percentage of unemployed persons in 
the economically active population.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
23

Movements in the labour markets of these 
three countries are also due to a sectoral 
reallocation focused on the construction 
sector. Spain and Portugal saw an ongoing 
decline in employment in this sector up to 
the end of the period under review; as a result, construction employment in the 
second quarter of this year showed a fall of 
62% in Spain and 51% in Portugal on the 
second quarter of 2007. In Ireland, a slight 
increase in employment was recorded for the fi  rst time since 2007. Even so, more 
than half of jobs have been lost there, too. In the periphery countries, many jobs were 
also cut in the manufacturing sector. In Spain and Ireland, annual employment losses continued in the second quarter of 
2014, while there has been growth in em-
ployment again in Portugal since the fi  rst 
quarter of 2014.6 Compared with levels be-
fore the crisis, employment losses in manu-
facturing range between 15% (Portugal) 
and 30% (Spain).
During the crisis years, employment losses 
in the services sector were mostly less se-
vere and more jobs were created in this sec-
tor again during the period of recovery. 
Specifi  cally, all three countries saw a marked 
rise in employment in the information and 
communication sector, in restaurants and hotels, as well as in business- related ser-
vices. Furthermore, the number of persons 
employed in the health sector – as in other 
industrial countries – is showing a positive trend. Altogether, the last seven years have witnessed a large- scale shift in employment 
away from industry and construction to-wards the services sector. As a result, the combined share of industry and construc-
tion during this period shrank by between 
6 percentage points (Portugal) and 8 per-
centage points (Spain).
Indications of a labour market recovery are 
also provided by an analysis of labour mar-
ket turnover, ie fl  ows into and outfl  ows 
from unemployment. If the infl  ow rate de-
clines or the outfl  ow rate goes up, the un-employment rate should stabilise over time at a lower level. Movements on the labour market usually follow a marked cyclical pat-
tern. In an upturn, more jobs are generally 
started than are terminated; in a downturn, more jobs are shed than created. The scale 
of outfl  ows and infl  ows also depends on 
structural factors. These include, in particu-lar, redundancy costs, which are determined 
by employment protection regulations, as 
well as the quality of job placement services along with the mobility and the skills profi  le of the labour force.
Below, reference is made to the transition rates into and from unemployment for Spain, Portugal and Ireland, calculated 
6 Comparisons refer to the quarter in the previous year 
unless stated otherwise.Change in the employment structure
Percentage of employed persons overall (15 to 64 years); difference from 100: households, extraterritorial organisations and 
bodies as well as “no responses”
SectorSpain Portugal IrelandComparison: EMU total
2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013
Agriculture 4.2 4.4 7.6 6.9 5.1 5.1 3.5 3.3
lndustry 15.6 13.6 19.1 17.9 13.3 12.6 18.6 17.2
Construction 12.1 6.0 11.2 6.8 11.5 5.5 8.4 6.8
Services 42.5 45.5 35.7 37.7 42.7 45.2 39.4 40.7
Public sector 22.0 26.5 22.9 27.7 26.7 30.9 28.0 29.7
Sources: Labour Force Survey and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
24

using the method of Elsby et al (2013).7 The 
outfl  ow rate from unemployment may be 
interpreted in this context as the probability 
that an unemployed person is no longer un-employed in the following month. It should 
be noted, however, that transitions be-
tween inactivity and labour force participa-tion are not taken into account when deter-mining the infl  ow rate into unemployment. 
For that reason, the calculations may be regarded only as an approximation of the transition rates between unemployment 
and employment.
In the period from 2008 to 2011, the un-employment rate in these three countries increased owing to both a higher infl  ow rate into unemployment and a lower out-
fl  ow rate from unemployment. In Spain and 
Ireland, a period of stabilisation has since set in with a decline in infl  ow rates, sug-gesting smaller employment losses. In the 
meantime, infl  ow rates have fallen in Portu-gal, too. In all three countries, the rates are 
still well above their pre- crisis levels, how-
ever. It is only since the second quarter of 
2014 that a moderate increase in the out-
fl  ow rates from unemployment can be ob-
served. This means that the average dur-ation of unemployment is also tending to go back down again somewhat. In Spain and Ireland this period is still considerably 
longer than before the crisis, however. It is 
only in Portugal that the average duration has now reached the mean level of the 
2005-07 period again.
Even if the economy goes on recovering at 
the current pace, unemployment in the 
three countries is set to decline only slowly 
and will still be considerably higher than be-
fore the onset of the global recession for 
some time to come. One key factor behind 
this is that unemployment in these three 
countries has become entrenched over the past few years, as is shown by the marked 
rise in structural unemployment as meas-ured by the European Commission’s non- accelerating wage rate of unemployment (NAWRU). The NAWRU in Spain went up 
from 13.0% in 2007 to 19.8% in 2014, and, 
during the same period, from 9.0% to 
12.1% in Portugal and from 7.2% to 10.9% 
in Ireland.8 The initiated structural reforms 
will help to counter the rise in structural un-
employment and to accelerate its reduc-tion. Given the diffi   cult situation in the 
three countries, it is therefore vital to perse-vere with the reform process.
7 See M W L Elsby, B Hobijn and A Sahin (2013), Un-
employment Dynamics in the OECD, The Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 95(2), pp 530-548. Elsby et 
al extend the method of R Shimer (2012), Reassessing 
the Ins and Outs of Unemployment, Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 15(2), pp 127-148, for calculating the 
transition rates given the availability of discrete macro-
data. This is based on the unemployment rate over 
time dut
dt=xt(1−ut)−ftut,
where ut denotes the unemployment rate, xt the in-
fl  ow rate and ft the outfl  ow rate in month t.
8 Owing to Ireland’s comparatively strong growth over the past few years, its structural unemployment rate at the end of the period under review was back below its 2012 peak of 12.1%.Turnover in the labour market
Source: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations based on the La-
bour Force Survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank02468101214%
Scale enlarged
Monthly inflow rates
to unemployment
00.40.81.21.62.0Monthly outflow rates
from unemployment
Ireland Portugal Spain2005 to 2007 2008 to 2011
2012 to 2013 2014Average of the periods (Q2 in each case)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
25

trending upwards slightly since mid-2013, and 
exceeded the prior-  year level by ½ % in the 
spring quarter, the last for which data are avail-
able. This was due largely to the creation of 
new jobs in services, especially in trade, trans-
port and communications. Employment in the 
industrial sector, by contrast, remained virtually 
unchanged. The number of unemployed con -
tinued to fall slightly after mid-  year . At 11.5% 
after seasonal adjustment, the third-  q uarter 
standardised unemployment rate was some -
what lower than a period earlier and 0.5 per -
centage point below its cyclical peak in spring 
2013. By now, unemployment rates are on the decline in virtually all euro-
 ar
ea member states, 
exceptions being France and Italy, which in 
summer posted new highs of 10.5% and 12.6% 
respectively. Last year and in the current year, 
the unemployment rate in Ireland, Spain and 
Portugal, on the euro-  ar ea periphery, even fell 
quite considerably, starting from a very high level. One contributing factor was that, in 
those countries, the cyclical recovery has begun 
to pick up speed, while productivity has been 
inching upwards. Other factors include the 
shrinking working-  ag e population and the de -
cline, due for instance to discouragement, in labour force participation (see the box on 
pages 22 to 25).
After a spring in which euro-  ar ea consumer 
price inflation had largely ground to a halt, in 
the third quarter prices rose by a slight 0.2%, 
after seasonal adjustment, on the quarter. Prices of unprocessed food rose for the first time since summer 2013, while even prices for processed food went up somewhat. The effect of the depreciating euro was felt particularly in industrial goods. Moreover, services price infla-tion, which had already been quite perceptible in the two preceding quarters, accelerated. By contrast, energy prices once again contracted. 
As in spring already, gas prices were slashed, 
whereas prices for refined petroleum products 
fell only marginally despite the distinct decline 
in crude oil prices; this was due to efforts to improve depressed profit margins. In spite of 
the slight rise in prices over time, annual HICP 
inflation shrank further in the third quarter to 
+0.4%, following +0.6% in spring. The fairly 
sharp rise in the prices of energy and food in 
summer 2013 was a factor. Excluding these two volatile components, which are affected strongly by weather conditions or global fac -
tors such as crude oil prices, the annual infla -
tion rate remained unchanged at +0.8%.
Seasonally adjusted consumer prices were down slightly in October month-
 on-
 month.
 
This was due not only to the sharp drop in 
crude oil prices but also to a distinct decline in 
industrial goods price inflation, attributable chiefly to seasonal sales in Germany. Annual 
consumer price inflation stood at +0.4%. How-ever, since energy prices did not fall that steeply relative to the decline in crude oil prices, there is likely to be room for further price reduction. Against this background, low headline HICP in-
flation rates may be expected to continue in 
the months to come.Inflation still 
merely mutedConsumer prices in October down somewhat on the monthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
26

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
On 4  September 2014, the ECB Governing 
Council adopted an additional package of monetary policy measures against the back -
drop of slackening growth and a persistently 
subdued inflation outlook in the euro area. To-
gether with the decisions taken in June 2014, 
these measures are intended to help anchor medium and long-
 term inflation expectations
 
and to bring the inflation rate back up to a level 
closer to 2%. As part of its package of meas -
ures, the Governing Council lowered key inter -
est rates by 10 basis points to 0.05% for its main refinancing operations, -0.20% for the deposit facility and 0.30% for the marginal 
lending facility.
The interest rate decision was based on the 
ECB Governing Council’s view that annual HICP inflation, which fell to 0.3% in August accord-
ing to a flash estimate, would remain low in 
the months ahead and increase only gradually 
by the end of 2016. This view is supported by sluggish real growth and the continuously sub-dued development of the monetary aggregate M3 and lending.
In addition to lowering interest rates, the ECB 
Governing Council also adopted purchase pro-grammes for asset-
 backed securities (ABS) and 
covered bonds. These measures are intended 
to improve the functioning of monetary policy transmission, support the provision of credit to 
the real economy and contribute to an even 
more accommodative monetary policy stance. 
The ECB Governing Council expects that these purchase programmes, along with the targeted 
longer-  term r efinancing operations (TLTROs) 
adopted in June with a maturity of up to four 
years, will significantly expand the Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet. Specifically, the ECB Governing 
Council announced on 6 November 2014 that 
it expects the balance sheet volume to move towards the dimensions it had at the beginning of 2012. However, the chief factor determining 
the monetary policy course going forward is 
and remains the inflation outlook.
Following its meeting on 2 October 2014, the 
ECB Governing Council published further de -
tails on the two new purchase programmes for 
ABS (Asset Backed Securities Purchase Pro -
gramme, ABSPP) and covered bonds (Covered 
Bond Purchase Programme, CBPP3). Each pro -
gramme will last for at least two years, and the 
eligibility criteria for purchasing securities are 
aligned with the requirements of the Eurosys -
tem’s collateral framework for monetary policy ECB Governing 
Council lowers key interest rates again to new 
 
record low
ECB Governing 
Council adopts purchase 
 
programmes  
for ABS and 
covered bondsPurchase pro-gramme details
Money market interest ratesin the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. • Average 1 to 12 November 2014.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 20140.500.51.01.52.02.5
–
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
27

Money market management and liquidity needs
 The three reserve maintenance periods 
from 9 July to 7 October 2014 saw a marked 
decrease in euro-area liquidity needs stem-
ming from autonomous factors. In the Sep-
tember-October 2014 reserve period, the 
fi  gure averaged €475.1 billion, which was 
€40.5 billion below its average level in the 
June-July 2014 reserve period. The €13.2 
billion net increase in the volume of bank-
notes in circulation served to absorb liquid-
ity, while the €31.6 billion net decline in government deposits and changes in the other autonomous factors (including net 
foreign assets) totalling €22.1 billion had a 
liquidity-providing effect. Minimum reserve 
requirements went up by €0.9 billion over 
the three maintenance periods, triggering a 
slight rise in the calculated liquidity needs 
(see table below).On 24 September, a volume of just under 
€83 billion was made available for the fi  rst 
targeted longer-term refi  nancing operation 
(TLTRO). Shifts from the main refi  nancing 
operation (amounting to €15 billion at the 
end of September) coupled with early re-
payments of liquidity allotted in the three-
year LTROs (totalling €87 billion during the 
period under review) caused the outstand-
ing volume for tender operations on the value date of the fi  rst TLTRO to grow, but 
only by just over €47 billion to €519 billion. 
Overall, the average outstanding tender volume fell from a level of €572 billion in 
the June-July reserve period (not taking into 
account the SMP liquidity-absorbing oper-
ation conducted in the fi  rst week) to stand 
at €497 billion in the September-October 
period (see the chart on page 30).
Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2014
9 July to
12 Aug13 Aug to9 Sep10 Sep to7 Oct
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  9.5 –  4.2 +  0.5
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 17.6 + 26.2 – 12.2
3 Net foreign assets
2 +  7.6 +  0.2 +  4.2
4 Other factors 2 + 11.1 +  3.4 –  4.4
Total + 26.8 + 25.6 – 11.9
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  5.1 +  8.1 – 15.8
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 45.4 – 27.3 + 10.8
(c) Other operations + 20.4 –  5.9 –  1.6
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.2 –  0.1 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  0.7 –  0.6 +  0.9
Total – 30.6 – 25.8 –  5.7
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) –  4.1 –  0.1 – 17.5
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.6 –  0.2 –  0.1
1 For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
28

During the period under review, the level of 
excess liquidity continued to be primarily in-
fl  uenced by open market operations, in-cluding, in particular, the additional de-mand for the main refi  nancing operation 
which arose at the end of each month, as 
well as by repayments of funds provided in the three-year LTROs and autonomous fac-
tors. Having averaged €130 billion in the 
two preceding reserve periods, the level of 
excess liquidity fell perceptibly in the Sep-tember-October period, following the re-
newed interest rate cut, to an average fi  g-
ure of €112 billion. The latter period was, 
however, characterised by two phases. Up 
to the settlement of the fi  rst TLTRO on 24 
September, the excess liquidity fi  gure habit-
ually hovered below €100 billion, reaching 
its lowest level at €77 billion. Following 
settlement of the TLTRO, this fi  gure swelled 
considerably, subsequently rising to as 
much as €160 billion.
The balance sheet holdings of securities ac-
quired through already completed purchase 
programmes fell further during the period under review in light of maturities and  taking into account end-of-quarter revalu-
ations (CBPP1 and CBPP2 declined by €3.0 
billion to €31.7 billion and by €0.6 billion to 
€13.5 billion respectively, while the SMP 
volume was down by €7.2 billion to €149.1 billion).
Overnight rates only partially mirrored the 
renewed reduction of the main refi  nancing 
rate and of the deposit rate by 10 basis 
points. The secured overnight money mar-
ket rate (GC Pooling, ECB basket) averaged 
-0.04% during the September-October re-
serve period and was thus no more than 9 
basis points below the main refi  nancing 
rate. At the same time, EONIA recorded an 
average rate of 0.00%, placing it no more 
than -5 basis points apart from the key interest rate. These interest rate spreads were narrower than in the previous two re-
serve periods, due not only to the overall 
lower level of excess liquidity but also quite probably to efforts by numerous credit insti-
tutions to avoid, wherever possible, (mark-
edly) negative overnight rates when trading 
on the euro money market. However, the 
September cut in the key interest rates had 
a stimulatory effect on overnight turnover, 
particularly in the secured segment. In the 
September-October reserve period, GC Pooling’s overnight turnover (ECB basket) 
rose by a substantial margin to an average 
of €19.9 billion (previous two periods: €14.4 billion and €14.7 billion). Unsecured EONIA 
turnover barely grew, its level remaining 
relatively low at an average of €29.8 billion. The sharp increases in overnight rates seen 
at the end of each month persisted as banks limited their lending (relatively low 
turnover) although the liquidity situation on 
these days was very favourable (see the 
chart above).Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug Sep Oct Nov
20140.20.100.10.20.30.4
––++++Daily data
€ bn%
050100150200Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
29

Halfway through the October-November 
2014 reserve period that followed the period under review, the reduced level of 
excess liquidity (around €90 billion) caused 
overnight rates to rise. While the secured 
overnight money market rate (GC Pooling, 
ECB basket) remained negative, EONIA rose 
to enter positive territory where it stayed until the end of October. During the fi  nal 
week of the reserve period, at which point 
credit institutions have usually come close 
to meeting their minimum reserve require-
ments and therefore have less need for 
 liquidity, there was a further marked drop in overnight rates, which saw the secured GC Pooling overnight rate (ECB basket) fall to a new all-time low of -0.114%. However, over the period as a whole, overnight rates aver-aged -0.01% (EONIA) and -0.06% (GC Pool-ing) and were therefore only slightly below 
their levels in the preceding period. The 
underlying turnover likewise fell short of the 
previous-period levels on average over the period, however in the secured segment these amounts remained elevated. At an average of €114 billion, excess liquidity 
stood marginally above its level in the previ-
ous period but remained volatile. Balance sheet holdings under the new purchase programme CBPP3, which was launched 
during this period, amounted to €7.4 billion as at 7 November 2014 and thus have had 
no major impact on the liquidity situation so far. At that juncture, the ABS Purchase Programme (ABSPP) had not yet com-
menced.Liquidity provision and use
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Securities Markets Programme (SMP), Covered Bond Purchase Programmes (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
SMP liquidity-absorbing tenders
Deposit facility
3002001000100200300400500600700800900
–––+++++++++Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
2014Current account holdings in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tenders
Three-year LTROsPurchase programmes 1
Targeted LTROMarginal lending facility
Reserve period tenders
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operations
Nov.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
30

refinancing operations.1 As a rule, this requires 
a minimum credit assessment equivalent to an 
external rating agency’s rating of BBB-. Whereas two such ratings are needed for ABS, only one is required for covered bonds. Exceptions apply 
to ABS with underlying claims against private non-
 financial corpor
ations which are resident 
in Greece or Cyprus. It is impossible for these 
ABS to obtain the minimum credit assessment 
since rating agencies apply upper limits linked 
to the individual country ratings. In these cases, the ABS must have received at least the highest possible rating for the respective country. Simi-
lar exceptions were also agreed for covered 
bonds issued in Greece and Cyprus. However, 
both securities categories in these countries must conform with additional requirements 
which go beyond the Eurosystem’s temporary 
collateral framework and are intended to lower the risk associated with this type of paper.
2
The Eurosystem began purchasing covered 
bonds in mid-  October 2 014 and had obtained 
paper worth €7.4 billion by 7 November. ABS 
purchases will commence in the course of No-vember now that the external service providers 
with which the Eurosystem will be collaborat -
ing in this context have been selected. Senior 
tranches, which are regarded as comparatively 
safe, will initially be the only purchase option. 
The option of purchasing mezzanine tranches 
may be introduced at a later stage, provided 
that the state can provide sufficient guarantees for these.
Monetary policy purchases of privately issued 
securities can have wide-  r anging negative side 
effects. For example, if purchase prices are too 
high, sellers can benefit from a transfer of re -
sources akin to a subsidy, thereby placing other 
market participants at a disadvantage. This 
would result in distortions of competition and 
inefficiencies resulting from misallocation. 
Moreover, private investors could potentially be crowded out by central banks, which could ad-
versely affect the sustainability of these mar -
kets. Announcing a specific high target volume 
for a central bank’s balance sheet total could further compound the above-
 mentioned side
 
effects. The Eurosystem must not lose sight of 
these side effects when conducting the pur -
chase programmes.
Following the second meeting of the ECB Gov-
erning Council in September 2014, the ECB an-nounced the result of the draw for the Govern-ing Council’s voting rotation system, which will enter into force in January 2015. Under this sys-
tem, the group of Governors representing the 
national central banks of the euro area’s largest 
member states, which includes the Bundes -
bank President as well as the Governors of the 
Spanish, French, Italian and Dutch central 
banks, will take turns in relinquishing their vot-ing rights for one ECB Governing Council meet-ing.
The first of eight TLTROs was carried out on 
18 September 2014. 255 of the 382 authorised 
institutions borrowed a total volume of €82.6 
billion from the Eurosystem. The second TLTRO 
will be carried out on 11 December 2014. In 
these first two TLTROs, participating banks can take out central bank loans amounting to up to 7% of their outstanding credit volume (not in-
cluding loans to households for house pur -
chase) to the non-  financial private sector as at 
30  April 2014, ie around €400 billion at the 
most. The interest rate for TLTROs is ten basis 
points above the main refinancing rate applic -
able at the time of allotment.
After excess liquidity generally fluctuated be -
tween €100 billion and €150 billion in July and 
August, demand in the area of main refinan -
cing operations waned following the allotment and settlement of the first TLTRO. At the same 
time, a slight rise in the early repayments of three-
 year tenders was r
ecorded. On the 
whole, the first TLTRO did not lead to any per -Eurosystem has 
already begun purchasing covered bonds
Side effects of 
inflated pur-chase prices, particularly in the case of high or unlimited purchase 
 
volumesVoting rotation 
system for ECB Governing Council to begin in January 2015
255 banks 
 
borrow €82.6 
billion in first 
 TLTRO
No persistent 
 
increase in 
 
excess liquidity 
from first TLTRO allotment
1 However, a number of adjustments will have to be made to take into account the difference between buying assets outright and accepting them as collateral for monetary pol-icy operations.2 For further details, see the ECB press release of 2 October 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
31

Excess liquidity and short- term money market rates
The level of short- term interest rates in the 
interbank money market depends to a great extent on the level of the Eurosystem’s key interest rates. Apart from the main refi  nan-
cing rate, these comprise the interest rates 
set for the marginal lending facility and for 
the deposit facility, which usually form a 
symmetrical corridor around the main refi  -
nancing rate. While this interest rate corri-
dor limits fl  uctuations in interbank over-night rates, the position of these rates 
within the corridor hinges primarily on the 
prevailing liquidity situation in the banking 
sector, which can largely be gauged by the 
level of excess liquidity.1 The term “excess 
liquidity” should be understood as meaning that banks’ overnight balances at the Euro-
system’s central banks, both in terms of their total amounts and average levels 
throughout the reserve period, exceed the 
minimum reserve requirements, meaning 
that, in aggregate, bank’s central bank re-
serves may be much higher than actually 
necessary.Prior to the fi  nancial crisis, the interest rate 
corridor boasted a symmetrical width of 
±100 basis points around the main refi  nan-cing rate. This made it relatively wide, thus providing strong incentives for a horizontal 
distribution of liquidity via the interbank 
money market. At that time, by restricting 
the size of allotments, the Eurosystem was 
able to ensure balanced liquidity conditions in aggregate terms, in other words a negli-gible level of excess liquidity, which allowed it to anchor short- term money market rates 
close to the main refi  nancing rate and 
therefore roughly at the centre of the inter-est rate corridor (see chart  below).
The escalation of the fi  nancial crisis in the fourth quarter of 2008 made it more diffi   -
cult for a large number of banks to procure 
liquidity via the interbank money market. 
The Eurosystem reacted to this situation by 
1 Excess liquidity = deposit facility plus current account 
deposits minus the reserve requirement.
Money market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014–10+1+2+3+4+5On average during the reserve period
€bn%
0200400600800
Excess liquidityMarginal lending rate
Minimum bid rate or fixed
interest rate for MROs
Deposit rateEONIADeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
32

switching its refi  nancing operations to a 
fi  xed- rate full allotment format. Since then, 
allotment volumes have no longer been 
subject to Eurosystem restraints and have in-
stead been geared to counterparties’ aggre-
gate demand. As a result, monetary policy refi  nancing and consequently the pool of excess liquidity have risen sharply. To date, the biggest increase in excess liquidity, 
which took its level up to nearly €800 billion at the beginning of 2012, was generated by 
the large- scale recourse to the two three- year refi  nancing operations conducted at 
the end of 2011 and the beginning of 2012.
Against a background of exceedingly high excess liquidity, the interbank overnight 
rates tend to closely shadow the deposit fa-cility rate.
2 Under such circumstances, a de-
clining level of excess liquidity will usually tip the balance back to an increase in de-
mand in the interbank money market, and 
EONIA will move closer to the main refi  nan-
cing rate, typically amid some fl  uctuation. Moreover, the negative status of the de-
posit facility since June 2014 has not funda-
mentally changed this inverse relationship 
between excess liquidity and money market 
rates. As the Eurosystem has progressively narrowed the gap between the main refi  -nancing rate and the deposit rate since 
2009 from its original width of 100 bp to its 
current size of 25 bp, the maximum width 
between EONIA and the deposit rate has 
likewise diminished (see adjacent chart).
Overall, therefore, the current situation is characterised by relatively close interaction 
between excess liquidity and EONIA. Should a rise in market interest rates induced by de-
clining excess liquidity cause short- term 
money market transactions to become less 
attractive to individual institutions than monetary policy refi  nancing, these institu-
tions will display an intensifi  ed demand for 
funds from the Eurosystem. This results in an increase in the level of excess liquidity, while EONIA will tend to fall. As the aggregate al-
lotment volume for refi  nancing operations under the current allotment procedure is 
not controlled by the Eurosystem, any fl  uc-
tuations in the liquidity situation and in 
short- term money market rates which might occur should be viewed as perfectly normal and should in no way be interpreted as sig-nalling a modifi  ed monetary policy stance.Banks’ aggregate demand for liquidity and 
the resulting excess liquidity will continue to 
play a signifi  cant role with regard to the status of very short- term money market rates within 
the interest rate corridor, not least because the Eurosystem has already stated its inten-
tion to maintain its policy of full allotment up to the end of 2016. In addition, the Eurosys-tem agreed on a number of measures in the 
summer and autumn of 2014 (ie the TLTROs 
and the two new purchase programmes for ABS and covered bonds) which, taken to-gether – and notwithstanding the imminent maturity dates of the two three- year ten-ders – will have the capacity to create new 
potential for raising the excess liquidity level, 
which experience has shown is likely to have a dampening effect on money market rates.
In the longer term, for reasons of effi   ciency 
it would nonetheless be desirable to revert 
to a system of controlled liquidity manage-ment entailing limited allotment volumes as 
this is a more precise means of controlling 
short- term money market rates which sends out a clearer signal regarding the monetary policy stance.
2 Provided the deposit rate is positive, banks are par-
ticularly inclined to store excess liquidity in the Eurosys-
tem’s deposit facility, where, unlike excess reserves held in current accounts, such liquidity earns interest. Since 
lowering the Eurosystem’s deposit rate to 0% and below, excess reserves held in both current accounts 
and the deposit facility have earned the same yield.Excess liquidity and spread betweenEONIA and deposit rate
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 80000.10.20.30.40.50.60.7
Excess liquidity in € bnOn average during the reserve period since October 2008
Spread between
main refinancing rateand deposit rate at...
... 100 basis points
...  25 basis points...  50 basis points...  75 basis pointsEONIA minus deposit rate
Percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
33

sistent increase in excess liquidity. It would ap-
pear that incentives still remain for the euro-  
area banking system to repay excess liquidity to 
the Eurosystem, also in view of the compara -
tively narrow interest rate corridor, which cur -
rently stands at ±25 basis points.
Despite the slightly disproportionate reaction 
to the interest rate cut in June, the unsecured 
interbank overnight rate EONIA initially re -
mained positive until the end of August. Since 
then, the EONIA has been both positive and 
negative – depending, in particular, on the pre-
vailing liquidity conditions. Although the 
 EONIA 
r
eached new record lows of up to 0.045% fol-
lowing the further interest rate cut of an add-
itional 10 basis points at the beginning of Sep-
tember, unsecured interbank overnight rates 
are once again closer to the main refinancing 
rate than they were in the period from June to August. Overall, when viewed in relation to ex-cess liquidity, the interest rate spread between 
the EONIA and the Eurosystem deposit rate 
continues to move in line with historical values (see the box on pages 32 and 33). A situation 
in which very short-  term money market r ates 
are nearing the level of the main refinancing 
rate following a decline in excess liquidity sug-gests a return to more normal conditions in the money market within the context of the full al-lotment of refinancing operations.Monetary developments 
in the euro area
Measured in terms of 12-month changes, the 
deleveraging process in the euro-  ar ea MFI sec-
tor continued to slow considerably in the third 
quarter. This was due, in particular, to the 
grinding to a halt of the substantial reduction 
in financial derivatives, which began in 2013. 
Furthermore, euro-
 ar
ea banks on balance ex -
panded their holdings of securities issued by gener
al government and their claims on non-  
residents. By contrast, the recovery in lending 
to the private sector, which started in summer 2013 and accelerated noticeably in the first half 
of 2014, began to sputter in the third quarter 
owing to weak growth in the real economy. As a result, the sustained growth of M3 was once 
again buoyed by other counterparts rather 
than lending to the private sector.
Following significant inflows in the preceding 
quarter, M3 increased substantially in the third quarter. This increase was once again attribut-
able to overnight deposits, which benefited 
from a further reduction in other deposit rates 
and rose considerably, above all in the non-  
financial private sector
. By contrast, other 
short-  term deposits included in M3 were scaled back slightly on balance in the reporting quar -
ter, mainly as a result of a decline in the short-
 Short-  term 
money 
market 
rates turn nega-
tive after ECB Governing Council’s interest rate decisionsMacroeconomic setting
Substantial M3 
growth driven by overnight 
 
depositsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2014 Q3 2014 Q2
Central government deposits – 27.2 16.3
Monetary aggregate M3 132.2 75.6
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 137.8 56.6
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 10.2 15.6
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 4.5 3.4
Monetary capital 3.2 – 76.8
of which
Capital and reserves 62.3 1.8
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities – 59.2 – 78.6Assets 2014 Q3 2014 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 16.1 – 39.2
Loans – 11.6 – 43.8
Loans, adjusted
1 – 12.1 12.0
Securities –  4.5 4.6
Credit to general government in the euro area 53.7 – 35.3
Loans –  0.6 – 13.2
Securities 54.3 – 22.1
Net external assets 8.9 83.4
Other counterparts of M3 62.2 – 49.6
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
34

term time deposits of households. As in the 
previous quarter, holdings of marketable instru-
ments rose slightly on balance, mainly due to 
an increase in money market fund shares and 
bank debt securities with a maturity of less 
than two years in the third quarter.
Against this backdrop, the upward trend in 
monetary growth that has been observed since 
the beginning of the year gained momentum 
in the reporting quarter and the annual growth 
rate of M3 rose markedly to 2.5%. At the same 
time annual growth (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) of loans to the euro-
 ar
ea 
private sector continued to rise perceptibly to 
-0.6% in September despite slight quarterly outflows. This was because net redemptions slowed considerably during the course of the year as a whole. However, the gap between 
money and credit growth remained wide in this context. Despite the tentative signs of recovery, 
underlying monetary dynamics continue to be 
subdued.
The recovery of loans to the euro-  ar ea private 
sector, which began to rise again slightly in the 
second quarter for the first time in two years, 
suffered a temporary setback in the third quar -
ter. This was due to loans to the corporate sec-
tor, especially to non-  financial corpor ations, 
where the robust upward momentum of the 
previous quarter stalled and the upward trend 
observed since the third quarter of 2013 started 
to falter. It should, however, be noted that 
these loans are generally characterised by cer -
tain fluctuations. Besides long-  term loans to  
non-
 financial corpor
ations, which are usually 
demanded for investment purposes, marked outflows of medium-
 term loans wer
e also re -
corded in the reporting quarter. Nonetheless, 
there are still signs of a clear recovery in lend-
ing compared with the previous year, as a re -
sult of which the annual growth rate of loans 
to non-  financial corpor ations in the euro area 
rose from -2.8% in the third quarter of 2013 to -1.8% in the reporting quarter.Renewed 
 upwar
d trend in 
monetary and 
credit growth
Reduction in 
loans to non-
 
financial 
corpor-
ations continuesMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, taken in 
isolation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation. 5 Adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 4
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
35

 Differences in dynamics of loans to non- fi  nancial 
 corporations in Germany and France
France currently stands out among the four 
large euro- area countries as the only one to 
have recorded stable, positive growth in loans to non- fi  nancial corporations in the 
euro area over a period of several quarters 
(see the chart on page 38). Although credit growth in France can be described as mod-erate compared with the levels seen during the previous 15 years, lending there is never-
theless perceptibly higher than in Germany, 
where credit dynamics remain subdued.1
At fi  rst glance, this is surprising as there are currently no indications of the credit supply being restricted in Germany, and in recent 
years the German economy has recorded 
stronger real GDP growth than the French 
economy. Between 2010 and the start of 2014 (the most recent data available), the average annual real GDP growth rate in Germany (+2.2%) was signifi  cantly higher 
than in France (+1.2%). This is primarily due 
to more favourable export growth in Ger-
many and the substantial structural barriers to growth in France.
During the period under review, long- term 
loans (which are commonly used for invest-
ment purposes) were the main driver of growth in loans to non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations in Germany and France. However, in-
dustrial investment patterns in these two 
countries do not explain the differences in 
loan dynamics over the past few years. 
Since 2010, industrial investment in France 
has on average even increased at a slower 
pace (+2.9%) than in Germany (+4.0%).
Instead, it seems that the different rates of growth for loans to non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations in Germany and France are mainly due to differences in the availability of alternative fi  nancing sources. According to the national 
accounts data (including the fi  nancial ac-counts), non- fi  nancial corporations in Ger-
many have, for some time now, generated a substantial part of their funds internally (see adjacent chart).
2 At the current end (data are 
available up until the fourth quarter of 2013), 
1 Lending to non- fi  nancial corporations in the rest of 
the euro area has been relatively low in both countries 
in recent years and is therefore disregarded in the fol-
lowing analysis. French banks, in particular, have re-
duced their loans to non- fi  nancial corporations in the 
rest of the euro area on balance during the last two years. This is consistent with the general euro- area trend of deleveraging in the banking sector, accom-
panied by a greater focus on core business, but it also refl  ects the currently heightened credit risk in the per-iphery countries.2 For an in- depth discussion of the development of the 
fi  nancing structure of non- fi  nancial corporations in 
Germany, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Long- term devel-opments in corporate fi  nancing in Germany – evidence 
based on the fi  nancial accounts, Monthly Report, 
January 2012, pp 13-27.Sources (+) and uses (–) ofnon-financial corporations’ funds
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 1325201510505101520
–––––++++As a percentage of GDP, four-quarter moving sum
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25FranceGermanyExternal financing
Internal financing
Acquisition of financial assets
InvestmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
36

internal fi  nancing makes up around 92% of 
total fi  nancing. In France, by contrast, in-
ternal fi  nancing accounts for a signifi  cantly lower share, recently amounting to only 
49%. The lesser importance of internal fi  nan-
cing in France refl  ects the downward ten-
dency of the profi  t ratio of non- fi  nancial cor-porations since the escalation of the fi  nancial crisis in 2008 (see the upper of the adjacent 
charts). The main reason for this was that 
the slump in gross value added in 2009 was replicated only to a minor extent in the com-pensation of employees and this discrepancy was not corrected ex post. To avoid a further loss in competitiveness, French non- fi  nancial 
corporations only marginally adjusted their 
sales prices to factor in the increase in wages 
and non- wage labour costs in excess of 
productivity gains.
Thus, for some time now, non- fi  nancial cor-
porations in France have been more reliant 
on external funding to fi  nance their equity 
investments and fi  xed asset formation. This is refl  ected not only in a structurally higher 
demand for loans, but also in the stronger 
overall dynamics of external fi  nancing (see 
the lower of the adjacent charts). The four- 
quarter sum of external fi  nancing of non- financial corporations in France thus 
amounts to around €100 billion (~ 4.8% of 
GDP) according to the latest results (fi  rst 
quarter of 2014). By contrast, the value for their German counterparts only amounts to 
around €10 billion (~ 0.4% of GDP). The signifi  cantly greater use of external fi  nan-cing sources by French non- fi  nancial cor-porations is a key factor which drove up 
their debt- to- GDP ratio perceptibly in recent years, while the corresponding ratio in Ger-many has remained at a relatively low level.
Despite the sharper growth in loans in France, their share in total external fi  nan-
cing has – like in Germany – fallen notice-
ably in recent years owing to substitution effects. In France, non- fi  nancial corpor-ations have recently been making increas-
ing use of unlisted shares and other equity. 
Furthermore, debt securities have been gaining signifi  cance in both countries in 
light of falling capital market yields (in rela-tion to bank lending rates).Profit ratio of non-financial corporations
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 1328303234363840424446Gross operating surplus as a percentage of gross value added
Germany
France
External financing
of non-financial corporations
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 1450050100150200
–++++€ billion, four-quarter moving sum
–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300+350Other external financing
Other equity
Listed shares
Debt securities
Other loans
Domestic MFI loans
Germany
FranceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
37

At country level, heterogeneity in the develop-
ment of lending remained high. Of the four 
large euro-
 ar
ea member states, only French 
non- financial corporations continued to report 
positive quarterly inflows (see chart above and the box on pages 36 and 37). German corpor -
ations on balance scaled back their loans fol -
lowing the positive quarterly inflow in the 
second quarter, while the reduction in loans to 
non- financial corpor ations picked up in Italy 
and Spain. There are likely to be many reasons for this development. In Spain, the positive im-
petus in the domestic economy, which usually 
supports the development of loans to non-  
 financial corporations with a lag of a few quar -
ters, is being overshadowed by the great need for deleveraging in the non-
 financial corpor
ate 
sector. The fact that Italy has slipped back into 
recession presents a particular risk to loan growth. In Germany (and the euro area as a 
whole), corporations’ demand for bank loans is likely to have been dampened – as in the previ-
ous quarters – by an increase in the use of 
 alternative sources of funds, while own funds 
represent the primary source of financing in 
Germany.
Survey results suggest that the importance of supply-
 si
de credit constraints diminished fur -
ther in most euro-  ar ea member states in the 
reporting quarter. According to the ECB’s re -cently published SAFE survey, small and me -
dium-  sized enterprises (SMEs) in the eur o area 
currently perceive access to bank loans, which had – in their opinion – deteriorated markedly in 2009 and 2012, to be less problematic, not least owing to an overall improvement in enter -
prise-  specific factors. The main exception to  
this are Italian SMEs, which believe that bank 
loans are now less readily available. In the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) conducted in the third quarter, the participating euro-
 a
rea banks on 
balance indicated that they largely left stand -
ards for loans to enterprises unchanged at the 
previous quarter’s level. This affected enter -
prises of all sizes in a similar way. At the same 
time, the surveyed euro-  ar ea institutions per -
ceived no marked changes in non-  financial cor -
por
ations’ demand for bank loans.
Once again, loans to households were instru -
mental in the development of loans to the euro-
 ar
ea private sector in the third quarter. 
These have grown at a somewhat faster rate 
since the beginning of the year, but, with an -
nual growth of 0.6%, are still to be regarded as extremely moderate. In an environment charac-terised by historically low interest rates, growth continued to be driven by loans for house pur -
chase. Here, too, there was persistent hetero -
geneity at country level. The increase in the 
euro-  ar ea aggregate masked a considerable in-Lending hetero-
geneity in the four large euro-
 
ar
ea countries 
remains high
Renewed reduc-
tion in the 
 
importance  
of supply-
 
side 
credit constraintsDiscernible in-
crease in loans to householdsLoans to non-financial corporations
€ billion; three-month changes at the end of the quarter, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Source: ECB. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 1425201510505101520
–––––++++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2011 12 13 145040302010010203040
–––––++++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
38

crease in loans for house purchase in core 
euro-  ar ea countries, while the periphery coun-
tries saw a further overall decline, not least on 
account of the need for household deleverag -
ing. For the euro area as a whole, the banks 
surveyed as part of the BLS also reported that 
demand in this credit segment rose consider -
ably, while standards for loans to households 
for house purchase in the euro area remained 
virtually unchanged.
For the first time since 2009, perceptible net inflows of consumer loans were recorded in the third quarter. This gradual upturn reflects the somewhat improved underlying dynamics of private consumption that have been ob -
served since 2013. This development is consist-ent with the information reported by the insti-tutions surveyed as part of the BLS. They stated 
that a slight easing of standards was accom -
panied by a moderate increase in borrowing in 
the consumer credit segment. However, signs 
of weaker private consumption are becoming 
increasingly evident, which is likely to have a 
dampening effect on credit growth in the com-ing quarters.
The net external asset position of the MFI sec-
tor, which has been the main counterpart sup-
porting M3 for the last two years, grew only 
slightly in the third quarter. Net outflows were even recorded in August and September. Since current account surpluses remained largely un-
changed over the same period, these reduc -
tions are likely to be primarily attributable to net outflows fr
om portfolio transactions with 
non- r esidents. While non-  banks r esident in the 
euro area continued to buy foreign securities, 
non- r esident investors disposed of domestically issued debt securities on a large scale. The rise in securitised lending to domestic general gov-ernment on banks’ balance sheets and the con-current increase in the external liabilities of the 
MFI sector suggest that these were sales of, among other things, government debt secur -
ities issued by euro-
 ar ea countries that were 
purchased by domestic banks.
In contrast to previous quarters, therefore, se -
curitised lending to government once again 
had a significant positive impact on monetary 
growth. Demand for euro-  ar ea securities issued 
by governments outside the respective home country was particularly high. In general, the 
greater interest in government securities can be interpreted as reflecting the relatively comfort-
able liquidity situation of domestic banks and 
the above-  mentioned lar ge-  scale sale of eur o- 
area securities by foreign investors.
Monetary capital, which increased slightly on balance following a significant decline in the Only slight 
 incr
ease in net 
 
external asset 
positionOn balance, marked increase in government securitiesBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20143 000 3 0002 000 2 0001 000 1 00001 000 1 0002 000 2 0003 000 3 0004 000 4 000
–––++++12-month changes1 at the end of the quarter, in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private sector in the euro area
Claims on general government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIsin the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
39

previous quarter, had a negative impact on M3 
in the reporting quarter. Appreciable outflows 
of both long-  term time deposits and long-  term 
bank debt securities with a maturity of over 
two years were offset by another significant in-
crease in capital and reserves in light of the 
new regulatory and supervisory activities. Des -
pite the distinct improvements in placing 
longer-
 term bank debt securities r
eported by 
institutions participating in the BLS, outflows 
were once again recorded in this area by Ger -
man, Spanish and Italian banks, in particular. This suggests that bank-
 side factors continue
 
to play a role in this context, too. In addition to 
some credit institutions requiring little funding 
on account of deleveraging, a key bank-  side  
factor is that banks have been substituting 
bank debt securities with alternative sources of 
financing, such as Eurosystem liquidity pro -
vided on favourable terms as well as deposits, 
which are continuing to grow. This mirrors the 
information provided by the majority of euro-  
area banks participating in the BLS which said 
that they had either already participated in the 
Eurosystem’s TLTROs or that they planned to do so in future. Banks also reported a slight overall improvement in their refinancing situ -
ation.
The net reduction in the asset items of euro-  
ar
ea banks observed in 2013 decelerated fur-
ther in the reporting quarter, measured in terms 
of 12-month changes (see chart on page 39). 
The deceleration was spread across various bal-
ance sheet items. There were two particularly 
striking developments. First, the substantial re-
duction in financial derivatives in the trading portfolio, which began in 2013, ground to a 
halt. Of the four large euro-  ar ea countries, this 
affected France and Germany most. Second, a 
deceleration also occurred in the reduction of 
other asset items in France, Germany and Spain, caused primarily by further net inflows 
of claims on the rest of the world. In Italy, by 
contrast, a slight acceleration of the reduction 
in other asset items was observed.German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business continued to 
grow in the third quarter of 2014. As in the 
preceding quarters, sight deposits benefited 
most from the renewed narrowing of the inter -
est rate spread between deposits of different 
maturities and the continued marked investor 
preference for liquid assets. Once again, this development was chiefly driven by the sight 
deposits of households. In contrast to previous 
quarters, however, non-  financial corpor ations 
also made a substantial contribution to the in-crease in sight deposits.
The shift from long-  term to shorter -  term de -
posit types that has been apparent since the 
onset of the financial crisis was less pronounced 
in the third quarter than was previously the 
case due to household demand for long-  t erm 
savings deposits, which was observed for the 
first time in five years. This potentially reflects 
the search for alternative investment opportun-
ities following the slight deterioration in senti -
ment in the equity market in the third quarter. 
On balance, however, longer-  term deposits  
continued to decline as financial corporations 
– especially insurers and pension funds – once 
again markedly reduced their investments in time deposits with a maturity of over two years. As in previous quarters, these profes -
sional investors are likely to have shifted the fr
eed-
 up funds towar
ds less liquid and riskier 
assets outside M3 in search of higher yield.
Once again, there was a clear rise in bank lend-
ing in Germany in the third quarter of 2014. As 
was previously the case, this rise was mainly due to an increase in lending to private non-
 
banks. In this context, MFIs in Germany in-
creased their holdings of securities issued by 
the domestic private sector and granted more 
loans to the private sector.
Loans to households continued to grow moder -
ately, as they have done since the beginning of Slight increase in 
monetary cap-ital on balance
Further signifi-
cant deceleration  
in net reduction 
in asset itemsIncrease in 
 
deposit business due mainly to sight deposits
Demand for 
long-
 
term sav-
ings deposits in-creases notably for first time in five years
Bank lending 
once again clearly on the riseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
40

2010. This was chiefly due to loans for house 
purchase, which once again increased at a 
slightly faster pace than in the preceding quar -
ters. By contrast, banks taking part in the BLS 
reported that the significant rise in demand for 
loans for house purchase experienced in the first half of 2014 ground to a virtual halt in the third 
quarter. According to the surveyed bank man -
agers, the outlook for the housing market im -
proved only slightly on the previous quarter from 
the perspective of borrowers, and, for the first 
time in over four years, consumer confidence did not translate into any real increase in de -
mand. Conversely, alternative sources of fund -
ing, such as household savings and loans from 
other banks, had a negative impact on house -
hold demand for loans for house purchase at 
surveyed institutions when viewed in isolation.
Banks’ lending policies for loans for house pur -
chase were more restrictive in the third quarter 
than they were in the second. They not only 
increased their margins – considerably in the 
case of riskier loans – but also tightened their 
credit standards somewhat as, unlike borrow -
ers, they were slightly pessimistic about the 
outlook for the housing market.
By contrast, lending policy in the consumer 
loans segment remained largely unchanged. At 
the same time, the surveyed banks reported a 
perceptible rise in demand in the third quarter 
of 2014. According to the surveyed bank man-
agers, this was primarily due to consumers’ in -
creased propensity to purchase. This is consist -
ent with the moderate increase in consumer loans recorded in the third quarter in the 
monthly balance sheet statistics, which include 
all MFIs in Germany. Conversely, there was a sig-
nificant decline in other loans. Overall, lending 
to domestic households continued to rise in the third quarter at a moderate annual rate of 1.4%.
Loans to domestic non-  financial corpor ations 
decreased perceptibly in the reporting quarter. 
Considerable net inflows of long-  term loans , 
which are usually viewed in connection with in-vestment, were offset by the sharp decrease in short-
 term loans, which incr
eased noticeably in 
the preceding quarter. This is consistent with the decrease in enterprises’ demand for bank 
loans reported in the quarter under review by 
banks taking part in the BLS due to lower fi -
nancing needs for inventories and working 
capital. Overall, German banks’ lending to non-  
financial corpor
ations has become increasingly 
volatile in recent quarters. Over the year as a 
whole, the annual lending rate remained very 
subdued at -0.5%.
German banks participating in the BLS painted 
a slightly more optimistic picture with regard to 
enterprises’ demand for loans, which they say 
increased slightly in the third quarter of 2014. 
According to surveyed bank managers, this de-velopment was driven by increased demand for 
funding for mergers, takeovers and corporate 
restructuring. Viewed in isolation, the use of 
other sources of financing – in addition to the above-
 mentioned factors – had a negative im
-
pact on demand. Such alternative sources of Increase in loans 
to households continues to be driven by loans for house 
 
purchase
Somewhat more 
restrictive lend-ing policy for loans for house purchase
Moderate rise in 
consumer loans, with no change in lending policy
Perceptible 
 decline 
in loans 
to non-
 
financial 
corporationsLending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2014
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 23.7 35.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 0.4 – 5.8
of over 2 years – 9.2 – 3.5
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 1.6 2.1
of over 3 months – 0.8 2.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 6.5 – 4.1
Securitised lending 4.2 6.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 8.3 6.9
of which to households 3 5.8 5.9
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 4.0 – 3.5
Securitised lending 10.4 4.9
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
41

An international comparison of the importance of 
bank credit as a debt fi  nancing instrument for non- fi  nancial  corporations
There is a persistently held view among the 
general public that the euro area’s fi  nancial 
system is primarily a bank- based one, par-
ticularly so by US or UK standards. It is based on the belief that bank loans are a major source of debt fi  nancing for non- fi  nancial corporations and borne out by 
banks’ substantial exposures to enterprises. 
However, a glance at the data would sug-
gest that this view needs to be put into some perspective. Internationally compar-able data on the role currently played by bank credit as a form of business fi  nance can be extracted  from the fi  nancial ac-counts, while data on the importance of corporate loans for banks can be sourced 
from the bank balance sheet statistics. The 
scatter plot on the next page combines 
both sets of data. The x- axis shows the vol-ume of loans which domestic non- fi  nancial corporations owe to domestic credit institu-
tions as a percentage of domestic non- 
fi  nancial corporations’ total debt outstand-
ing, while the y- axis plots domestic banks’ 
loan exposures to domestic non- fi  nancial corporations as a share of domestic credit 
institutions’ aggregate total assets.1 To clas-
sify the different countries, the system of coordinates is subdivided into four quad-rants. The importance of bank credit as a 
debt fi  nancing instrument for non- fi  nancial 
corporations is relatively high (low) in the countries shown in one of the two quad-
rants on the right (left). The graph also re-
veals that the importance of corporate loans is comparatively high (low) for the banking sectors of the countries in the 
upper (lower) quadrants.2
The calculations show that bank loans as a 
source of non- fi  nancial corporations’ debt fi  nancing are more important for the euro 
area as a whole, relatively speaking, than they are for the United States and the United Kingdom. Looking at the countries individually, this is mainly true for Greece and Italy and somewhat lesser so for the 
Netherlands and Germany. In Spain, the de-leveraging process witnessed in recent years has helped to considerably diminish the im-
portance of bank loans for non- fi  nancial 
corporations.3
Appearances would suggest that other 
lenders, besides banks, are key providers of 
1 For the purpose of this analysis, debt comprises 
loans (excluding trade credits) and debt securities. Pen-
sion fund reserves are omitted to improve international 
comparability because their importance is highly con-
tingent on each country’s institutional setting and, in 
the euro area, is only noteworthy in Germany and Italy. 
Other liabilities are excluded for much the same rea-
son. Data on credit institutions’ debt components and total assets for the euro- area countries and the United 
Kingdom are extracted from the fl  ow- of- funds ac-counts and the monthly balance sheet statistics of banks (MFIs) as provided by Eurostat and the ECB. 
Data on the volume of loans to non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations in the United States are based on estimates by the Bank for International Settlements, while credit in-stitutions’ total debt fi  gures and total assets are taken from the Federal Reserve Board’s fi  nancial accounts.
2 In keeping with an analysis prepared by the IMF, if 
bank credit accounts for more (less) than 50 percent-
age points of total debt, it is assumed to have a high 
(low) importance. As for the importance of corporate 
lending in credit institutions’ balance sheets, a thresh-old value is set at 15 percentage points, with a higher 
(lower) value implying high (low) importance. Given 
that the IMF uses non- fi  nancial corporations’ total li-
abilities as an approximate measure for bank credit, 
the results exhibit signifi  cant discrepancies in some re-
spects. The IMF’s defi  nition of debt furthermore in-cludes other liabilities, which are excluded here. See IMF, Sovereigns, banks, and emerging markets: de-tailed analysis and policies, Global Financial Stability 
Report, April 2012.
3 If the defi  nition of debt were broadened to also 
cover other liabilities (including trade credits), bank credit would not represent a highly important debt 
 fi  nancing instrument for non- fi  nancial corporations in 
any of the euro- area countries, with the exception of 
Greece.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
42

debt fi  nance for non- fi  nancial corporations 
in the euro area. Noteworthy examples in-
clude intra- group lending as well as the 
granting of credit through other fi  nancial intermediaries which comprise inter alia  
special purpose vehicles and specialised  fi  nancing vehicles.
4 Furthermore, research 
has found that bank liabilities account for a higher percentage of total debt in the euro area at small and medium- sized enterprises 
(SMEs) than they do at large fi  rms. How-ever, SMEs likewise procure their debt 
 fi  nance from a wide variety of sources, not-
ably loans from (affi   liated) enterprises and 
trade credits. Looking at SMEs in their entir-ety, these sources of funding even make up the bulk of their debt fi  nancing.
5 That being 
said, bank credit can, of course, still be the main source of funding for individual SMEs or in certain segments.
From a credit institution perspective, it can 
be concluded that loan exposures to do-mestic non- fi  nancial corporations account for a signifi  cant percentage of total assets 
in Italy, Greece, Portugal and Spain, relative 
to other countries. This percentage is no more than 14% for the euro area as a whole, which would appear low when compared with the fi  gure of 22% for the United States. However, this discrepancy also owes something to differences in the 
institutional make- up of the euro- area and 
US banking systems. As a case in point, in-
vestment banks in the United States are mostly run as standalone institutions and 
accordingly, unlike in the euro area, are not 
consolidated into the commercial banking 
system.6
On the whole, then, the widely held public 
view that the European fi  nancial system is primarily a bank- based one would appear to oversimplify matters. Rather, non- 
fi  nancial corporations procure their external 
fi  nancing from a diversifi  ed funding base using a variety of debt fi  nancing instru-
ments.7
4 The role of alternative lenders and the shadow bank-
ing system in the euro area is discussed in Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implications, 
Monthly Report, March 2014, pp 15-34.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, German enterprises’ 
profi  tability and fi  nancing in 2012, Monthly Report, 
December 2013, pp 41-55. These data are available for 
a restricted group of EU countries in the BACH data-
base of the European Committee of Central Balance- 
Sheet Data Offi   ces (ECCBSO). For enterprises in Ger-
many see H Friderichs and T Körting (2011), Die Rolle 
der Bankkredite im Finanzierungsspektrum der 
deutschen Wirtschaft, Wirtschaftsdienst, volume 91, 1, 
pp 31-38.6 Similarly, the disposal of a signifi  cant volume, quan-
titatively speaking, of mortgage loans granted to 
households in the course of securitisation business is 
also likely to have been a factor that diminished com-
mercial banks’ aggregate total assets and thus lifted the relative share of loans to non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations.
7 See Eurosystem Working Group (2013), Corporate 
fi  nance and economic activity in the euro area, ECB 
Occasional Paper, No 151.Credit ties between non-financial corporations and banks
*
Sources: BIS, Eurostat, ECB, Federal Reserve Board and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Bank credit consists entirely of loans.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 20 40 60 80 1000510152025
Domestic bank credit as a percentage
of non-financial corporations’ total debtImportance of bank credit for
non-financial corporationsImportance ofcorporate loansfor banks
Low HighBank credit to domestic non-financial corporations as apercentage of banks’ total assetsHigh
LowFIEMUATESPTUSGR
IT
NL
DE FR IEBE
UK
LU%, as at 2014 Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
43

financing are extremely important for enter -
prises in Germany. In particular, internal finan -
cing plays a more prominent role in Germany 
than in many other euro-  ar ea countries (see 
also the box on pages 36 and 37).
According to the results of the latest BLS round 
for the third quarter, the corporate lending 
standards of surveyed institutions remained vir -
tually unchanged on balance across all firm 
sizes and all maturities. However, institutions tightened their margins, particularly for aver -
age loans to large enterprises, and adjusted all 
other surveyed credit conditions in favour of their borrowers (especially non-
 inter
est rate 
charges, loan covenants and the desired loan maturity). Consequently, there have been no 
major changes in credit standards, ie changes 
in the criteria that have to be met by potential 
borrowers, for more than five years. In the 
quarter just ended, credit standards remained 
virtually constant overall due to two opposing 
effects – the surveyed bank-  r elated factors (in this case, the financing conditions offered by institutions and their liquidity position) had a 
slight easing effect, while risk assessment had a 
marginally restrictive effect on the adjustment 
of credit standards.
In the third quarter, the survey also contained ad hoc questions on the banks’ funding situ -
ation, the impact of the sovereign debt crisis 
and participation in TLTROs from 2014 to 2016. 
The financial institutions reported a slight im -
provement in their funding environment com -
pared with the previous quarter. They also 
stated that the sovereign debt crisis was having 
no more than minor effects on their funding 
conditions and no effects whatsoever on their 
lending policy during the reporting quarter. The surveyed institutions showed only a low level of 
interest in the TLTRO of September 2014. The predominant reason cited for this was that there were no funding constraints. In many 
cases, the institutions were still uncertain as to 
whether they would take part in the TLTRO of 
December 2014 and in the following years, however. Those BLS banks which had already 
participated in a  T LTRO or which are consider -
ing doing so in the future intend to use the pro-
vided funds chiefly for lending. They anticipate 
that taking part will lead to a slight improve -
ment in their financial situation, but do not ex-pect any effects on their credit standards.
In light of their still very low level, bank lending 
rates on new business are likely to have sup -
ported domestic lending to the private sector. 
In the third quarter, bank lending rates across 
all business areas, maturities and volumes 
largely followed the moderate decline in inter -
est rates in the money and capital markets. For 
example, the interest rates for small-
 scale loans 
to enterprises decreased discernibly, whereas 
they only fell slightly for large-  scale loans. On  
average, at the end of September, the report -
ing institutions were charging interest of 2.8% 
for small-  scale and 1 .6% for large-  scale short-  
term loans to domestic non-  financial corpor -
ations. Interest rates on long-  term loans to  
non-
 financial corpor
ations stood at 2.4% and Credit standards 
for enterprises virtually 
 
unchangedBLS indicates 
that German banks have 
 
relatively little 
interest in TLTROs
Bank lending rates follow interest rate 
 decline 
in the 
capital marketLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20142101234
––++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
44

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number 
of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents report-ing “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2014 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20142.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation ofover ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
45

2.3%, respectively, at the end of the period 
under review.
Loans to households were also somewhat 
more favourable in the third quarter. At the end of September, the interest rate on long-  term  
loans for house purchase stood at 2.4%. De -
posits of households and non-  financial corpor -
ations again almost consistently earned some -
what less interest than in the previous quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
46

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments on the international financial 
markets in recent months have been shaped by 
geopolitical tensions and adjusted expectations 
for global growth. For example, the Inter -
national Monetary Fund has lowered its growth 
forecast for the global economy this year and 
next. The euro area and, for a while, Japan were among the harbingers of negative eco -
nomic data, while the United States’ economic 
situation and prospects are by and large ex -
pected to be more favourable. This was also 
reflected in differing monetary policy measures. The ECB Governing Council adopted further ex-
pansionary monetary policy measures in Sep -
tember. The same is true of the Bank of Japan, which announced in October that it would fur -
ther accelerate the expansion of the monetary 
base. By contrast, the US Federal Reserve phased out its bond purchase programme 
(quantitative easing) at the end of October, as 
most market participants had expected. As a 
result, benchmark bond yields fell considerably 
on the major bond markets from the end of June onwards. By contrast, the international 
stock markets showed divergent developments 
amid temporarily heightened volatility, with 
European equities in particular recording losses. 
On the foreign exchange markets, exchange 
rate parities moved in favour of the US dollar. 
The euro, by contrast, forfeited approximately 
3½% of its trade-  weighted value compar ed 
with the end of June.
Exchange rates
On the foreign exchange markets, market par -
ticipants’ interest was focused on the euro-  
dollar exchange rate. Diverging assessments of 
the economic situation for the euro area and the United States as well as further monetary policy easing by the Eurosystem had a mark-
edly negative impact on the euro exchange r
ate. This effect was heightened by expect -
ations of a possible earlier interest rate reversal 
in the United States, which led to a positive 
market sentiment in favour of the US dollar. 
Compared with the end of June, the euro de -
preciated against the US dollar by around 9% 
on balance, continuing the downward trend that began in spring. For a time, the value of 
the euro fell to below US$1.24, its lowest level since August 2012.
The euro exchange rate was weakened, in par -
ticular, by the ECB Governing Council’s unex -
pected rate cut to a new all-  time low of 0.05% 
in September, the announcement of purchase 
programmes for asset-  b acked securities and 
covered bonds, and by speculation about fur -
ther measures possibly being taken to ease 
monetary policy in the euro area given the low 
inflation rate and disappointing economic data. 
Speculation among market participants about 
further monetary policy easing measures was stoked additionally by ECB President Mario 
Draghi’s statement to the effect that he would 
use further unconventional measures, if need 
be, to address the risks of an excessively long 
period of low inflation.
By contrast, the Fed further continued to taper 
the purchase amounts under its bond purchase programme through the summer, too, and de-
cided at the end of October to halt the pro -
gramme altogether. Most market participants h
ad expected this move; however, given the 
better-  than-  expected cyclical indicators and the 
Fed’s upbeat assessment of the economic situ-
ation, the probability also grew in the eyes of 
market participants of an earlier interest rate 
reversal in the United States. This benefited the 
US dollar and intensified the downward pres -
sure on the single European currency. The euro latterly stood at just under US$1.25, close to its hitherto lowest point this year.Falling yields 
 
affect  
financial 
 
markets
Euro declines 
markedly against the  US dollar on balance, …… and falls temporarily to its lowest level since August 2012
Euro burdened 
by monetary policy easing and concerns about the 
 
euro-area 
 
economy …
… and market 
participants’ growing expect -
ations of an earlier interest rate reversal in the United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
47

On balance, the euro appreciated against the 
yen from mid-  year onwar ds. After initially los -
ing in value following the monetary policy eas-
ing in the euro area, the single currency 
strengthened markedly against the Japanese currency following the Bank of Japan’s unex -
pected announcement at the end of October 
that it would accelerate its annual expansion of the monetary base to further ease its monetary policy stance. As this report went to press, the 
euro was trading at ¥144, which was around 
4% up on its end-  June level.
Conversely, the single currency lost some 
ground against the pound sterling. Here, too, the reasons described above had a negative 
impact on the euro exchange rate. In addition, the euro weakened against the pound sterling following the Bank of England’s hints of a pos-
sible interest rate increase at the beginning of 
2015. The euro recovered somewhat for a time 
when it appeared possible that a majority would vote for Scottish independence in the referendum – the majority eventually did not 
materialise, however. At the end of the report-
ing period, the euro was trading at £0.79, or around 1½% lower than at the end of the 
second quarter.
The euro posted marked gains against the rou-
ble although the Russian central bank raised its policy rates substantially and intervened in the 
foreign exchange market. Compared with the 
end of June, the euro appreciated by approxi -
mately 25%. The rouble was adversely affected by the geopolitical situation in east Ukraine, the 
sanctions imposed on Russia, a decline in in -
vestor confidence and a significant drop in fos-
sil fuel prices. In mid-  November , the Russian 
central bank announced that it would abandon the prevailing exchange rate band, at the edges of which it intervened to stabilise the exchange rate. However, it continues to reserve the right to intervene in the interest of financial stability.
Vis- à-  vis the curr encies of the euro area’s 20 
most important trading partners, the euro sus-
tained a loss in value of 3½% compared with 
the end of June. Most recently, the single cur -
rency was thus trading 3½% below its level at 
the launch of monetary union. In real terms, 
too – ie taking account of the inflation differ -
entials between the euro area and its major 
trading partners – the effective euro exchange rate fell somewhat in the period under review. The price competitiveness of euro-
 ar
ea export-
ers has improved accordingly as a result: allow-
ing for estimation uncertainty, it is to be 
deemed more or less neutral.Single currency 
gains against the yen, …… loses some ground against the pound 
 
sterling …
… and makes 
strong gains against the 
 
rouble
Effective ex-
change rate of the euro weakerExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A SOND J FMAM J J A S OND
2013 20141.201.301.40
120130140150
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.13 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
48

Securities markets and 
 
portfolio transactions
On the bond markets, the combination of un-
certainty about the future development of the 
world economy and the constantly recurring 
bouts of geopolitical tension led to temporary 
safe haven flows into US Treasuries. As a result, 
yields on ten-  y ear US Treasuries dropped 20 
basis points to a level of 2.4% from the end of 
June. The widely anticipated end of the Fed’s 
programme of purchasing Treasuries and mort-
gage-  backed securities had no marked impact  
on yields. The Bank of Japan’s decision at the 
end of October to further accelerate the expan-
sion of the monetary base had the effect of driving down yields on Japanese government 
bonds.
Against the backdrop of reduced growth ex -
pectations and surprisingly low inflation rates, 
financial investors’ demand for government bonds remained strong in the euro area, too, and put downward pressure on yields. More -
over, the Eurosystem lowered its key interest r
ates at the beginning of September and an -
nounced purchase programmes for asset-  
backed securities and covered bonds. As a re -
sult, the GDP-  weighted yield on ten-  year bonds 
issued by euro-  ar ea countries (excluding Ger -
many) contracted by 45 basis points, from 
2.3% at the end of June to 1.8%; for a time, 
yields on most European government bonds 
had fallen yet again to new record lows. As this 
report went to press, ten-  year Bunds wer e 
yielding 0.7%, or 44 basis points less than at the end of June, after their yields had even 
shrunk briefly to 0.66% in mid-  October .
Within the euro area, yields on Greek govern -
ment bonds saw an exceptional development. 
Discussions about an early exit from the inter -
national assistance programmes and about 
new parliamentary elections in Greece put con-
siderable upward pressure on yields on Greek 
government bonds in the first half of October. 
Yields on ten-  year bonds climbed mor e than 
250 basis points in just a few days, but relin -quished some of these gains in the days that fol
lowed. Nonetheless, yields latterly stood at 
8.2%, or 219 basis points higher than at end-  
June. Developments in Greece had only a very weak impact on the other euro-
 ar
ea periphery 
countries. Compared with the end of June, yield spreads of most long-
 t
erm government 
bonds issued by euro-  ar ea periphery countries 
narrowed against Federal securities with the 
same maturities.
Since the end of June, the slope of the German 
yield curve derived from the yields on Federal 
securities became flatter once again, slipping 
by 40 basis points to 91 basis points as meas-ured by the yield differential between ten-
 year 
and two-  year bonds. The tightening of the  
interest rate differential thus continued into the 
current reporting period (see the upper chart 
on page 50), which is an indication of expect-
ations that the short-  run inter est rate will re -
main low for some time to come.United States 
also experiences falling interest rates
Geopolitical risks 
and cyclical downturn set the tone on the European bond market
Yield move-
ments mixed in the euro areaYield curve for German Federal securities flat -
tens once againBond yields in Germany, Japanand the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
20140.250.500.751.001.251.501.752.002.252.502.753.00Daily data% Yield on ten-year government bonds
outstanding
USA1
Japan1GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
49

In view of the lacklustre economic recovery and 
the current low level of euro-  ar ea inflation 
rates, market-
 based longer
-
 term inflation ex -
pectations have declined. The five-  year forwar d 
inflation rate in five years based on French and 
German bonds dropped from 2.0% at mid-
 year 
to 1
.9% (see the chart above). A sharp tempor-
ary decline in forward inflation rates in mid-  
October was triggered by a considerable drop 
in yields on nominal government bonds on the back of safe haven flows. However, this proved to be a short-
 lived 
phenomenon.
The already very favourable financing condi -
tions for European enterprises in the capital market improved yet again. Yields on bonds is-
sued by European non-  financial corpor ations 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years 
and with a BBB rating fell 39 basis points com-pared with the end of June to a level of 1.8%; 
meanwhile, yields on corresponding bonds is -
sued by the financial sector likewise declined 
by 39 basis points to reach 3.0%.1 Despite the 
falling Bund yields, spreads against German Federal bonds with the same maturity nar -
rowed slightly. As a result, the lows of the pre-
vious quarter with regard to the absolute 
 financing costs for European enterprises in the 
capital market were undercut once again. As before, investors’ search for yield in the low-
 
interest-  r ate environment is likely to have been the decisive factor here.
2
As with corporate bonds, there was also a 
sharp decrease in yields on covered bonds, not-
ably for longer maturities (see the chart on 
page 51).3 Yields on covered bonds with a re -
sidual maturity of seven to ten years fell by 62 basis points from end-
 June to ar
ound 0.9% of 
late.4 The yield spread over Bunds with the 
same maturities amounted to 26 basis points; 
declining by 25 basis points, it was more than halved in the period in question. The announce-ment, made after the ECB Governing Council’s meeting in early September, of the purchase of 
covered bonds by the Eurosystem appears to 
have put downward pressure on yields. Com -
pared with the previous day, yields on covered 
bonds dropped by some 10 basis points after 
the purchase programme was announced, al -
though the effect of the announcement seems Inflation expect -
ations downFurther improve-
ment in finan-cing conditions for enterprises
Decrease in 
yields on covered bondsYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.1 Day before the 
most recent interest rate cut by the ECB Governing Council.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 00.300.30.60.91.21.5
–+++++
Residual maturity in years13 November 201430 June 2014 
3 September 20141%
Five-year forward inflation rate in five years
*
Sources:  Euro  MTS  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived 
from separately estimated yield curves of German and French 
inflation-linked  and  maturity-matched  nominal  bonds  which are subsequently aggregated using GDP weights.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 20141.61.82.02.22.4% pa
Sep Oct Nov
2014Daily data Monthly averages
1 These calculations are based on corporate bond yields 
included in the various iBoxx bond indices for different rat-ing grades.
2 In its latest Global Financial Stability Report, the Inter -
national Monetary Fund discusses the extent to which the 
valuation level in the corporate bond markets still ad -
equately reflects default and liquidity risks. See Inter -
national Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, 
October 2014, pp 1ff.3 As measured using the iBoxx covered bond overall index for the euro area, which also contains German Pfandbriefe.4 A strong decline was already recorded in the first half of 
2014. At the beginning of the year, yields on covered bonds with the above-
 mentioned maturities stood at
 
2.4%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
50

to be diminishing in the case of longer matur -
ities. Moreover, the effect appears to be more 
pronounced in the case of covered bonds from 
periphery countries than of German or French 
paper.
Gross issuance in the German bond market stood at €331½ billion in the third quarter of 2014 and was therefore below its previous-
 
quarter level (€3
58½ billion). After deducting 
redemptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance amounted to €4½ billion. In addition, for -
eign borrowers placed debt securities worth 
€14 billion on the German market. Thus, funds totalling a net €18 billion were raised in the 
German bond market in the reporting period.
The public sector raised €2½ billion in the bond 
market in the third quarter, compared with 
€14½ billion one quarter earlier. These figures 
include issues from resolution agencies of Ger -
man banks, which are ascribed to the public 
sector for statistical purposes. Central govern -
ment itself issued mainly five-  year Federal notes 
(€10½ billion). At the same time, it redeemed 
ten- year F ederal bonds (Bunds) and two-  year  
Federal Treasury notes (Schätze) totalling €12½ 
billion and €2½ billion net respectively. In the 
quarter under review, state governments issued Net bond 
 
market issuancePublic sector borrowing 
 
moderateYields on covered bonds
0123456%, monthly averages
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Source: iBoxx.  1 ECB Governing Council meeting on 4 September 2014. 2 ECB Governing Council meeting on 2 October 2014. 
3 Launch of CBPP3 on 20 October 2014. 4 All residual maturities.
Deutsche BundesbankJuly Aug Sep Oct Nov
2014012345678Daily data
Residual maturities
Selected countries 4
Germany
Ireland
Spain
Italy
France1 23By comparison:1 to 3 years
7 to 10 years
Bund 7 to 10 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
51

their own bonds to the value of €13½ billion in 
net terms.
German enterprises took advantage of the fa -
vourable financing conditions and issued debt 
securities to the value of €3½ billion in net terms between July and September. On bal -
ance, these were solely bonds with maturities 
of more than one year. The majority of the 
issues was attributable to non-  financial corpor -
ations.
In the r
eporting quarter, domestic credit institu-
tions followed the tendency seen in the previ -
ous quarter by reducing their capital market 
debt further, by €1½ billion, compared with €10 billion in the second quarter. This was probably chiefly due to the fact that banks’ 
funding needs – which they can, moreover, pri-
marily cover cheaply through deposits – were 
limited. In particular, they redeemed mortgage 
and public Pfandbriefe (€2½ billion and €1½ billion respectively). This contrasted with net issues of other bank debt securities which can 
be structured flexibly (€2 billion) and of debt 
securities by specialised credit institutions (€½ 
billion).
In the third quarter, German non-  b anks were 
the main buyers on the domestic bond market; 
they added paper worth €15½ billion to their 
portfolios. Most of these investors are likely to have been institutional investors. German credit institutions likewise invested in interest-
 bearing 
paper
, making purchases worth €5 billion. The 
two investor groups’ interest focused here on 
foreign securities (€13½ and €3½ billion re -
spectively). Non-  r esident investors bought Ger -
man debt securities for €1½ billion. On bal -
ance, these were solely securities issued by the private sector.
European equity markets sustained price losses 
compared with mid-  year (see the chart on  
page 53). Buoyed by an accommodative mon-
etary policy and positive economic data, sev -
eral indices at first climbed to new highs in the 
course of July. However, given the subsequent 
unexpected economic downturn, the at times 
worsening geopolitical risks and an increased assessment of risk, equity prices subsequently 
fell on balance. In this setting, despite the ex -
pansionary monetary policy measures, the European Euro Stoxx index and the German 
CDAX share price index shed 5% and 5.9% re-spectively on balance compared with end-
 June.
Between early July and mid-
 November
, the per -
formance of European bank stock prices was strongly affected by market participants’ ex -
pectations on how the most important banks 
would fare in the asset quality review and the 
stress test prior to the launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism.
5 In the week before 
the results were published on 26 October, bank stocks posted gains of close to 6% (compared 
with 2.6% in the market as a whole) which Issuance of 
 
corporate bonds mainly in the longer-
 
term ma-
turity segment
Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tions continueDomestic non-
 
banks 
main 
buyers of debt securities
European equity 
markets post price losses
Performance  
of bank stock prices affected by launch of banking unionInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents – 12.4 16.6 16.5
Credit institutions –  7.7 1.2 4.9
of which
Foreign debt securities –  0.1 2.3 3.4
Deutsche Bundesbank –  2.7 – 4.4 – 3.7
Other sectors –  1.9 19.8 15.3
of which
Domestic debt securities – 21.4 – 9.8 1.7
Non-residents – 10.9 10.3 1.7
SharesResidents 6.5 15.7 1.0
Credit institutions 6.9 2.8 2.3
of which
Domestic shares 3.2 0.5 0.7
Non-banks –  0.4 12.9 – 1.3
of which
Domestic shares –  6.6 1.8 0.0
Non-residents 3.9 7.7 5.6
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 15.6 11.7 20.7
Investment in retail funds 3.2 2.5 0.4
of which
Equity funds 0.6 0.4 – 3.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 For information on the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank, Launch of the banking union: 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism in Europe, Monthly Re-
port, October 2014, pp 43-64.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
52

were not eroded by price losses of just over 2% 
as a direct response to the publication. Al-
though individual institutions sustained consid-
erable net stock price losses after it became 
apparent that they had a high capital shortfall, 
the publication of the bank stress test results 
did not produce any major unpleasant surprises 
for the banking sector as a whole. In Novem -
ber in particular, however, discussions about 
more stringent regulation and about fines for interest rate and currency manipulation de -
pressed European bank stock prices. All in all, 
bank stocks clearly underperformed the market 
as a whole, posting losses of 10% compared 
with the end of June.
The gloomier economic picture in the euro area 
was reflected only with a time lag in analysts’ 
corporate earnings expectations. Up until the 
beginning of October, earnings expectations over a 12-month horizon were still rising slightly. They were subsequently adjusted 
downwards, however, and are now back at the end-
 June level. B
y contrast, long-
 term earnings 
expectations were below their mid-  year levels  
as this report went to press. The price/earnings ratio of European stocks fell from 14.2 in June to 12.9, bringing it closer to its long-
 term aver -
age of 11.3. The implied equity risk premiums 
for the Euro Stoxx, which are calculated using a 
dividend discount model, rose by just under 
one percentage point to 9.5% in the reporting period.
6 A rise in implied stock market volatility 
and disagreement among analysts (also called 
“dispersion”) indicate – like the higher risk pre-mium – a reassessment of risk. Stock price un-
certainty in the euro area was at a decidedly low level during the summer months and lat -
terly rose towards its long-  term aver age. Thus, 
there is much to suggest that euro-
 ar
ea invest-
ors’ perception of risk grew on the whole in 
the course of the quarter under review.
Stock prices in the United States performed better than in the euro area. As measured by 
the S&P 500, the US stock market was 4% up 
on its end-  J une level as this report went to 
press. All-  time highs wer e recorded in July and September on the strength of a more robust economic outlook, surprisingly positive news 
from the labour market and support from mon-etary policy. Short-
 lived equity price declines in 
August and October were followed in both cases by a stronger recovery in the United States than in the euro area. Japanese stocks 
posted net price gains compared with the end 
of June (Nikkei +14.7%). However, these were 
ultimately due above all to the Bank of Japan’s 
surprising announcement that it would be ex -
panding its quantitative easing, which trig-
gered a leap in prices.Earnings expect -
ations and risk 
premiums
Stock price gains 
in the USA and JapanStock prices in major markets*
Sources: Deutsche Börse AG, Thomson Reuters and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Price indices (taking no account of divi-
dends.  1 Expected  volatility  in  the  next  30  days,  calculated 
from option prices on the DAX.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 201480100120140160180Weekly averages
%
0204060 Lin scale
Implicit DAX volatility (VDAX NEW) 1S&P 500
Dow Jones
Euro StoxxCDAXEnd-2009 = 100; log scale
6 The rise in the equity risk premium from June is attribut-able to the fact that, when stock prices went down, earn-ings expectations did not fall to the same extent; moreover, 
yields on risk-  fr ee alternative investments declined. The 
high level of the equity risk premium in the euro area com-pared with the historical average and other markets is due 
to a combination of high dividend returns, high medium-  
term expected earnings growth and the currently extremely low yield on risk-
 fr
ee alternative investments.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
53

Issuing activity in the German equity market 
picked up somewhat in the third quarter. Do -
mestic enterprises issued new shares totalling 
€6½ billion, the majority of which were listed. 
Of greater importance in terms of amount was, inter alia, the capital increase carried out by a 
telecommunications enterprise. The volume of 
foreign equities outstanding in the German market climbed by €½ billion. Equities were 
purchased primarily by foreign investors (€5½ 
billion) and domestic credit institutions (€2½ billion). By contrast, domestic non-
 banks sold
 
equities to the value of €1½ billion.7
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €21 
billion, after raising funds totalling €14 billion in 
the previous three-  month period. The fr esh 
funds mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€20½ billion). 
Among the asset classes, it was mainly mixed 
securities funds (€10½ billion) and bond funds (€8 billion) that placed new shares on the mar -
ket. Foreign funds distributed in the German market attracted new resources totalling €13 
billion net in the third quarter of 2014. Domes-
tic non-  banks wer e the main buyers, adding 
mutual fund shares worth €35½ billion to their portfolios. These were domestic shares for the 
most part. Domestic credit institutions pur -
chased investment fund shares for €1½ billion, while foreign investors sold mutual fund shares worth €3 billion.
Direct investment
As in cross-  bor der portfolio transactions, which 
recorded a net outflow of funds totalling €22½ 
billion, net capital exports amounting to €27 
billion were registered in the form of direct in-vestment in the third quarter of 2014.
The largest contributing factor was the com -
paratively high level of funding provided by 
German enterprises to their subsidiaries abroad, Slight pick-  up in 
stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
 
purchases of 
 
investment fund 
shares
Capital exports 
in direct 
 
investment
German direct 
investment abroadMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q3r Q2r Q3p
I Current account + 38.9 + 46.3 + 52.6 
1 Goods 1 + 49.1 + 55.4 + 61.0 
2 Services 2 – 17.9 –  8.7 – 18.2 
3 Primary income + 17.2 +  6.6 + 17.9 
4 Secondary income –  9.6 –  6.9 –  8.2 
II Capital account +  0.4 +  0.6 +  0.9 
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 62.2 + 64.2 + 78.7 
1 Direct investment +  3.6 + 15.8 + 26.8 
Domestic investment 
abroad +  8.6 + 23.2 + 19.3 
Foreign investment in the reporting country +  4.9 +  7.4 –  7.4 
2 Portfolio investment + 38.4 + 22.7 + 22.6 
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 32.6 + 41.3 + 26.6 
Shares
3 +  8.7 +  4.9 –  0.1 
Investment fund shares 4+  7.7 +  8.6 + 12.8 
of whichMoney market fund shares +  0.7 –  2.0 +  2.5 
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 16.6 + 27.6 + 15.6 
of whichDenominated in euro
6 +  7.8 + 23.9 + 11.5 
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  0.3 +  0.2 –  1.6 
Foreign investment in  domestic debt securities –  5.7 + 18.6 +  4.1 
Shares
3 +  4.0 +  7.7 +  5.5 
Investment fund shares +  1.2 +  0.7 –  3.2 
Long-term debt  securities
5 –  5.3 + 11.0 –  6.9 
of whichPublic bonds and notes
8 +  4.3 +  9.7 –  6.4 
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  5.6 –  0.6 +  8.6 
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  1.6 +  9.0 +  6.9 
4 Other investment 10 + 19.4 + 17.3 + 22.1 
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions + 15.4 + 41.8 – 27.1 
Enterprises and  households
11 –  5.3 –  4.0 –  2.4 
General government + 11.2 –  3.5 +  8.2 
Bundesbank –  2.0 – 17.1 + 43.4 
5 Reserve assets 12 –  0.8 –  0.6 +  0.3 
IV Errors and omissions 13 + 23.0 + 17.2 + 25.3 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including participation certifi  cates. 4 Including reinvestment of earnings. 
5  Up to and including 2012, without accrued interest. Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Includes the follow-
ing sectors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households 
and non- profi  t institutions serving households. 12 Excluding al-location of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 13 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial ac-count and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 For further details, see under Direct investment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
54

 Structure and activity of foreign aﬃ   liates of German 
 investors: Results of outward FATS*
Rationale and methodology
When analysing globalisation and cross- 
border value chains, the activities of and re-
lationships between internationally active 
groups and the foreign affi   liates which they 
control are of considerable interest. If pol-
icy- makers are to provide appropriate re-
sponses to the phenomenon of globalisa-
tion they need to have recourse to a reliable 
statistical database. To achieve this object-
ive, an EU Regulation1 was adopted which 
effectively obliges all member states to pro-
vide Eurostat, the Statistical Offi   ce of the European Union (EU), annually with key 
data on cross- border controlled enterprises 
on a harmonised basis. These data simul-
taneously form a key part of the toolbox for 
analysing the European single market and the interconnectedness of economies aris-
ing from the European integration process.
FATS make a distinction between key data pertaining to enterprises in Germany con-
trolled by foreign investors (inward FATS) and 
key data relating to enterprises abroad that 
are ultimately controlled by German invest-
ors (outward FATS). In Germany, responsibil-ity for these statistics is divided between the 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce (inward FATS) and 
the Deutsche Bundesbank (outward FATS).2
At present, the outward FATS focus on three 
key metrics, namely the number of foreign 
affi   liates, the number of employees and the 
annual turnover of these enterprises. As a 
database, use is made of the “foreign direct 
investment stock statistics” which are com-
piled by the Bundesbank each year on the basis of the Foreign Trade and Payments Regulation (Außenwirtschaftsverordnung).  
To avoid double- counting in the EU aggre-
gates, only the direct or indirect majority stakes of German investors who are also headquartered in Germany are included 
when calculating the FATS variables. As the foreign direct investment stock statistics are subject to a reporting threshold for the total 
assets of direct investment enterprises, the 
outward FATS similarly do not take into ac-count any foreign affi   liates with total assets 
up to and including the amount (in con-
verted terms) of €3 million.
Empirical fi  ndingsThe latest available data are for the reporting 
year 2012. At year- end, the data identifi  ed 
27,000 enterprises abroad as being ultim-
ately controlled by German investors. Half of 
these enterprises were foreign affi   liates 
domiciled in EU countries, a circumstance re-fl  ecting the importance to many investors of 
close proximity to sales markets as a deci-sion- making criterion (see the chart on 
page 56). Some 22% of these foreign affi   li-
ates were domiciled in America, of which  almost 3,900 enterprises – in other words, 
nearly two- thirds – were based in the United 
States. Foreign affi   liates controlled by Ger-
man investors and located in Asia are grow-ing in importance, the main emphasis being on the People’s Republic of China where just 
under 1,400 enterprises were domiciled at 
* Foreign subsidiaries including branches and perman-
ent establishments abroad. FATS: Foreign Affi   liates 
Statistics; statistics on the structure and activity of for-
eign affi   liates.1 Regulation (EC) No 716/ 2007 of the European Parlia-ment and of the Council of 20 June 2007 on Commu-
nity statistics on the structure and activity of foreign 
affi   liates.
2 See P Schmidt, B Waldmüller and B Stejskal- Passler 
(2009), Future statistics on foreign- controlled enter-prises in Germany (inward FATS) and subsidiaries of 
German residents investing abroad (outward FATS), in 
AStA Wirtschafts- und Sozialstatistisches Archiv (ie AStA Economic and Social Statistics Archive), Vol-
ume 3, Issue 3, pp 169 ff (in German only).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
55

the end of 2012. Foreign affi   liates in Oceania 
and the Polar regions, as well as in Africa, 
play only a minor role for German investors, 
viewed in terms of holding a majority stake.
A slightly different regional breakdown be-
comes apparent if the focus is placed on 
the number of persons employed by these 
foreign affi   liates. The majority of the 5.1 
million total number of employees are con-
centrated in EU countries or Europe as a 
whole (54%). However, if a comparison is 
made with the number of enterprises, this 
share works out at 5 percentage points less. Compared with the number of enterprises, 
Asian countries were of relatively greater signifi  cance at the end of 2012 given that they represent a favourable choice for wage- intensive production on account of the lower wage costs or local content re-quirements. Of the 900,000 total number of employees concentrated in Asia, well 
above half of these worked for German for-eign affi   liates based in the People’s Republic 
of China and India alone. The growing interest displayed by German investors in 
Asian countries is also demonstrated by the 
reduced proportion of their foreign affi   li-
ates’ workforce located in EU countries. Be-
tween 2009 and 2012, this block went down by 3 percentage points from 49% to 
46%, following a shift to the highly dy-
namic Asian region.
In 2012, the volume of turnover generated 
by German foreign affi   liates totalled €1.9 tril-lion. More than €1 trillion of this amount was 
attributable to affi   liates in European coun-tries. Accounting for 27% of this turnover, 
foreign affi   liates in American countries, most notably the United States, Brazil, Canada and 
Mexico, were nevertheless also of relatively 
major importance. Asian countries’ share of 
turnover stood at 14%, more than half of 
which was generated in the People’s Repub-
lic of China and Japan. Between 2009 and 
2012, the turnover of German foreign affi   li-
ates in this region almost doubled, whereas 
turnover in the EU was up by just 14%.
Information on the activities of foreign af-
fi  liates – broken down by individual sector 
in line with the internationally harmonised 
classifi  cation of economic activities, NACE3 
Rev 2 – is also available. At the end of 2012, just under 30% of German foreign affi   liates 
3 Nomenclature générale des activités économiques 
dans les Communautés européennes; Statistical classi-
fi  cation of economic activities in the European Com-
munity.Regional breakdown of foreign affiliates of German investors*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on the statistics on the structure and activity of foreign affiliates of German investors (outward 
FATs).
Deutsche Bundesbank01020304050%
Africa Oceania and
Polar regionsRest of Europe Asia America EU countriesby number of enterprises (end of 2012)
by number of employees (end of 2012)
by size of turnover (in 2012)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
56

were assignable to section G covering 
wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor 
vehicles and motorcycles (see adjacent 
table). As regards manufacturing abroad, German investors were likewise found to 
have a key stake in 7,200 foreign affi   liates 
at the end of 2012. The number of German foreign affi   liates involved in fi  nancial and in-
surance activities remained broadly con-
stant with 2,400 foreign affi   liates between 
2009 and 2012, doubtless also on account of the fi  nancial crisis.
At the end of 2012, German foreign affi   li-
ates employed almost 2.4 million individuals in the manufacturing sector, most of whom were engaged in the manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi- trailers as well as 
of fabricated metal products and machin-
ery. Just under one- quarter of all employees (1.2 million persons) worked for foreign af-fi  liates operating in the wholesale and retail 
trade. While the bulk of the workforce in 
the manufacturing sector was employed by foreign affi   liates in non- EU countries (62%), 
a much larger share of foreign affi   liates’ 
workforce was employed in the wholesale 
and retail trade in the EU (59%).
In the case of the manufacturing industry as 
well as the wholesale and retail trade, 35% 
of annual turnover in 2012 was generated 
by foreign enterprises controlled by German 
investors. These sectors also saw above- 
average growth in turnover between 2009 
and 2012. In 2012, just under €210 billion 
turnover was generated by foreign affi   liates 
engaged in fi  nancial and insurance activ-
ities; this represented an 11% share of the 
total turnover of all foreign affi   liates.4
4 Detailed results broken down by country and eco-
nomic sector for the period 2009 to 2012 can be 
found at www.bundesbank.de in the internet publica-
tion “Structure and activity of foreign affi   liates of Ger-
man investors (outward FATS)” under Statistics/Exter-
nal sector/Foreign affi   liates (FATS).Structure and activity of foreign  aﬃ   liates of German investors by economic activity of the foreign aﬃ   liates 
 
Economic activity of the 
 foreign affi   liatesNumber of
Turn-over (in € billion)Enter-prisesEm-ploy-ees (in thou-sands)
At the end of 2012In 2012
All economic activities
1 26,997 5,055 1,896
of which
C Manufacturing 7,174 2,373    670
of which
Refi  ned petroleum 
products, manufacture of chemicals and pharmaceuticals and manufacture of rubber and plastic products 1,690 433    183
Fabricated metal prod-ucts and machinery 2,456 622    145
of which
Manufacture of basic metals and fabricated metal products 777 144    32
Machinery 1,174 293    71
Total vehicles and other transport equipment 1,265 740    236
of which
Manufacture of motor vehicles,  trailers and semi-trailers 1,151 710    230
G  Wholesale and retail 
trade; maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles 7,877 1,207    671
of which
Wholesale trade (ex-cluding motor vehicles and motorcycles) 6,305 622    340
Retail trade (excluding motor vehicles and motorcycles) 800 485    118
H  Transportation and 
 storage 1,273 397    97
J  Information and 
 communication 645 205    60
K  Financial and insurance 
activities 2,398 244    207
L  Real estate activities 1,262 5    5
M  Professional, scientifi  c 
and technical activities, 
veterinary activities 3,122 91    16
Q  Health and social work 1,143 73    9
1 Excluding section “A Agriculture, forestry and fi  shing” 
and section “O Public administration, defence and com-pulsory social security”.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
57

which amounted to €19½ billion in the third 
quarter. German enterprises primarily increased 
their equity capital (€12 billion), in particular 
through reinvested earnings. At the same time, 
they also stepped up intra-
 gr
oup lending (€7½ 
billion). Here, there was an expansion of finan-
cial credits while trade credits were cut back. Major destinations for German direct invest -
ment were the Netherlands (€5½ billion), the United Kingdom (€5
½ billion) and France (€4 
billion). In Russia, on the other hand, equity 
capital was reduced (€1 billion).Foreign investors scaled back their direct invest-
ment in Germany (€7½ billion) in the third quarter of 2014. Equity capital was built up 
(€2½ billion) primarily in the form of reinvested earnings; on the other hand, intra-
 gr
oup loans 
were repaid (€10 billion). This was largely due 
to the financial relationships with the Nether -
lands. Here, chiefly domestic affiliates repaid previously granted direct investment loans to 
their foreign parent companies (€8½ billion) in the third quarter.Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
58

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Economic output in Germany rose only very 
moderately in the third quarter of 2014. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash 
estimate, real GDP edged up by just 0.1% on 
the preceding three-  month period in seasonal  
and calendar-  adjusted terms fol lowing a first 
quarter that had been boosted by special fac -
tors (0.8%) with a subsequent countermove -
ment in the second quarter (0.1%).1 The under -
lying growth path of the German economy has 
therefore been flattening off since the begin -
ning of the year. In the reporting period, in par -
ticular, the slackening momentum was more 
pronounced than was implied by final demand. Aggregate capacity utilisation remained within normal bounds.
This cyclical cooling emanated from the pro -
duction sector. Industrial orders have not been 
growing since the beginning of the year and business sentiment has deteriorated percep -
tibly. Industry was already scaling back its out-
put slightly in the third quarter in anticipation 
of slackening business, even though industrial 
exports both within and outside the euro area 
showed a further increase. Following the weather-
 induced ups and downs in the first
 
half of the year, the construction sector failed 
to maintain the heightened level of activity of 
2013. By contrast, business activity in the con-sumption-
 r
elated service sectors fared better. A 
key part in this was played by the positive sen-
timent of households, which was boosted by 
strong income growth and the persistently fa -
vourable labour market situation.
German firms’ export business was significantly 
better in the third quarter of 2014 than it had 
been in the second quarter. This contrasts somewhat with the weak production data and 
export expectations, which have been scaled 
back since the beginning of the year. The 2½% 
quarter-  on-  quarter rise in exports of goods in  
price- and seasonally adjusted terms was attrib-utable in fairly equal parts to increased exports to other euro-
 ar
ea countries and to non-
 eur
o-
 
area countries. Sales rose substantially in the 
central and east European EU countries and in the United Kingdom and, after the sluggish ac-
tivity in the second quarter, continued their 
earlier upward movement. Exports in Asia were 
likewise on a growth course, with especially dynamic growth in exports to south and east 
Asian emerging market economies. Exports to 
China, which had expanded very strongly in the previous quarter, showed only a slight increase 
in the summer, however. There was a further 
marked rise in exports to the United States. By 
contrast, sales in the OPEC countries declined Very moderate 
economic growth in 
 
summer 2014 …
… due to 
 
cyclical cooling 
in the produc-tion sector
Clear increase  
in exports of 
goodsOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014949698100102104106
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1
1 The quarterly rates of change of the first and second 
quarters were revised upwards by 0.1 percentage point in each case.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
59

considerably, albeit following a sharp increase 
in the second quarter. There was an acceler -
ation of the downward trend in trade with Rus-
sia observed over the past two years.
The expansion in exports covered a wide range 
of goods. There were, admittedly, sectors 
where growth was negative, above all in cap -
ital goods. The automotive industry suffered a 
setback following its export successes in the 
second quarter. Furthermore, sales of machin -
ery decreased. By contrast, exports of other 
transport equipment recorded a sharp increase. 
There were also more exports of computers, 
electronic and optical products and electrical equipment. Exports of intermediate goods saw 
a slight rise. Moreover, exports of consumer 
goods were flourishing, which was due in par -
ticular to sales of pharmaceutical products.
Imports of goods in the third quarter largely offset the losses sustained in the preceding three-
 month period. In price- and seasonal
ly 
adjusted terms, there was an increase of 1¼% on the second quarter, which had seen a fall of 
½%. Imports of capital goods performed rela -
tively unfavourably. Other transport equipment 
played a major role in this context. Moreover, 
German enterprises’ continuing hesitant pro -
pensity to invest was also making itself felt. The 
detailed figures, which are currently available 
only up to August, show that purchases of ma-chinery from foreign producers were down sig-
nificantly on the quarter, with sales of motor vehicles stagnating. The reporting period is likely to have seen an overall increase in im -
ports of information and communication tech-nology (ICT) products and electrical equipment. 
There is also likely to have been a rise in im -
ports of intermediate and consumer goods.
Investment in machinery and equipment in the 
second and third quarters failed to continue its 
tendency towards recovery that began to 
emerge in the final quarter of 2013 and the first 
quarter of this year. Enterprises anticipate that 
demand can be comfortably met using the 
available domestic capacities. The purchase of 
moveable fixed assets is thus primarily in con -
nection with replacement and modernisation projects. The relevant short-
 term indicators
 
confirm the finding that enterprises are cur -
rently exercising caution in terms of their in -
vestment behaviour. During the summer 
months, the increase in domestic sales of ma -
chinery and other equipment contrasted with 
weak imports in this product group. Although 
there were distinctly more new car registrations 
by commercial customers, new commercial 
 vehicle registrations were stagnating during the period under review.Broad-  based 
 e
xpansion in the 
range of exportsImports almost 
made up for previous 
 
quarter’s losses
Investment in 
machinery and equipment  still lacking 
 
momentum90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014July-
Aug 8090100110120
July-
Aug
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
60

Seasonally adjusted construction output de -
clined somewhat in the third quarter. Following 
a steep decline in the previous quarter, which is 
to be seen chiefly as a reaction to weather-  
related strongly heightened activity in the first 
quarter, this clearly points to a slowdown in 
construction output. This interpretation is also 
corroborated by the fact that utilisation in the 
main construction sector in the second and third quarters no longer matched the record 
highs of the preceding 12-month period. A cer -
tain heterogeneity across the construction sub-sectors may be noted, however. Tendencies to-
wards an easing of the situation are likely to have been related primarily to construction work in the commercial and public sectors. Nevertheless, housing construction, too, is 
showing a slackening pace of growth.
According to Federal Statistical Office data, pri-
vate consumption expanded substantially in 
the third quarter of 2014. This is in line with the 
market research institution Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK) rating the consumer 
climate more favourably again. Households’ keenness to consume remained particularly 
pronounced despite dropping off slightly. The 
main factors here were the continuing positive 
situation on the labour market and strong wage increases. This is consistent with the higher number of car registrations by house -
holds and with indicators for the retail sector. 
In particular, retailers continued to take an op-timistic view of their business situation.
Sectoral trends
In the third quarter of 2014, industrial produc-
tion declined by a seasonally adjusted ¼% on 
the quarter. The decline was somewhat smaller than in the second quarter (-½%). Unlike in the second quarter, the dampening effects of holi-
day and bridge days did not play a significant 
part in terms of the quarter-  on-  quarter figur e. 
The summer months presented an entirely dif-ferent picture with regard to the quarterly pat-tern of industrial output, which was marked by considerable fluctuations due to the extremely 
late start to school holidays in many federal states. All in all, the slight downward move -
ment in industrial output since the second 
quarter is a reflection of the underlying trend in incoming orders that set in at the beginning of the year, which reveals no momentum.
Output in major sectors of industry was marked 
by considerable differences in the third quarter. 
Overall output was curbed by the automotive 
industry, which cut back its production (-¾%). 
Capital goods production was nevertheless up 
by ¼% on the second quarter. Mechanical en-
gineering recorded a steep rise (+3¼%) after contracting in the two preceding quarters. In addition, output increased in the computers, electronic and optical products sector as well as in other transport equipment. The produc -
tion of intermediate goods showed a marked over
all decline (-¾%). Manufacture of metal 
products contracted again, while the chemicals industry recorded a rise. In the period under re-Lack of stimuli  
in construction 
 
investment
Further expan-
sion of private consumption
Further slight fall 
in industrial 
 
output …… with consid-
erable differ-ences between the sectors of industry …Output in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
61

view, output of consumer goods was down 
slightly (-½%) on the second quarter.
Looking at manufacturing capacity utilisation, 
as reported by the Ifo Institute, when broken 
down into main industrial groupings, the inter -
mediate goods sector appears to be in a some-
what better cyclical position than the capital 
goods sector at the start of the fourth quarter. In the intermediate goods sector, the lead over 
the multi-  year aver age was maintained, while 
producers of vehicles, machinery and other 
equipment saw an overall decline back to nor -
mal sectoral capacity utilisation.
In the period under review, seasonally adjusted 
construction output just about maintained the level of the previous quarter (-¼%). Main con-
struction output remained unchanged overall 
in seasonally adjusted terms. Building construc-tion and civil engineering practically showed a 
sideways movement. Provisional data, which 
are fairly prone to revision, indicate a decline of ½% in finishing trades output. Energy produc-
tion recorded a slight seasonally adjusted de -
crease of ¼% in the third quarter.
The services industries are likely to have ex -
panded again overall in the period under re -
view. Nevertheless, it was mainly in the service 
sectors related to industry and construction that the lack of stimuli from the production 
sector was making itself felt. The decline in the 
mileage of domestic heavy goods vehicles on toll roads, for example, is an indication that 
business in the transport sector was impaired. 
In keeping with this picture, the wholesale 
trade recorded a quarter-  on-  quarter decline in  
sales after seasonal adjustment. By contrast, 
service providers primarily geared to consump-
tion benefited from the continued markedly positive consumer sentiment. Sales by motor 
vehicle traders showed a distinct increase and 
retail sales almost held up at the level of the 
second quarter. The hotel and restaurant sector is likely to have recorded a significant increase in turnover.Employment and labour 
 
market
The ongoing upturn on the labour market has so far not been dented by subdued growth in the economy. There was a steep rise in employ-
ment of 81,000, or 0.2%, in the third quarter 
of 2014, even though this was somewhat 
weaker than in the second quarter (+128,000). 
Unemployment tended to move sidewise. The 
rising demand for labour is still being largely 
covered by immigration.
Growth in employment in the third quarter was 
once again attributable solely to the increase in regular jobs subject to social security contribu-
tions, while self-  employment was stagnating  
and the number of persons employed exclu -
sively in forms of low-  paid part-  time work in  
fact decreased slightly. After seasonal adjust -
ment, a total of roughly 101,000 additional jobs subject to social security contributions
 
were filled in July and August; this corresponds 
to an increase of 0.3% compared with the second quarter. The sectoral profile remained 
broadly unchanged compared with the second 
quarter. Employment in business-  r elated ser -
vices (excluding temporary agency employ -
ment), the health and social work sector, and 
hotel and restaurant services showed compara-
tively clear growth. There was an increase on average in the number of positions filled in manufacturing, the closely related sectors of logistics and temporary agency employment, 
and in the wholesale and retail trade. The con-struction sector did not make any contribution to employment growth, however.
According to the available information, the in-
flux of workers from other European countries during the year so far seems as large as it was in 2013. By contrast, there was a considerable increase in the number of refugees and asylum … also in view 
of capacity 
 
utilisation
Lack of momen-
tum in construc-tion output, 
 
energy produc-
tion down slightly
Services sector 
still on growth pathStable employ-ment growth with stagnating unemployment
Jobs subject to 
social security contributions growing mainly in services sector
Immigration 
 
remains highDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
62

seekers.2 In all probability, the migration surplus 
for 2014 as a whole is again likely to be clearly 
higher than in the previous year (437,000 per -
sons), but is likely to have a smaller impact on 
the labour market. There has been a distinct 
increase in immigration from Romania and Bul-garia
 3 owing to the free movement of workers 
since the beginning of 2014. Immigration from 
the eight central and east European countries 
that joined the EU in 2004 is still substantial, 
but has declined slightly compared with 2013. 
Much the same applies to three of the four south European periphery countries. It is only 
from Italy that more immigrants are expected 
in the current year on balance than in 2013. Whereas immigration from EU countries dir -
ectly strengthens the potential labour force, 
this is not the case for asylum seekers and refu-gees, as they are not generally granted imme-diate access to the labour market.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons 
registered as unemployed has been hovering at around 2.9 million for six months. On an aver -
age of the third quarter, slightly more persons 
were registered as unemployed than in the pre-
ceding three-  month period. This can be ex -
plained by the timing of this year’s school holi-
days, which stretched further into September 
than in other years. This meant that enterprises’ increased recruitment activity linked to the end 
of the holidays did not have an impact until October, when unemployment showed a 
marked decline of 22,000. The unemployment rate remained at 6.7% throughout.
The labour market is likely to remain stable re-
gardless of the gloomier cyclical outlook. The Almost no 
change in 
 r
egistered 
 unemploymentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fe-
deral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclu-
ding  seasonal  jobs  and  jobs  located  abroad.  3 From  May 2009, unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Oct40.541.041.542.042.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
Million
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sandOfficially unemployed
 3Unemployed
Year-on-year change1TotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug
2 The number of initial applications for asylum rose from 
65,000 in 2012 to 110,000 last year. 136,000 initial appli-
cations for asylum were made in the Federal Republic of Germany in the first ten months of this year, with just under one-
 quarter of these submitted by persons from
 
Syria.
3 According to the Central Register of Foreign Nationals, 
the number of nationals from these countries registered in 
Germany showed an annual increase of 114,000 in Sep -
tember. This means that immigration from this region is 
likely to be more than one-  third higher than in the pr evious 
year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
63

Ifo employment  barometer , which provides 
information on the employment plans of trade 
and industry and business-  related 
services over 
the coming three months, continues to point 
to an expansion. This can also be seen from the September DIHK survey, even though there has been a decline in the previously fairly high per -
centage of enterprises planning to increase their staff numbers over the next 12 months. 
With regard to unemployment, leading indica-
tors suggest a sideways movement. The IAB 
 la
bour market barometer, which is based on 
surveys of the managers of all the local em -
ployment agencies, just surpassed the neutral 
threshold in October.
The Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job 
index continued to improve during the summer and rose to its highest level for more than two 
years. This is due to a marked increase in job vacancies reported to the Federal Labour 
Agency. However, following the introduction of legislation from 1 July 2014 allowing long-
 term 
contributors to the statutory pension insurance system to r
etire early at the age of 63 and draw 
a full pension, this movement cannot be inter -
preted as being purely cyclical in nature. It is more likely to indicate difficulties in filling va -
cancies following the early retirement of ex-
perienced skilled professionals.Wages and prices
The increase in negotiated rates of pay in the 
second half of the year has so far not been 
quite as high as it was in the first six months of the year. Collective wages and salaries, includ-ing one-
 off payments and fringe benefits, went 
up by 
2.8% year-  on- year in 
the third quarter of 
2014, after rising by 3.3% in the second quar -
ter. Growth in basic rates of pay declined from 3.4% to 2.9%. One of the main reasons for this 
slower increase was that, in a number of longer-
 running collective wage settlements,
 
the second, smaller rise was paid out. Secondly, 
the wage agreements concluded in the later 
stages of this year’s pay round no longer pro -
vide for rises that are as substantial as those in 
settlements reached at the beginning of the year. However, industry-
 specific factors prob -
ably also made themselves felt in the most re-cent pay agreements of the cooperative banks 
and the west German textile and clothing in -
dustry with volumes of no more than around 
2% converted to an annual basis.
Overall price developments in Germany were 
trending moderately upwards in the third quar -
ter of 2014. With the exception of energy, ex-ternal price pressure eased on the back of the euro’s depreciation, so that domestically gener -
ated cost trends are gaining in importance.
With the exception of energy, seasonally ad -
justed prices largely moved upwards at the up-
stream stages of the economy in the third quarter compared with the preceding three-
 
month period. This applies equally to inter -
mediate, capital and consumer goods at both 
the import and the domestic producer levels. In 
the case of imports, this brought a halt to a downward trend caused mainly by the euro’s 
appreciation between mid-2012 to early 2014. The decline in the domestic producer prices of consumer goods, which does not appear to fit 
into this pattern, was driven by a marked re -
duction in the price of dairy products in Sep -
tember. By contrast, energy prices contracted 
clearly in the third quarter as a result of declin-Further rise in 
employment likely
Growth in 
 vac
ancies prob-
ably not solely 
for cyclical 
 r
easonsNegotiated rates of pay grew less sharply in Q3 2014 than in H1
Subdued upward  
price trend
No further 
 decline in 
prices 
excluding  ener
gy 
at upstream 
stages of the economyNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,total
Basic pay
 1Q1-Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
64

ing crude oil prices, although the depreciation 
of the euro had a mitigating effect. The annual 
rate of change in prices at the upstream stages of the economy remained broadly negative due 
to the effect of energy. It declined marginally by -1.8% for the imports of goods and re -
mained at -0.8% for domestic sales. As there was no change in export sales prices in year-
 
on- year terms, 
the terms of trade showed a 
distinct improvement.
The easing of price inflation in construction ser -
vices continued in the third quarter. The year-  
on- year rate persisted at 1.7%. The rate was 
somewhat higher for the finishing trades than 
it was for structural work, with price reductions 
for cement and concrete likely to have played a 
part in this. The cooling of the, in some in -
stances, overheated regional property markets 
is also revealed in the price data. According to 
data from BulwienGesa AG, housing prices in 
the third quarter rose by 5¾% on the year in 
the seven big cities, compared with 7% in the 
first half of the year and as much as 9% in 
2013. The relatively moderate rise in prices for 
owner-  occupied housing over the course of 
the year so far is mainly due to the slowdown in price rises in urban housing markets.
Consumer price inflation remained muted in 
the summer. The quarter-  on- quarter rate, at a  
seasonally adjusted 0.3%, was in fact some-what higher than in the second quarter. The prices of all the lar
ger components, with the 
exception of energy, were moving upwards. 
There was a fairly sharp increase in food prices, mainly for fruit and vegetables as a result of the 
poor weather in August. The sub-  index for in-
dustrial goods (excluding energy) also showed 
a marked rise, due, among other things, to the 
increase in additional charges for numerous medicines from July onwards. The upward trend in services prices and housing rents re -
mained largely unchanged. Only energy prices 
declined distinctly as a result of the easing in 
crude oil prices.No further slow-
down in rise in construction prices, tenden-cies towards easing on the housing market
Subdued rise in 
consumer prices continuesExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20149095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Oct95100105Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
65

In spite of this broadly-  b ased upward move -
ment, the annual rates of the national con -
sumer price index (CPI) and of the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) went down 
slightly to 0.8%. A contributing factor was that, unlike this year, energy went up in the third quarter of 2013. Excluding energy, con -
sumer prices were 1.3% up on the year in the third quarter, which is moderate in view of the accelerated rise in unit labour costs. One likely 
reason for this is that, owing to the compara -
tive rent system, there is a major time lag be -
fore increases in rents for new lettings affect existing rents, which dominate the consumer 
price index. Another is that lower prices in im-
portant holiday destinations are also reflected 
in the German consumer price index through 
the channel of package holidays.
In October, seasonally adjusted consumer prices in Germany saw a marked month-
 on- 
month 
fall (0.2%) for the first time in a long 
while. This decrease was due to a clear lower -
ing of prices of refined petroleum products as a result of the declining crude oil prices. In add-ition, prices for industrial goods (excluding en-
ergy) were lower due to mid-  season sales in  
clothing. Such sales of autumn goods used not 
to be common in Germany. These price-  
dampening effects more than offset the price 
increases for services and the slightly faster rise in housing rents. Nevertheless, the annual rate 
of the national consumer price index (CPI) re -
mained unchanged at 0.8% and annual HICP 
inflation went down only slightly to 0.7%, since there had been steep price reductions in 
 ener
gy 
prices in October last year.
Orders received and outlook
The further deterioration in business expect -
ations and the stagnation of new orders point to a rather sluggish course of economic devel-
opment in Germany until at least the end of 2014. Although global demand for goods is continuing to expand, it currently lacks major 
stimuli. In addition, no marked recovery in im-Temporary dip in 
prices in October
Economy lack-
ing momentum in coming 
 winterDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
July-
Aug
July-
Aug90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
66

portant euro-  ar ea partner countries has yet 
materialised. Nonetheless, other external fac -
tors, such as the euro’s considerable depreci -
ation and the sharp fall in oil prices, could 
gradually improve economic activity to a limited 
extent. Given the favourable labour market 
situation, high levels of immigration and marked wage growth, underlying domestic growth dynamics will receive continuing sup -
port from private consumption. In the light of 
increased global risks and uncertainty about the implications of some economic policy 
measures, there may be a time lag before the 
recovery in corporate investment resumes.
Industry has already attuned itself to more un-
favourable demand conditions by cutting pro -
duction. Further adjustments are possible given 
the deterioration in business and export ex -
pectations, which has extended over a period 
of more than six months now. In the third 
quarter, new industrial orders maintained the 
level of the second quarter after seasonal ad -
justment. However, waning demand for inter -
mediate goods, mainly from Germany (-2¾%), 
but also from the euro area (-¾%), could be seen as an indication that industrial activity is likely to be relatively feeble in the coming 
months. By contrast, orders of inputs and inter -
mediate goods from non-  e uro- a rea countries 
were clearly up (+2%) on their depressed level of the second quarter.
The tendency to weakness is less clear with 
 regard to demand for capital goods, however. 
Extremely large major orders in shipbuilding played a key part in the marked 1¼% rise on the quarter overall. However, even excluding other transport equipment, the volume sur -
passed the peak of the current business cycle in the first quarter of 2014. This was primarily due to the fact that mechanical engineering orders 
continued their upward trend throughout the 
summer months, with stimuli from both Ger -
many and abroad. By contrast, orders of motor 
vehicles saw noticeable losses in the period under review, with the slowdown in domestic 
demand being considerably greater than that 
for export orders. Following an 18-month up -
ward movement, new orders of consumer 
goods underwent a quarter-  on-  quarter decline 
of 
1¾% in the third quarter.
Construction activity is likely to have continued 
to bolster the domestic economy, although in 
the short term it will not match the intensity of the past year. The marked decline in permits for 
apartments built by private contractors since 
the beginning of the year is becoming increas-ingly apparent in the case of housing construc-
tion. The resulting slowdown did have an im -
pact on the dynamics of demand, even though the volume of permits for housing enterprises’ 
construction projects showed a sharp increase 
during the same period. Added to this is the fact that seasonally adjusted construction de -
mand from enterprises and public institutions 
failed to match its level in the final quarter of 
2013 and first quarter of 2014.
The current lack of impetus in industry and 
construction is spilling over into some services 
sectors. According to the Ifo business survey, 
business expectations in trade have likewise de-
teriorated. Sentiment remained very optimistic 
in the other services sectors, however. The Ger -
man Chamber of Industry and Commerce 
(DIHK) survey, which is representative of a wide section of the economy, shows that 85% of en-terprises do not expect business to deteriorate in the future. This is a decline of just 4 percent-
age points compared with the figures pub -
lished at the beginning of the year and in the 
early summer. The ongoing labour market im -
provement and households’ consumer senti -
ment are contributing to the stable overall situ-
ation in the domestic economy. Consumers 
appeared largely unperturbed by the deterior -
ating economic outlook and, until recently, 
were still feeling extremely positive about their income prospects and propensity to purchase.No new impetus 
from industrial orders
Major orders in 
shipbuildingConstruction 
 activity 
less brisk 
than before
Domestic 
 
economy  
stable overallDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
67

Public finances*
General government budget
The public finance situation in Germany has re-
mained relatively favourable this year. For the 
third consecutive year, general government is likely to achieve a broadly balanced budget 
(2013: +0.1% of gross domestic product (GDP)), 
while the revenue and expenditure ratios are 
likely to remain more or less unchanged (2013: 
both at around 44½%). As things currently 
stand, the impact of cyclical factors will remain 
almost neutral on an annual average and the cyclically adjusted result will also be broadly 
balanced as in 2013.1 Although sharper growth 
in social security spending is placing a strain on 
the general government budget, interest ex -
penditure is continuing to fall due to very be -
nign financing conditions and the Bundes -
bank’s dividend has risen significantly. While the social security funds are likely to lar
gely 
scale back their surpluses from 2013, central, state and local government budgets are ex -
pected to improve to a certain degree.
A deficit – albeit a small one – is on the horizon 
next year. This is primarily because the social 
security funds are expected to run up consider -
able deficits, which will substantially erode 
their relatively high reserves. The impact of cyc-
lical factors on government budgets is likely to 
remain almost neutral. From the present per -
spective, various strain and relief measures on 
the revenue side broadly offset each other. For 
instance, while both the contribution rate to the statutory pension insurance scheme and 
the average additional contribution rate to the statutory health insurance scheme are expected 
to be cut, contributions to long-  term care in -
surance are to be raised. Burdens on the ex -
penditure side are attributable to the rising cost of the pension reform package and, in no small part, to additional spending on long-
 term care. 
Additional expenditur
e on transport infrastruc-
ture, education and research, which got off to 
a slow start, is also likely to pick up the pace. As a result, the expenditure ratio is set to rise 
despite further cuts in interest expenditure.
As things currently stand, the debt ratio is still 
on a downward trend (end-2013: 76.9%; mid-
2014: 75.4%). This is primarily due to nominal 
GDP growth in the denominator, which pushes 
down the ratio when the general government 
budget is broadly balanced. Furthermore, the 
liabilities and assets of government-  owned bad 
banks are to be r
educed further. The assistance 
agreed for euro-  area countries and payments  
to the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) are 
not pushing up debt this year by nearly as 
much as in previous years.
After a brief (compared with other European countries) period of stress in the wake of the 
2008-09 financial and economic crisis, Germa-ny’s general government budget was balanced 
again in 2012. The fact that economic strains 
eased relatively quickly and that a large propor -
tion of fiscal support measures in connection 
with the crisis were of a temporary nature also 
helped expedite this recovery. Moreover, the 
conditions for public finances in Germany were 
particularly favourable. For instance, while 
taxes and levies were cut overall between 2008 and 2012 and the resulting shortfalls clearly ex-General govern-
ment budget still balanced in 2014, …
… but deterior-
ation expected in 2015As things 
 curr
ently stand, 
debt ratio still on downward trend
Relatively sound 
public finances reflect favour-able conditions and previous 
 r
eforms
* The section entitled “General government budget” refers to data contained in the national accounts and the Maas-tricht ratios pursuant to the European System of Accounts 
(ESA) 2010. For information on the latest revisions, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, September 2014, 
pp 7-12, and the press release of 2 October 2014. The re-sults for the fiscal balance and for revenue and expenditure underwent minor revision again with the Maastricht notifi-
cation, which was published by Eurostat in October; see 
Eurostat, Press Release No 158, 21 October 2014.1 This estimation is based on the Eurosystem’s cyclical ad-
justment method; see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggre -
gated framework for analysing public finances: Germany’s 
fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Re -
port, March 2006, pp 61-76. By contrast, the cyclical ad -
justment procedure used for EU budgetary surveillance and 
the procedure for the central government’s debt brake 
(which is based thereon) paint a clearly negative picture of the economic situation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
68

ceeded additional revenue from fiscal drag,2 
the GDP growth structure raised revenue. Very 
low interest rates and falling structural un-
employment provided relief on the expenditure 
side. In addition, labour market and pension re-
forms that were concluded some time ago 
helped keep overall expenditure growth firmly 
in check despite sharper rises in other areas.
Given the still high debt ratio and unfavourable 
demographic trends, Germany would be well 
advised to achieve a budget position that is at 
least structurally balanced in the medium term, 
too. Aside from this, it is essential that central 
and state government build up sufficient safety 
margins vis-  à- vis the strict national deficit ceil -
ings, which will come into force for all federal states, too, as of 2020 at the latest. To this end, 
central and state government should include surpluses in their budget plans under normal circumstances, which means that there is an 
ongoing need for further consolidation. In view 
of the considerable uncertainties regarding 
global and European economic developments, 
however, it appears appropriate to initially 
maintain the fiscal policy course mapped out in 
current plans. Due, in particular, to the social 
security funds’ dwindling reserves, this will in -
volve easing the general government fiscal 
stance next year (measured in terms of changes in the cyclically adjusted primary balance ratio). 
The automatic stabilisers should, as a rule, be 
allowed to operate freely. Thus, if economic ac-tivity were to pick up, a better budget outturn would be possible, whereas a downturn would result in cyclically induced higher deficits. How-
ever, an additional debt-  financed economic 
stimulus package would be of little help given 
Germany’s economic situation or taking into 
account the comparatively small boost it could be expected to provide to the rest of the euro 
area. There is enough leeway to devise fiscal policy measures aimed at strengthening the 
underlying conditions for growth without hav-ing to resort to borrowing, namely by improv-
ing the budget structure and making govern -
ment activities more cost-  eff ective. For ex -
ample, infrastructure can be better maintained and expanded as necessary without incurring 
new debt.
Budgetary development  
of central, state and local government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue3 in the third quarter of 2014 was 
up by 4% on the year. The pace of growth was 
thus somewhat faster than in the first six 
months of the year, but this was chiefly attrib-
utable to strains arising from a one-  off factor4 
in the second quarter (see the chart above and 
the table on page 70). Year-  on- year growth in 
wage tax revenue was somewhat higher than that in gross wages and salaries owing to the 
usual effects of tax progression. Furthermore, 
cash revenue was bolstered by stagnating child Given high un-
certainty, initially maintain course mapped out in current plans
Further robust growth in tax revenue in  2014 Q3Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014012345678
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
overall (positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific excise duties are largely independent of prices.3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.4 Court orders issued by Hamburg Fiscal Court on 11 April 
2014 (case number 4 V 154/  13 ) after a complaint was 
lodged by nuclear power plant operators ruling that the 
operators should be provisionally refunded for nuclear fuel tax payments.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
69

benefit payments. Revenue from profit-  related  
taxes was up by 8%, also due to a one-  off fac-
tor affecting non-  assessed taxes on earnings. 
By contrast, revenue from consumption-  related 
taxes 
increased at a slower pace of 2%.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
forecast to rise by 3½% for the year as a whole. 
This growth primarily reflects underlying macro-
economic developments5 as well as additional 
revenue from fiscal drag. However, legislative 
changes are expected, on balance, to result in limited revenue losses. On the one hand, short-falls are envisaged, not least due to the rise in 
the basic income tax allowance and the grad -
ual changeover to downstream taxation of 
pensions, with tax exemption on contributions being raised. On the other hand, the phasing-
 
out of both the homebuyers’ grant and the in
-
vestment grant (which are deducted from cash revenue), the increase in real estate acquisition tax, which has been implemented in some fed-eral states, and annual tobacco tax rises are 
likely to have a positive impact, in particular.
A gain of 3% is expected in 2015. Growth in 
macroeconomic reference variables for tax rev-
enue is forecast to be roughly the same as in 
2014 and legislative changes are likely to be 
relatively insignificant. However, tax refunds are expected as a result of previous court rulings.
6 
Average annual growth rates of 3½% are fore-
cast for 2016 to 2019. The projected develop -
ments will continue to largely reflect macroeco-
nomic growth assumptions and fiscal drag. Full- year revenue 
rise mainly 
 r
eflects macro-
economic 
 developmentsSimilar 
growth 
forecast for sub-
sequent yearsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2014 1.2Q3
2013 2014 2013 2014
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 416.4 428.9 + 12.5 + 3.0 + 3.5 139.0 144.5 + 5.5 +  4.0
of which
Wage tax 113.3 120.3 +  7.0 + 6.2 + 6.1 38.0 40.5 + 2.5 +  6.7
Profi  t-related taxes 3 67.8 68.7 +  0.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 18.8 20.3 + 1.5 +  8.1
Assessed income tax 31.6 33.8 +  2.1 + 6.8 + 5.8 9.8 10.0 + 0.2 +  2.1
Corporation tax 14.8 15.0 +  0.2 + 1.6 – 1.2 3.3 4.3 + 1.0 + 30.4
Investment income tax
4 21.4 19.9 –  1.5 – 6.9 – 5.3 5.7 6.0 + 0.3 +  5.4
Turnover taxes 5 146.3 150.8 +  4.5 + 3.1 + 3.1 50.0 51.1 + 1.1 +  2.2
Energy tax 24.2 24.6 +  0.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 10.1 10.0 – 0.1 –  0.7
Tobacco tax 9.5 9.9 +  0.4 + 4.4 + 4.7 3.9 3.7 – 0.1 –  3.2
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2014. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and invest-
ment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection. For 2014, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 1.2% and nominal growth 3.2% (May: 
+1.8% and +3.5%, respectively). GDP growth for 2015 is 
forecast to be 1.3% in real terms and 3.2% in nominal 
terms (May: +2.0% and +3.8%, respectively). In the me -
dium term, nominal growth of around 3% per annum is 
still forecast.6 Chiefly the European Court of Justice ruling of 20 Octo-ber 2011 on the taxation of dividends paid to EU/EEA com-panies, with total losses of €2½ billion distributed over the course of 2015 and 2016 (case C-284/
 09).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
70

 Legislative changes will only slightly dampen 
the impact of fiscal drag over the remainder of 
the forecast horizon. The tax ratio (as defined 
in the government’s financial statistics) is there-
fore projected to rise to 22.5% by the end of 
the forecast period in 2019 (2013: 22.1%).
The May forecast for 2014 has thus been revised 
slightly upwards. However, it should be noted 
that the calculations do not factor in any short-
falls as a result of the ruling by Hamburg Fiscal 
Court regarding the suspension of the nuclear 
fuel tax. Nuclear power plant operators who 
lodged a complaint with Hamburg Fiscal Court 
received just over €2 billion in refunds in May 
and this ruling has resulted in risks for the central government budget, which are likely to total just under €3 billion for 2014. If the Federal Consti-tutional Court and the European Court of Justice confirm that these complaints are founded, add-
itional tax shortfalls of €4½ billion (cumulated) 
will have to be included for the period up to the 
end of 2016.7 Previous expectations for 2015 
onwards have been revised downwards, al -
though the revenue shortfalls are limited and tax 
developments are by no means expected to be 
unfavourable going forward. These revisions pri-
marily stem from the fact that the forecast for 
the 2015 macroeconomic setting is now gloom-
ier than it was in May. Tax revenue in 2015 is 
now forecast to be €6½ billion lower, while the 
revisions for 2016 to 2018 range between -€7 
billion and -€4 billion.8 In addition to risks from 
the nuclear fuel tax, there is uncertainty with 
 regar
d to future economic developments and 
receipts from profit-  related 
taxes, which are 
volatile and thus difficult to estimate.
Central government budget
In the third quarter of 2014, the central govern-
ment deficit fell significantly on the year (from 
€8 billion to €3 billion). Revenue recorded sharp 
growth of 6½% (€5 billion), which was mainly 
driven by a €4½ billion rise in tax revenue (partly due to a fall of €2 billion in deductions for trans-
fers to the EU budget). By contrast, overall ex -penditure virtually stagnated. Interest expend -
iture again recorded a notable decline (€1½ bil-
lion), with premiums paid when issuing new 
securities accounting alone for €1 billion of this 
drop. By comparison, growth was recorded in 
personnel expenditure (€½ billion) – retrospect-ively applying the spring pay agreement to civil servants and retired civil servants is likely to have 
had a particular effect here – and in payments 
to state government (€½ billion), reflecting not 
least central government’s increased contribu -
tion to the basic allowance for the elderly.
Central government posted an overall deficit of 
€12½ billion for the first three quarters of 2014. In order to achieve the planned deficit of €6½ 
billion, a surplus of €6 billion will have to be 
generated in the final quarter. This would con-
stitute an improvement of €8½ billion on the previous year. All in all, this appears to be 
achievable. First of all, the considerable one-  off 
bur
dens that were recorded at the end of 2013 
(advance payments to the flood assistance fund of €8 billion as well as a contribution payment 
of €4½ billion to the ESM) no longer exist. 
Moreover, further relief is expected from lower -
ing payments to the health insurance fund (€1½ billion) and reclaiming flood assistance fund re-sources (€1 billion). However, additional strains 
are expected from other sources compared 
with the final quarter of 2013. The latest tax es-Revenue expect -
ations confirmed 
for 2014 and 
 r
evised down-
wards for subse-quent years
Clear decline in 
deficit in 2014 Q3 due to sharp 
 r
evenue growth  
and stagnating 
 e
xpenditurePlanned deficit for 2014 seems achievable 
 despite 
deterior-
ation in macro-economic 
 envir
onment
7 Nuclear power plant operators who lodged a complaint 
with Hamburg Fiscal Court received €2.2 billion in refunds 
in May. If these are not repaid to general government and these operators continue to make no payments for the re-
mainder of the year, this will result in shortfalls which are 
likely to total just under €3 billion compared with the results 
calculated by the Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecast -
ing. Other operators who are not affected by the ruling of Hamburg Fiscal Court currently continue to pay this tax and, 
by the end of 2014, will likely have paid a total of around 
€2 billion since the tax was introduced in 2011. The Federal Constitutional Court and the European Court of Justice have not yet ruled whether the nuclear fuel tax is constitutional. The official tax estimate includes just over €1 billion a year 
for 2015 and 2016 in revenue from the nuclear fuel tax, 
which is only due to be levied until the end of 2016.
8 After adjustment for the financial impact of legislative 
changes made in the intervening period (with an insignifi-
cant impact on revenue) and corrections concerning the 
fiscal effects caused by court rulings (downward revision of 
€1 billion in 2015 and €1½ billion in 2016), revenue esti -
mates were revised downwards by €6 billion for 2015 and by €6 billion to €4½ billion for 2016 to 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
71

timate forecasts additional revenue of €½ bil -
lion this year vis-  à- vis the budget plan for the 
year as a whole. However, these figures do not 
contain strains arising as a result of Hamburg 
Fiscal Court’s ruling on refunds and the suspen-
sion of payments of nuclear fuel tax. If the Fed-
eral Fiscal Court does not reverse the prelimin -
ary legal protection soon, the shortfalls are likely 
to exceed the provisions made in the budget, 
resulting in net tax shortfalls of €1 billion. Add-
itional strains of €½ billion compared with the 
budget plan are also likely to be recorded for 
unemployment welfare benefit (II). However, re-lief is expected especially in the areas of interest 
expenditure and other operating expenditure 
(due to the fact that this type of spending in the 
defence ministry9 is still likely to be lower than 
planned). This should far exceed the total 
amount budgeted for global spending cuts (€2 
billion). Furthermore, much-  hi gher-  th an- 
anticipated funds from the EU and fines im -
posed by the Federal Cartel  Office are also to be  
expected on the revenue side.The structural central government budget bal -
ance, which is relevant to the debt brake, is ex-pected to reach a surplus of €1 billion. As cen-
tral government’s autumn forecast of nominal 
GDP growth is 0.3 percentage point lower than in the assumptions made when the budget was approved in June, the cyclical burden estimated 
using the calculation method for the debt 
brake has risen by €2 billion to €7 billion. The 
budget plan envisages a net burden from 
 financial transactions of €3 bil
lion. If the def -
icits from the Energy and Climate Fund and the 
flood assistance fund (central government off-  
budget entities), which are relevant to the debt brake, of potentially around €2 billion are also included in the plan, as they were in the previ-
ous year, the forecast structural surplus would 
again amount to €1 billion after revision for 
these effects. However, on the basis of the cyc-
lical adjustment method used by the Bundes -
bank, the cyclical impact on the fiscal balance 
is almost neutral; a slight structural deficit is 
thus expected.
The draft central government budget for 2015, 
which was approved by the Federal Cabinet at 
the beginning of July, envisaged a balance be -
tween revenue and expenditure without any 
net new borrowing for the first time in four-  
and- a- half decades. Given the very favourable
 
conditions expected at that time, it was possible 
to finance new central government projects without putting undue strain on the budget. Compared with central government’s draft 
budget, the latest tax estimate projects revenue 
shortfalls of only €½ billion – despite percep -
tibly weakened growth expectations – because deductions from tax revenue for transfers to the EU budget are now down by €2 billion. At the 
end of the parliamentary Budget Committee’s 
adjustment meeting, a reassessment of expend-
iture growth in connection with long-  term un -
employment led to estimates being revised up-Tax shortfalls 
possible vis-à-vis budget plan, but relief from sources such as interest expend-iture, other 
 oper
ating 
 e
xpenditure and 
non-tax  r
evenueStructural surplus  
still possible even if deficit of flood assistance fund is 
 included 
– 
but very high 
cyclical burden forecast
After parliamen-
tary adjustments , 
budget plan for 
2015 still envis-ages no new net 
 borr
owingCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–25–20–15–10–5
20132012Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122014
20142013€ billion
9 According to press reports, the entire funds planned in 
the departmental budget are to be exhausted. However, this already includes global spending cuts and transfers from other operating expenditure to personnel expend -
iture.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
72

wards by €1 billion, while payments to the 
statutory pension insurance scheme declined by 
€½ billion as a result of cutting the contribution 
rate. Furthermore, appropriations for interest expenditure, in particular, which were previ -
ously generous, were reduced in the wake of 
the significant decline in interest rates since the summer (-€1½ billion). Overall, it was therefore 
possible to maintain a balanced budget as set 
out in the coalition agreement without the 
need for saving measures.
Calculating the structural deficit as defined in 
the debt brake, central government estimated 
a cyclical burden of €5 billion in its autumn pro-
jection. By contrast, according to Bundesbank 
estimates, the impact of cyclical factors will be 
almost neutral. Central government’s method, 
after deduction of the planned net relief of 
€1½ billion from financial transactions, thus re-sults in a structural surplus of €3½ billion. Fac-toring in an unchanged deficit for the flood as-sistance fund and omitting the one-
 off bur
den 
in the 2014 budget plan caused by anticipated (one-
 off) shortfalls fr
om nuclear fuel tax in the 
amount of €2 billion, the structural position will 
thus change little compared with the current 
year (despite a further reduction in the interest burden).
10
Looking at the extended planning horizon of 
the present financial plan, the tax estimate pro-
jects that central government revenue short -
falls will decline from €3 billion to an overall 
relatively moderate €1½ billion between 2016 
and 2018. After presenting the tax estimate, 
the Federal Finance Minister also announced a package for these years that contains a total of €10 billion of additional central government in-
vestment and is to be financed without new net borrowing. Central government will need to describe how it intends to offset these 
budgetary burdens as part of the next decision on benchmark figures in March 2015 at the lat-
est. Given the current uncertain situation, a structurally close-
 to- balance budg
et could be 
achieved, and the automatic stabilisers should 
be allowed to operate fully where necessary. Based on the autumn forecast’s medium-  term 
assumption of GDP growth persistently remain-
ing slightly above potential GDP growth, it would still make sense to remain below the deficit ceilings anchored in the debt brake. Central government debt remains very high, 
even if the burdens associated with it are ob -
scured to a certain extent by the currently very 
low level of interest rates. Furthermore, bur -
dens will increase as a result of demographic change. Overal
l, there is much to be said for 
factoring in a larger safety margin in order to 
be able to compensate for any unpleasant sur -
prises without the need for procyclical fiscal 
policy. If a further increase in infrastructure in-
vestment were considered necessary, for in -
stance, this should then be financed by provid-
ing services in a more cost-  efficient manner 
and by shifting budget items.
Central government’s off-  budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks) reported a surplus of €½ bi
llion in the third quarter, as they had done 
one year previously. This was largely attribut -
able to the pension reserve and the Restructur -
ing Fund, which has up to now been regularly 
financed in the summer quarter by revenue from the bank levy (€½ billion). A deficit was 
recorded by the flood assistance fund, in par -
ticular, but this remained very limited at just 
under €¼ billion. However, outflows are likely 
to rise considerably until the end of 2014, mainly due to the repayment of €1 billion to 
the central government budget. Nevertheless, 
surpluses in precautionary off-  budget entities 
for future pension burdens, the significant re -
demption of the Investment and Repayment 
Fund financed by Bundesbank profits, and the 
surplus in the special fund for the redemption 
of inflation-  indexed Feder al securities should 
have a much greater impact on the whole in 
2014. Be that as it may, the surplus will be con-siderably down on the 2013 level (€11 billion), Plan envisages 
balanced budget for 2015 in structural terms as defined in debt brake, too
Strive to achieve 
target of sub-stantial safety margin vis-
 à- vis 
deficit 
ceilingsAnother slight surplus for off-
 
budget entities in 
2014 Q3
10 With the updated cyclical adjustment based on data 
from the autumn 2014 projection, which indicates a some-
what lower cyclical burden for 2014 compared with the 
value for the budget outturn calculated using the simplified method.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
73

which was largely the result of the flood assis-
tance fund being topped up (€8 billion).
State government budgets11
Following a deficit increase in the first half of 
2014, the situation improved again in the third 
quarter for state government core budgets: 
after recording a deficit of €1 billion one year 
previously, they generated a surplus of €1½ bil-lion. The sharp rise in revenue of 4½% (€3 bil-lion) was chiefly driven by strong tax growth of just over 5%. By contrast, expenditure went up by only just over 1% (€1 billion). Even growth in personnel expenditure remained comparatively 
moderate at 2½% (€½ billion), as the second 
stage of wage increases agreed in 2013, which 
came into force at the start of 2014, had not 
been fully applied to civil servants and retired civil servants.
12 Growth in current transfers to 
local government (+1%) and investment ex -
penditure (+1½%) was still somewhat slower. 
In addition, other operating expenditure (-½%) and specifically interest expenditure (-11½%, or €½ billion) both fell.
Following this recent positive development, the 
full-year deficit of the state government core 
budgets could remain largely unchanged in 
year-  on- year terms at €2 billion. The r ecent sale 
of asset-  backed securities by BayernLB will ini-
tially bring the Bavarian state government budget €1 billion in revenue in the form of 
state aid repayments. At the same time, how -
ever, expenditure linked to calls on guarantees 
in connection with assistance provided to the 
Landesbank appears to be just as high.13
State government finances could once again 
come under increased pressure next year. Des-pite a downward revision in the latest tax esti-
mate (-€3 billion), the rise in tax revenue re -
mains sizeable (+2½%). Moreover, additional central government funds for childcar
e and 
education (including 100% assumption of costs for student grants and loans) are planned, and favourable funding options are likely to provide further relief for interest payments. Expenditure 
is expected to be placed under considerable 
strain, however. For example, the results of the new wage negotiations that are on the agenda 
will also affect payments to civil servants and 
retired civil servants. Wage adjustments are of 
particular importance, given the high propor -
tion of state government budgets allocated to expenditure on personnel. In light of the highly 
divergent fiscal positions of the federal states, 
as well as the major differences vis-à-vis their economic strength and price levels, it would stand to reason to differentiate between the 
federal states more than at present in this re -
gard.14 The current transfers to local govern -
ment are likely to continue rising at an appre -
ciable rate. Overall, it is particularly crucial for 
federal states with high financing deficits to promptly address their consolidation require -
ments, which need to be met by 2020. More-over, consistent deficit reduction should not be 
limited to satisfying debt brake requirements; instead, the aim should be to make tangible 
progress working towards safety margins vis-  à- 
vis a balanced budget, as already achieved by 
some federal states. Although, as a general rule, the east German states currently find themselves in a favourable financial position, they also need to take into account the fact that special-
 purpose grants, which ar
e still 
high, will be discontinued over the next few 
years. In this respect, regarding current budget 
surpluses as leeway for future expenditure in -
creases would create a number of problems.Surplus in 2014 
Q3 thanks to high tax revenue and muted 
 e
xpenditure 
growth, …
… but progress 
made in deficit reduction not assured for year as a whole
Gloomy outlook 
for 2015, and extensive con-solidation still needed by 2020 in several 
 feder
al states11 The development of local government finances in the 
second quarter of 2014 was analysed in greater detail in the short articles in the Bundesbank’s October 2014 
Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.12 The Constitutional Court of North Rhine-
 Westphalia r
e-
jected the state ruling regarding a heavily muted increase in civil servant salaries for pay grades A 11 and higher as un-
constitutional. A larger retroactive increase was later agreed for these groups, which added €½ billion to the 
budget burden. However, it would appear that payment is still outstanding.13 See Bavarian State Ministry of Finance, Regional Devel-
opment and Regional Identity, Press Release No  421 of 
30 October 2014.14 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of financial rela-
tions in the German federal system, Monthly Report, Sep-tember 2014, pp 33-52.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
74

Social security funds15
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme recorded 
a deficit of just over €½ billion in the third quar -
ter, which was around half as high as the previ -
ous year’s figure. However, financial improve -
ment was even more pronounced in the preced -
ing quarters. Revenue grew strongly by 4%, which mainly reflects ongoing favourable em -
ployment and wage developments. But growth 
in expenditure accelerated more markedly to 3%, particularly owing to the higher pension increase 
in year-  on- year terms (1. 67% in western Ger -
many and 2.53% in eastern Germany).
The benefit increases agreed in spring 2014 (particularly mothers’ pensions and full pen -
sions at 63) have thus far increased spending 
only minimally, with a sizeable catch-  up effect 
now anticipated until the end of 2014. Never -
theless, another surplus is expected for the year as a whole owing to the stable, strong growth in contribution receipts. This is expected to play 
a role in pushing the scheme’s financial re -
serves to over the upper limit of 1.5 times its 
monthly expenditure at the end of 2015: under 
current legislation, this would mean lowering 
the contribution rate by 0.2 percentage point 
to 18.7% at the turn of the year. Although 
benefit increases mean that a deficit and asso-
ciated decline in reserves are on the cards for 
2015, the financial reserves are still likely to re-
main above the upper limit if the contribution 
rate is not lowered. In subsequent years, how-ever, the lower contribution rate will accelerate the depletion of the reserves, and the minimum 
level of reserves of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure will be reached sooner. 
Thereafter, if there are no changes to benefits 
legislation, there will likely be prolonged pres -
sure to raise the contribution rate due to the 
demographic outlook.
As a result of changes in the methodology for 
the national accounts, particularly due to the in-clusion in the statistics of disabled persons em -
ployed in workshops, per capita earnings are 
considerably lower than they were in the past. 
Under current legislation, this is to be taken into account in the pension increase, which will con-
sequently be around 1 percentage point lower 
in mid-2015. For this reason alone, the contribu-tion rate can be set 0.1 percentage point lower. 
However, the pension level will only be deter -
mined by national accounts earnings in the short term and on a temporary basis. The adjustment 
formula contains a correction factor; this en-
sures that the pension increase and level are de-
termined, approximately, by the income of per -
sons in the statutory pension insurance scheme who are subject to compulsory insurance contri-
butions rather than by national accounts earn -
ings. The downward adjustment in 2015 will Financial 
 impr
ovement 
slows down  
in 2014 Q3
Surplus in 2014 
adds to contri-bution rate 
 r
eduction 
 potential
Revision 
of na-
tional accounts results in tem-porary reduction of pension 
 incr
easesFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
15 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-  term care insur ance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2014 was discussed in the short articles of the 
Bundesbank’s September Monthly Report. These are the 
most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
75

thus be reversed in the following year by a cor -
respondingly higher pension increase. Pensions 
will therefore only be lower for one year.16 Even 
factoring in this dampening effect, next year’s 
pension increase could be substantial at about 1½%. In view of the additional benefits that 
have been introduced, total pension expenditure 
in 2015 will increase at one of the highest growth rates recorded since the mid-1990s. In principle, the statutory pension insurance scheme could be shielded from the temporary 
effects of national accounts revisions if the level 
of income subject to compulsory contributions 
were directly relevant to the adjustment. How -ever, it would then be necessary to postpone the 
mid- year adjustment date until the end of the 
year due to the late availability of data.
Federal Employment Agency
At just over €½ billion, the surplus recorded by 
the Federal Employment Agency in the third quarter was up by half on the year. Revenue grew by almost 4½%, with expenditure even 
½% below its 2013 level. This was primarily at-tributable to the gradual phasing-
 out of subsid-
ies for partial retirement schemes and to re -
duced insolvency benefit payments. By con -
trast, payments for unemployment insurance benefit (I) remained virtual
ly unchanged com -
pared with 2013, while spending on vocational training increased slightly once again.
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a slight surplus for the first three quarters as a 
whole. A considerable surplus is expected in the 
fourth quarter owing to the usual final-  qu arter 
bonuses, which means that the result for the 
year as a whole is likely to be far more favourable than the figure of just under €½ billion (including civil servant pension funds) estimated in the Fed-eral Employment Agency’s budget plan. The key 
factors behind this improved performance are 
unexpectedly high contribution receipts, on the 
one hand, and lower-  than-  anticipated spending 
on active labour market policy measures, on the 
other. By comparison, payments for unemploy -
ment insurance benefit (I) marginally exceeded 
the target figure. All in all, the current situation, which is characterised by a persistently low level 
of unemployment and a continued rise in em -
ployment (particularly employment subject to so -
cial security contributions), is financially benefi -
cial for the Federal Employment Agency. This 
trend is likely to continue next year as well.Improvement in 
2014 Q3
Result for 2014 
as a whole more favourable than estimated in budget planFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014789101112
1.21.52.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue 1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits  and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 2
16 An example of a similar effect, albeit the other way 
around, was seen in 2010 when legislators intervened to 
prevent a pension cut (in line with reduced per capita earn-
ings); instead, it was ruled that the cut would be imple -
mented over time by reducing subsequent increases.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
76

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External tr
ansactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 General economic 
indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance 
sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’
s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 A ssets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in 
Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets 
and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 Assets 
and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 Assets 
and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by 
banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by 
banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, 
sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of 
domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of 
domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of 
domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 10 Savings deposits 
and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 11 Debt securities 
and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 12 Building and 
loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 13 Assets 
and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve r atios ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance 
in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance 
in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base r
ates ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eurosystem 
monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market 
rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Interest 
rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 A ssets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of 
debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding 
of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shares 
in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Yields 
and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and 
purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets 
and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 Acquisition 
of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets 
and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  58•
 2 General government: 
revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 General government: 
budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•D
eutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
3•

 4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
 5 Central, 
state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Central 
and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  60•
 7 Central, 
state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension 
insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 Feder
al Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 10 Statutory 
health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 11 Statutory 
long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 12 Central 
government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 13 Central, 
state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  63•
 14 Central, 
state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in 
the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Orders 
received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Orders 
received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail tr
ade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 Ne
gotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 10 Assets, 
equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 11 Revenues and 
operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items 
of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 For
eign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 Se
rvices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 Se
condary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 Ca
pital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 Fi
nancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position 
of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  79•
 9 External position 
of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 10 Assets 
and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 11 ECB’s 
euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 12 Euro-ar
ea member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 13 Effective exchange 
rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2014
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 3.0
         Feb 7.0 4.2 3.1 3.0 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.1         Mar 7.0 4.1 2.5 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 3.0
         Apr 8.6 4.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.6 2.8 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6         June 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.4 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 3.0
         July 7.0 4.0 2.1 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.3 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 2.9
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8
         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.2 2.4 1.4 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 0.16 0.29 2.6
         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.1 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.5
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 1.2 0.25 0.32 2.2
         June 5.4 2.3 1.6 1.5 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 1.6 0.08 0.24 2.1
         July 5.6 2.5 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.9 2.7 2.1 2.1 − 1.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.02 0.19 1.7
         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 ... − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.00 0.08 1.6
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2013          Jan −
5,404 − 3,373 + 3,853 − 21,755 + 30,963 − 587 − 4,768 1.3288 100.4 98.0
         Feb + 9,684 + 10,815 − 11,133 + 12,126 − 12,306 − 13,388 + 2,437 1.3359 101.6 99.0
         Mar + 24,325 + 21,850 − 15,952 − 15,544 − 8,053 + 5,368 + 2,278 1.2964 100.2 97.9
         Apr + 15,682 + 15,966 − 22,109 − 7,492 − 12,040 − 2,536 − 41 1.3026 100.5 97.9
         May + 13,281 + 16,534 − 19,277 + 43,749 + 16,032 − 78,503 − 555 1.2982 100.5 98.1
         June + 31,110 + 17,359 − 30,802 − 14,289 + 38,096 − 54,018 − 591 1.3189 101.6 99.0
         July + 25,727 + 18,655 − 28,642 + 6,932 − 33,262 − 2,551 + 239 1.3080 101.5 98.9
         Aug + 10,197 + 6,737 − 6,788 − 311 + 25,517 − 30,025 − 1,969 1.3310 102.2 99.5
         Sep + 15,496 + 12,674 − 20,433 − 19,275 + 20,258 − 20,286 − 1,131 1.3348 102.0 99.1
         Oct + 26,444 + 17,447 − 19,823 + 17,937 − 1,006 − 37,608 + 855 1.3635 102.8 99.8
         Nov + 28,788 + 17,698 − 32,897 − 23,194 + 56,136 − 66,021 + 181 1.3493 102.6 99.5
         Dec + 32,480 + 12,947 − 48,851 − 11,048 + 7,261 − 43,720 − 1,344 1.3704 103.9 100.7
2014          Jan + 2,778 + 1,836 + 8,048 − 9,239 + 46,651 − 26,631 − 2,733 1.3610 103.4 100.3
         Feb + 9,296 + 15,923 − 10,969 − 521 + 38,839 − 49,800 + 513 1.3659 103.6 100.4         Mar + 19,555 + 19,157 − 25,746 − 14,616 − 16,924 + 6,130 − 336 1.3823 104.6 101.4
         Apr + 18,793 + 15,723 − 19,137 − 18,708 − 83,554 + 83,464 − 339 1.3813 104.5 101.0
         May + 12,716 + 16,533 − 11,031 + 10,644 + 57,814 − 79,032 − 457 1.3732 103.8 100.1         June + 24,844 + 18,676 − 28,344 + 7,875 + 21,930 − 58,637 + 488 1.3592 103.0 99.3
         July + 32,830 + 21,064 − 25,855 − 1,873 − 9,633 − 14,989 + 641 1.3539 102.6 p 98.8         Aug + 15,086 + 7,795 − 16,078 + 8,585 − 40,836 + 17,375 − 1,203 1.3316 101.9 p 98.2         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2901 100.4 p 96.7
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2673 99.6 p 95.9
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.12 and 13, pp 79−80
  2  Including financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2011 1.6 1.8 3.6 8.7 2.8 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.4 5.0
2012 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.4 4.5 − 1.0 0.0 − 7.0 0.2 − 2.4 4.82013 − 0.5 0.2 0.1 2.2 − 1.4 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 4.2
2013          Q1 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.8 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 6.0 − 1.7 − 2.6 3.1
         Q2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5 1.4 − 0.8 0.7 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.3 4.6         Q3 − 0.3 0.4 0.8 1.9 − 0.8 0.6 − 3.2 2.7 − 1.5 4.6         Q4 0.4 0.8 1.0 1.6 − 0.2 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0 4.4
2014          Q1 1.0 1.1 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.7 − 1.1 ... − 0.5 2.8
         Q2 0.8 1.0 0.8 2.6 ... 0.1 − 0.3 ... − 0.6 2.3
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2011 3.5 4.4 7.2 19.7 2.1 2.3 − 5.8 − 0.4 1.2 8.82012 − 2.5 − 3.3
5 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 6.4 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.8 0.2 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 0.4
2013          Q2 − 1.0 1.3 − 0.3 3.8 − 6.4 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 3.9 − 0.1
         Q3 − 1.1 0.8 − 0.2 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.6 − 5.4 − 1.6 − 3.6 0.2
         Q4 1.5 4.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.1 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.6
2014          Q1 1.3 4.0 3.0 − 1.3 − 5.6 − 0.8 − 2.5 11.9 0.5 − 2.8
         Q2 1.0 4.0 1.1 2.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 3.0 21.0 0.0 − 0.2
         Q3 e 0.6 ... p 0.4 ... − 2.5 ... ... p 19.8 ... − 0.2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1 70.8
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 70.1 72.02014 79.9 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 72.2 72.2
2013          Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.8 64.9 − 71.3 71.8
         Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 77.5 79.6 65.9 − 72.2 72.2
2014          Q1 80.1 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.8 65.9 − 72.5 72.1
         Q2 79.5 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 81.3 67.7 − 71.7 72.0
         Q3 79.9 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.5 70.4 − 72.5 71.5
         Q4 80.0 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 72.0 73.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.3 7.8 9.2 17.9 14.7 8.4 16.2
2012 11.3 7.6 5.5 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.02013 12.0 8.4 5.3 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.2 11.9
2014          Apr 11.6 8.5 5.2 7.9 8.5 10.1 27.1 11.8 12.5 10.8
         May 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.6 10.2 26.8 11.7 12.6 10.8         June 11.5 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.6 10.4 26.7 11.6 12.4 10.8
         July 11.5 8.5 4.6 7.5 8.6 10.5 26.4 11.5 12.6 ...
         Aug 11.5 8.5 5.1 7.7 8.6 10.5 ... 11.4 12.5 ...         Sep 11.5 8.5 5.1 ... 8.7 10.5 ... 11.2 12.6 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2011 9 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9 4.2
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.32013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2014          May 0.5 0.8 0.6 0.6 1.0 0.8 − 2.1 0.4 0.4 0.8
         June 0.5 0.7 1.0 0.4 1.1 0.6 − 1.5 0.5 0.2 0.8
         July 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 1.0 0.6 − 0.8 0.5 0.0 0.6
         Aug 0.4 0.4 0.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.5 − 0.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.8         Sep 0.3 0.2 0.8 0.2 1.5 0.4 − 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 1.2
         Oct 
e 0.4 0.3 0.7 0.5 ... ... − 1.8 ... e 0.2 0.7
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2011 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.9 1.0 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 10.1 − 12.6 − 3.5 − 3.4
2012 − 3.6 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 4.9 − 8.6 − 8.0 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 2.9 − 2.9 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 4.1 − 12.2 − 5.7 − 2.8 − 0.9
 
General government debt 10
 
2011 85.5 102.1 77.6 6.0 48.5 85.0 171.3 111.1 116.4 42.7
2012 88.7 104.0 79.0 9.7 53.0 89.2 156.9 121.7 122.2 40.9
2013 90.7 104.5 76.9 10.1 56.0 92.2 174.9 123.3 127.9 38.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. ta. 3  GDP of the euro area, Germany and Latvia: ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mi-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual ning and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. 5  Positively influenced by late
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted da- reports. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
1.9 2.2 0.9 2.8 − 1.2 3.0 0.7 0.1 0.4 2011
− 0.2 2.0 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 2.4 2012
2.1 2.5 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.4 1.0 − 1.1 ... − 5.4 2013
0.6 1.5 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 4.6 0.5 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 5.3 2013          Q1
2.1 3.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 2.4 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.1          Q2
2.8 2.5 − 0.6 0.4 − 1.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 5.2          Q3
3.1 2.4 0.8 1.3 3.2 1.5 2.1 − 0.1 − 5.1          Q4
3.8 3.8 − 0.5 0.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 0.6 − 3.8 2014          Q1
... 2.6 ... 0.6 ... 2.5 ... 1.1 − 2.2          Q2
 
Industrial production1,4
 
2.0 − − 0.7 6.8 − 1.0 5.4 2.1 − 1.7 − 8.1 2011
− 4.3 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 7.7 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.7 2012− 3.4 − 0.6 0.8 0.5 5.3 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 12.3 2013
− 7.3 − 0.2 0.7 1.1 3.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 13.0 2013          Q2
− 2.7 − − 0.4 0.5 − 1.5 4.5 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 10.7          Q3
5.1 − 0.3 0.6 3.8 10.8 1.3 1.0 − 10.3          Q4
7.6 − − 7.1 2.1 2.3 6.0 1.8 1.6 − 2.4 2014          Q1
8.7 − − 1.9 0.9 2.3 5.2 3.8 2.3 − 1.0          Q2
... −
p 0.5 ... ... ... ... 0.9 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
76.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201264.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 201366.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 54.6 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5 2013          Q3
65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8          Q4
67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 46.8 79.5 74.1 54.1          Q2
65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 56.5 80.8 75.3 54.5          Q3
66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 57.3 81.2 76.9 54.5          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
4.8 6.4 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.4 7.9 20115.1 6.3 5.3 4.3 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 20125.9 6.4 6.7 4.9 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 2013
6.1 5.9 7.2 4.9 14.6 13.5 9.7 24.9 15.9 2014          Apr 
6.2 6.0 7.0 5.0 14.4 13.4 9.5 24.7 15.9          May
6.1 5.9 6.8 5.0 14.1 13.2 9.3 24.5 15.8          June
6.2 6.0 6.7 4.9 13.9 13.2 9.1 24.3 15.7          July
6.1 5.9 6.6 4.9 13.9 13.2 9.1 24.2 15.4          Aug 
6.1 5.8 6.5 5.1 13.6 13.0 8.9 24.0 15.1          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 2013
1.4 0.4 0.1 1.5 − 0.3 0.0 1.0 0.2 − 0.1 2014          May
1.2 0.7 0.3 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.0 0.0 0.0          June
1.2 0.6 0.3 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.3 − 0.4 0.9          July
0.7 0.8 0.4 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.5 0.8          Aug 
0.3 0.6 0.2
p 1.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.0          Sep 
0.4 0.7 0.4 ... 0.1 0.0 0.1 ... 0.3          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
0.3 − 2.6 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 7.4 − 4.1 − 6.2 − 9.4 − 5.8 20110.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 2.3 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 5.8 20120.6 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6 − 14.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 2013
 
General government debt 10
 
18.5 69.8 61.3 82.1 111.1 43.5 46.2 69.2 66.0 201121.4 67.9 66.5 81.7 124.8 52.1 53.4 84.4 79.5 201223.6 69.8 68.6 81.2 128.0 54.6 70.4 92.1 102.2 2013
January, April, July and October. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; sea- onwards. 10  As a percentage of GDP (based on ESA 2010); Euro-area aggregate:
sonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation based European Central Bank, member states (Maastricht Treaty definition): European
on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including Estonia from 2011 Commission.

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households
government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Feb 0.4 − 4.2 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 6.9
         Mar 53.4 18.0 24.1 35.4 29.8 11.5 − 42.1 − 53.7 − 6.0 16.7 − 1.5 − 32.4 11.2
         Apr 14.5 13.3 34.0 1.2 − 8.8 − 6.0 58.9 65.0 − 24.9 − 7.6 − 1.9 − 15.7 0.2
         May 7.2 − 19.3 0.3 26.5 52.1 77.6 − 0.0 − 77.6 − 5.5 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.5 11.5
         June − 7.3 − 35.8 − 24.8 28.5 36.5 36.0 − 56.6 − 92.5 13.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 22.4 37.9         July − 120.7 − 83.5 − 12.1 − 37.2 − 39.5 − 1.8 − 27.9 − 26.1 − 35.0 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 25.8 − 3.8
         Aug − 53.7 − 35.9 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.3 − 15.8 − 50.1 − 8.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 13.7 12.0         Sep 3.2 19.3 − 0.6 − 16.1 − 16.3 23.8 − 31.6 − 55.4 − 8.6 − 4.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 1.0
         Oct − 43.1 − 61.4 − 26.5 18.2 5.8 34.1 65.3 31.3 8.4 2.0 − 0.5 15.3 − 8.4         Nov − 18.9 7.6 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.2 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.4         Dec − 181.2 −106.4 − 38.7 − 74.8 − 73.0 79.5 − 84.9 − 164.4 − 11.0 − 8.9 − 0.5 − 9.8 8.2
2014          Jan 45.4 − 16.8 9.6 62.2 42.5 9.0 124.9 116.0 − 1.1 − 2.7 0.1 − 12.4 13.9
         Feb − 5.8 − 9.9 − 16.4 4.1 12.3 32.7 16.3 − 16.4 − 11.8 − 5.9 0.1 − 11.3 5.3
         Mar 6.5 4.9 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.7 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.3
         Apr − 1.9 − 2.0 − 17.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.3 65.0 74.2 − 24.9 − 31.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 7.4         May − 27.5 − 38.1 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.4 36.6 − 14.9 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.1         June 7.5 21.7 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.8 − 33.2 − 103.0 − 14.9 − 10.5 − 1.4 − 22.3 19.3
         July − 23.0 − 12.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.8 61.1 33.3 − 5.8 − 12.3 0.6 − 10.2 16.2         Aug − 44.5 − 49.8 − 15.6 5.3 15.8 − 2.4 − 6.8 − 4.4 0.3 − 5.0 1.3 − 9.3 13.2         Sep 32.5 23.4 − 13.7 9.0 9.6 − 23.7 − 16.0 7.7 − 8.3 − 16.3 0.3 − 11.9 19.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.2 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.8 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.5 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.9 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.6 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.8 − 11.3 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 6.3 4.0
         Sep 10.6 6.6 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 13.4 3.2 − 2.9 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.2 1.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
5.7 − 12.5 − 1.2 9.9 5.1 − 1.2 6.2 − 3.4 8.2 26.9 6.3 − 13.4 2013          Feb 
10.6 15.5 − 44.8 58.0 47.2 11.7 35.5 5.1 5.6 22.7 − 5.9 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.6 26.1 − 57.9 54.1 73.8 7.2 66.7 − 26.5 6.7 − 8.8 − 0.4 1.4          Apr 
62.5 26.6 − 1.1 11.6 25.8 5.0 20.8 − 17.2 3.0 13.2 − 3.4 − 7.4          May
30.3 − 8.6 − − 6.7 25.7 45.1 6.2 38.9 − 19.2 − 0.2 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.1          June
− 26.1 − 55.1 − − 6.4 − 7.0 − 8.3 6.9 − 15.2 − 2.2 3.5 − 48.9 − 1.1 − 6.7          July
− 55.7 12.4 − 32.8 27.4 25.4 1.4 24.0 0.5 1.5 4.4 9.5 1.1          Aug 
11.2 58.1 − − 33.8 − 1.3 23.6 − 0.2 23.8 − 19.2 − 5.6 − 8.0 − 26.4 6.5          Sep 
− 28.0 − 5.3 − 15.7 22.0 38.5 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 5.5 1.3 − 12.4          Oct 
18.4 − 11.9 − 28.4 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 3.7 − 1.1 − 4.0          Nov 
− 49.3 − 25.0 − − 16.4 15.7 14.2 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.2 1.7 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 12.9          Dec 
20.4 39.7 − − 4.5 − 39.7 − 36.5 − 13.6 − 23.0 − 15.6 12.5 − 7.2 25.3 − 0.9 2014          Jan 
36.9 − 14.2 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.6 − 0.7 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.3 1.9 − 12.2 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 13.3 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 2.5 − 26.9 27.9 38.2 5.3 32.9 − 7.9 − 2.4 − 8.8 5.4 − 11.8          Apr 
33.1 − 52.1 − 64.0 57.9 55.0 7.1 47.9 1.0 1.9 − 14.1 − 4.1 8.6          May
26.3 49.5 − 16.3 22.8 44.3 6.4 37.9 − 19.5 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.3          June
− 23.1 3.7 − 30.0 15.4 10.4 9.4 1.0 6.6 − 1.6 2.8 17.4 − 7.2          July
− 46.4 − 48.3 − 47.4 40.8 35.0 2.0 33.0 3.4 2.4 3.0 3.4 2.4          Aug 
− 6.2 22.5 − 0.8 15.4 33.0 0.2 32.8 − 11.9 − 5.8 − 17.7 − 11.7 6.2          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5 2013          Feb 
− 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July
− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 
2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.4 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.2 3.8 0.3 − 0.4 6.0 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.2 0.0 0.5          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities 2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Aug 27,308.5 16,630.7 13,308.3 11,168.4 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.4 1,177.0 2,145.4 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,168.2 16,703.9 13,333.5 11,196.6 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.4 1,180.1 2,190.3 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,635.7 16,703.7 13,308.5 11,176.6 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.2 1,194.7 2,200.5 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,703.9 16,727.0 13,301.5 11,169.7 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.4 4,996.6 4,980.3         Dec 26,251.1 16,610.8 13,245.1 11,044.3 1,433.8 767.0 3,365.7 1,170.3 2,195.4 4,845.6 4,794.7
2013          Jan 26,397.8 16,646.9 13,249.6 11,053.1 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.3 1,174.2 2,223.1 4,799.6 4,951.2
         Feb 26,517.2 16,640.3 13,243.1 11,048.6 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.8
         Mar 26,567.8 16,698.5 13,262.6 11,044.6 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,025.1
         Apr 26,709.3 16,730.7 13,270.3 11,014.5 1,440.4 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.9
         May 26,371.6 16,728.1 13,249.1 10,992.1 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9
         June 25,926.2 16,691.6 13,200.4 10,975.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,675.6 16,573.2 13,113.1 10,895.5 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,649.7 16,162.3 12,803.0 10,650.3 1,360.6 792.1 3,359.3 1,097.4 2,262.0 4,488.2 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,045.4 16,244.7 12,806.2 10,643.1 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,681.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,988.5 16,224.0 12,773.7 10,637.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,672.3 4,092.2
         Mar 24,907.2 16,234.4 12,773.7 10,639.5 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,639.5 4,033.4
         Apr 25,048.8 16,238.4 12,772.4 10,652.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,698.2 4,112.3
         May 25,177.6 16,220.3 12,736.9 10,588.9 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,771.3 4,186.0
         June 25,134.0 16,210.8 12,731.8 10,608.0 1,318.3 805.5 3,479.0 1,101.1 2,377.9 4,752.3 4,170.9
         July 25,308.9 16,180.1 12,705.3 10,578.3 1,321.3 805.7 3,474.8 1,110.4 2,364.4 4,854.0 4,274.9
         Aug 25,543.5 16,146.3 12,655.6 10,542.8 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.7 1,099.8 2,390.9 4,876.6 4,520.6
         Sep 25,685.8 16,186.9 12,684.5 10,581.9 1,298.6 804.1 3,502.4 1,099.4 2,403.0 4,986.7 4,512.1
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.9 3,688.8 2,924.4 2,527.0 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.7 972.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.2 10,071.1 3,896.1 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4 2012          Aug 
866.7 10,716.2 10,109.3 10,110.9 3,940.3 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.3 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.6 10,183.5 10,170.2 3,994.2 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,809.5 10,247.1 10,269.7 4,061.3 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,821.5 10,224.9 10,253.7 4,036.1 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,836.5 10,221.3 10,262.6 4,047.8 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,915.5 10,288.3 10,326.1 4,090.3 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.0 10,325.1 10,354.6 4,147.6 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.7 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,901.0 10,352.4 10,401.9 4,311.2 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.6 10,349.1 10,399.9 4,305.2 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.7 10,339.1 10,383.4 4,308.3 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,967.2 10,356.2 10,399.5 4,333.2 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.3 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.6 10,351.3 10,394.7 4,365.3 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.0 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,021.2 10,387.7 10,426.3 4,415.3 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,051.0 10,388.2 10,424.6 4,448.0 1,104.3 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,023.5 10,379.1 10,420.7 4,449.5 1,115.4 430.7 2,244.9 2,095.2 85.1          July
946.8 11,016.0 10,415.8 10,455.4 4,478.9 1,123.9 427.4 2,241.4 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,020.3 10,418.0 10,468.9 4,523.2 1,116.4 423.1 2,227.4 2,092.0 86.7          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8 2012          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,123.0 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of 
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 427.5 422.3 513.2 2,965.8 2,264.9
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 432.3 428.3 492.5 2,938.5 2,251.6
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 414.8 411.2 497.3 2,914.4 2,226.2
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 421.2 417.4 495.5 2,889.4 2,206.6         Dec 251.0 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 376.4 372.4 467.9 2,853.2 2,183.1
2013          Jan 284.9 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 390.1 386.2 459.7 2,807.6 2,172.3
         Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 417.3 412.0 465.9 2,806.9 2,151.4
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 440.3 434.2 459.6 2,775.5 2,122.0
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 431.3 423.8 459.1 2,747.3 2,102.0
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 444.5 437.7 455.7 2,721.4 2,076.4
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 466.2 459.7 436.0 2,695.8 2,061.8
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 417.1 411.3 434.8 2,656.5 2,031.2
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9
         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.8 288.1 404.8 2,586.4 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.9 279.4 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 307.3 295.7 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7
         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 294.0 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.2 276.3 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.8
         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.8 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.4 293.5 409.6 2,524.1 1,898.4
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.2 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.5 296.5 412.9 2,521.4 1,888.9
         Sep 240.5 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 288.4 273.3 414.6 2,526.1 1,877.4
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.9 6.3 3.4 545.9 285.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates 7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
122.7 96.4 2,746.8 4,115.7 2,361.9 − 47.0 5,458.0 − 4,979.0 8,827.3 9,688.6 7,646.4 113.0 2012          Aug 
119.8 92.6 2,726.0 4,047.7 2,405.8 − 57.2 5,325.8 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,701.8 7,665.2 113.1          Sep 
113.6 93.5 2,707.3 4,020.9 2,394.4 − 73.0 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,756.9 7,621.4 112.1          Oct 
96.1 91.2 2,702.1 3,940.0 2,408.9 − 67.4 4,944.8 − 5,091.6 8,957.5 9,761.1 7,627.4 114.6          Nov 
87.4 93.8 2,672.1 3,793.4 2,396.4 − 52.1 4,729.6 − 5,168.7 9,045.7 9,809.1 7,578.1 120.0          Dec 
70.1 92.3 2,645.3 3,774.6 2,387.7 − 32.6 4,932.3 − 5,109.7 9,002.2 9,749.0 7,536.2 112.0 2013          Jan 
61.7 88.1 2,657.0 3,812.7 2,378.2 − 38.3 4,982.2 − 5,119.4 9,018.5 9,757.0 7,529.6 111.1          Feb 
59.2 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.4 2,414.3 − 58.9 4,955.7 − 5,170.4 9,081.9 9,805.9 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.5 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.7 2,390.1 − 43.1 5,122.2 − 5,239.7 9,128.2 9,855.0 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
62.9 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.3 2,377.8 − 54.6 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,856.7 7,467.3 111.9          May
66.1 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.9 2,335.9 − 63.2 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.1 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.1 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.3 2,365.2 − 59.0 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.6 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,308.9 2,340.4 − 62.2 3,954.3 − 5,445.1 9,250.0 9,852.8 7,310.9 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,473.8 2,385.1 − 42.1 4,108.4 − 5,419.2 9,224.8 9,855.2 7,355.1 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,427.9 2,405.4 − 29.7 4,039.4 − 5,428.4 9,235.6 9,867.3 7,337.8 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,391.9 2,422.1 − 29.0 3,981.7 − 5,461.6 9,274.3 9,879.7 7,344.8 106.1          Mar 
37.9 32.6 2,474.0 3,462.9 2,433.7 − 17.8 4,060.6 − 5,499.3 9,301.5 9,903.7 7,324.5 104.5          Apr 
43.8 35.1 2,484.3 3,476.6 2,426.9 − 32.2 4,116.5 − 5,557.1 9,363.3 9,971.5 7,313.8 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,374.8 2,457.3 − 48.0 4,138.9 − 5,601.3 9,386.3 9,987.0 7,300.9 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.3 3,437.2 2,470.6 − 42.6 4,239.4 − 5,612.0 9,403.1 10,018.2 7,302.0 107.8          July
41.2 34.2 2,446.1 3,449.7 2,495.1 − 55.8 4,452.0 − 5,648.9 9,446.6 10,068.5 7,319.2 108.3          Aug 
38.8 33.2 2,454.2 3,575.2 2,507.2 − 66.3 4,473.3 − 5,688.4 9,471.2 10,082.9 7,325.9 109.0          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 − 2012          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.1 7.4 527.4 641.9 532.3 − 622.0 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,398.2 1,865.0 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2012          Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5 2012          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+ 0.5
− 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 17.5
+ 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+ 4.2
− 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8 2012          Apr − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+ 0.8
+ 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
adjustment is
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments,
euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2014 Feb                28 2,181.1 303.2 243.8 80.7 163.1 24.1 19.0 19.0 −
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 303.2 244.3 80.8 163.5 23.9 18.8 18.8 −
                              14 2,167.8 303.1 244.5 80.8 163.7 23.8 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,166.1 303.1 244.7 80.7 164.0 23.9 19.2 19.2 −
                              28 2,152.1 303.1 244.5 80.7 163.9 23.1 17.7 17.7 −
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              11 2,169.1 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              18 2,167.8 326.5 244.1 80.9 163.2 23.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              25 2,169.1 326.5 245.2 81.8 163.4 23.8 18.4 18.4 −
         May                  2 2,217.1 326.5 245.6 81.8 163.8 23.5 18.7 18.7 −
                                9 2,167.7 326.5 246.3 81.6 164.7 23.2 18.6 18.6 −
                              16 2,185.0 326.5 244.5 81.3 163.2 24.2 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 2,163.7 326.5 245.3 81.3 164.0 24.5 20.3 20.3 −
                              30 2,197.1 326.5 245.9 81.3 164.6 23.8 19.6 19.6 −
         June                  6 2,172.3 326.5 248.3 81.7 166.6 22.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,124.3 326.5 247.5 81.6 165.9 23.4 18.8 18.8 −
                              20 2,080.0 326.5 244.4 81.0 163.5 25.5 18.4 18.4 −
                              27 2,088.1 326.5 244.4 80.6 163.8 24.4 18.6 18.6 −
         July                  4 2,070.3 334.4 249.6 81.7 167.9 23.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              11 2,057.1 334.4 249.2 81.6 167.6 22.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              18 2,062.5 334.4 248.2 81.6 166.5 24.5 19.5 19.5 −
                              25 2,044.3 334.4 248.1 81.6 166.5 25.2 18.6 18.6 −
2014 Aug                  1 2,059.7 334.4 248.5 81.7 166.8 24.9 18.5 18.5 −
                                8 2,025.3 334.4 249.4 81.1 168.3 24.5 18.9 18.9 −
                              15 2,023.2 334.4 249.1 80.8 168.3 24.5 19.3 19.3 −
                              22 2,013.0 334.4 249.3 80.8 168.5 24.3 19.9 19.9 −
                              29 2,038.7 334.4 249.5 80.9 168.7 24.2 20.9 20.9 −
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 334.4 249.8 81.4 168.4 25.4 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,003.8 334.4 250.1 81.4 168.7 25.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              19 1,988.2 334.4 247.3 81.1 166.1 26.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              26 2,038.2 334.4 248.4 81.2 167.2 26.5 20.5 20.5 −
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 334.5 263.1 84.5 178.6 27.8 20.6 20.6 −
                              10 2,042.7 334.5 263.0 84.3 178.7 28.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              17 2,029.7 334.5 262.4 84.3 178.1 27.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              24 2,032.8 334.5 263.6 84.3 179.3 26.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              31 2,052.1 334.5 262.9 84.3 178.6 27.9 22.3 22.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
664.5 94.0 569.7 − − 0.8 0.0 74.1 586.4 229.3 357.1 28.2 237.7 2014 Feb                28
654.0 87.0 566.7 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 588.0 229.3 358.7 28.2 239.0          Mar                  7
648.9 92.6 556.3 − − 0.0 0.0 76.0 587.9 228.8 359.0 28.2 237.0                               14644.1 96.9 546.2 − − 0.9 0.0 77.8 588.5 228.6 359.9 28.2 236.6                               21
640.8 121.3 518.0 − − 1.4 − 66.0 590.4 228.4 362.0 28.2 238.2                               28
627.4 110.6 516.5 − − 0.2 − 66.5 588.4 224.9 363.5 28.2 239.1          Apr                  4
636.7 104.6 532.1 − − − − 64.9 588.1 224.7 363.4 28.2 239.0                               11
636.3 112.2 523.8 − − 0.3 − 63.6 588.3 224.7 363.7 28.2 239.5                               18
638.1 121.8 516.3 − − 0.0 0.0 60.1 586.7 224.7 362.0 28.2 242.0                               25
688.3 172.6 515.0 − − 0.8 0.0 61.3 581.6 219.6 362.0 27.3 244.2          May                  2
642.4 129.1 513.2 − − − − 60.6 583.1 219.6 363.6 27.3 239.7                                 9
651.5 137.3 514.2 − − 0.0 0.0 68.4 583.6 219.6 364.1 27.3 239.4                               16640.0 131.9 508.0 − − 0.1 − 61.2 576.6 216.7 360.0 27.3 242.0                               23
679.7 174.0 505.7 − − 0.1 0.0 57.4 573.7 215.3 358.5 27.3 243.2                               30
653.3 149.4 503.9 − − 0.0 − 61.1 570.9 212.8 358.0 27.3 242.3          June                  6
607.6 136.8 470.8 − − 0.0 − 63.8 570.0 212.5 357.4 27.3 239.4                               13
565.0 97.9 467.1 − − 0.0 − 62.9 569.4 209.9 359.5 27.3 240.6                               20
568.4 115.0 453.3 − − 0.1 − 65.2 570.6 209.9 360.7 27.3 242.8                               27
545.9 97.1 448.8 − − − − 61.6 566.9 205.2 361.7 26.7 243.6          July                  4
529.2 94.2 434.8 − − 0.2 − 60.9 568.8 204.8 364.0 26.7 246.5                               11
531.7 99.9 431.1 − − 0.7 0.0 68.3 565.8 204.1 361.7 26.7 243.4                               18
507.8 97.9 409.6 − − 0.4 − 74.2 566.3 203.5 362.8 26.7 242.8                               25
533.5 133.3 400.2 − − 0.0 0.0 74.2 556.8 199.0 357.8 26.7 242.1 2014 Aug                  1504.9 107.9 397.0 − − 0.0 − 66.1 559.1 199.0 360.1 26.7 241.1                                 8
501.0 108.2 392.8 − − 0.0 − 66.8 560.9 199.0 361.9 26.7 240.5                               15
497.6 107.6 390.0 − − 0.0 0.1 61.9 557.7 195.4 362.3 26.7 241.1                               22517.6 131.8 384.9 − − 0.9 − 62.6 559.9 195.4 364.4 26.7 242.9                               29
492.7 111.2 381.4 − − 0.1 0.0 62.4 560.7 195.4 365.3 26.7 238.1          Sep                  5483.1 110.7 372.3 − − 0.2 − 63.5 561.6 195.1 366.5 26.7 237.5                               12
472.3 105.7 366.3 − − 0.3 − 63.3 561.4 194.5 366.9 26.7 236.0                               19
520.2 90.3 429.6 − − 0.3 0.0 66.3 561.8 194.5 367.3 26.7 233.3                               26
513.9 89.1 424.7 − − 0.1 − 67.0 561.9 194.6 367.2 26.7 238.1          Oct                  3
506.8 84.2 422.4 − − 0.1 − 65.7 561.1 194.0 367.0 26.7 235.1                               10
499.2 82.5 416.6 − − 0.1 − 65.6 559.1 191.2 367.9 26.7 234.3                               17
503.9 92.9 410.8 − − 0.2 0.0 60.8 561.2 192.4 368.8 26.7 234.0                               24
527.6 118.2 408.5 − − 1.0 − 59.8 557.1 192.9 364.2 26.7 233.1                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5 2012          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 
21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May
12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 
10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning
Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2014 Feb                28 2,181.1 933.8 392.5 187.4 29.4 175.5 − 0.2 5.2 − 126.1 99.3 26.9
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 937.0 393.6 187.1 30.9 175.5 − 0.0 5.2 − 113.9 74.7 39.2
                              14 2,167.8 938.1 425.8 226.8 23.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.0 − 83.4 56.4 27.1
                              21 2,166.1 936.9 405.2 195.2 34.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.1 − 103.4 77.7 25.8
                              28 2,152.1 938.7 382.9 179.2 28.3 175.5 − − 9.5 − 117.1 89.9 27.2
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 942.5 382.4 181.1 25.7 175.5 − 0.0 10.3 − 95.1 69.9 25.2
                              11 2,169.1 944.2 392.0 198.2 21.2 172.5 − 0.2 4.1 − 99.9 68.9 31.0
                              18 2,167.8 951.9 386.4 202.9 30.1 153.4 − 0.0 4.1 − 98.7 63.7 35.0
                              25 2,169.1 946.4 356.9 166.1 24.0 166.8 − 0.0 4.0 − 129.2 91.1 38.1
         May                  2 2,217.1 950.3 383.3 240.2 39.1 103.9 − 0.1 2.8 − 147.7 105.3 42.4
                                9 2,167.7 948.9 349.5 150.0 33.8 165.5 − 0.1 2.9 − 139.6 101.4 38.2
                              16 2,185.0 947.7 363.2 201.4 17.5 144.3 − 0.0 2.5 − 142.4 102.6 39.8
                              23 2,163.7 947.2 329.8 168.5 23.8 137.5 − 0.0 2.8 − 157.7 121.1 36.5
                              30 2,197.1 953.8 352.2 209.4 39.9 102.9 − 0.0 1.7 − 163.0 119.8 43.3
         June                  6 2,172.3 957.8 343.7 187.1 37.3 119.2 − 0.1 1.8 − 141.6 100.3 41.3
                              13 2,124.3 956.5 325.8 199.8 17.2 108.7 − 0.2 2.7 − 124.1 89.2 34.9
                              20 2,080.0 955.9 237.8 211.2 26.5 − − 0.0 8.0 − 168.3 130.1 38.2
                              27 2,088.1 958.3 243.2 217.7 25.4 − − 0.0 8.6 − 171.6 131.9 39.7
         July                  4 2,070.3 963.9 241.5 214.2 27.3 − − 0.0 3.7 − 141.1 100.3 40.9
                              11 2,057.1 965.2 226.3 206.2 20.2 − − 0.0 4.2 − 144.1 107.2 36.8
                              18 2,062.5 965.6 233.9 211.1 22.7 − − 0.1 5.0 − 140.9 103.2 37.7
                              25 2,044.3 965.5 217.7 196.4 21.3 − − 0.0 4.8 − 139.9 107.1 32.8
2014 Aug                  1 2,059.7 971.4 263.9 219.7 44.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 105.8 70.9 34.9
                                8 2,025.3 973.4 235.9 214.5 21.1 − − 0.3 5.0 − 96.7 66.6 30.2
                              15 2,023.2 975.6 241.5 221.6 19.8 − − 0.0 4.8 − 86.3 57.7 28.6
                              22 2,013.0 970.3 230.9 205.2 25.6 − − 0.0 4.8 − 95.1 66.4 28.7
                              29 2,038.7 971.3 253.7 222.8 30.9 − − 0.0 4.9 − 93.1 63.8 29.3
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 972.6 220.4 193.7 26.7 − − 0.0 4.9 − 98.5 70.7 27.8
                              12 2,003.8 971.9 200.3 179.2 21.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 111.4 80.0 31.4
                              19 1,988.2 970.4 185.5 162.4 23.1 − − 0.0 4.9 − 115.8 86.0 29.8
                              26 2,038.2 970.0 234.1 209.4 24.7 − − 0.0 4.8 − 116.6 87.1 29.5
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 975.1 237.1 206.8 30.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 100.0 69.5 30.5
                              10 2,042.7 974.3 227.8 204.6 23.1 − − 0.1 4.8 − 103.2 72.6 30.7
                              17 2,029.7 972.9 213.9 184.8 29.0 − − 0.0 4.7 − 108.5 75.6 32.9
                              24 2,032.8 971.1 197.2 170.0 27.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 134.0 102.2 31.8
                              31 2,052.1 975.2 250.0 211.6 38.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 93.1 56.8 36.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
93.5 2.8 4.9 4.9 − 52.7 214.2 − 262.9 92.4 2014 Feb                28
90.6 1.9 5.8 5.8 − 52.7 216.5 − 262.9 92.4          Mar                  7
88.1 1.2 6.5 6.5 − 52.7 211.5 − 262.9 92.5                               14
88.2 1.0 6.9 6.9 − 52.7 211.2 − 262.9 92.5                               21
81.6 1.4 5.7 5.7 − 52.7 206.8 − 262.9 92.7                               28
84.1 1.1 4.6 4.6 − 52.8 206.1 − 288.9 93.0          Apr                  4
82.9 1.1 4.9 4.9 − 52.8 205.4 − 288.9 93.0                               11
78.3 1.3 4.4 4.4 − 52.8 208.0 − 288.9 93.0                               18
80.5 1.4 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 211.4 − 288.9 93.0                               25
78.4 1.5 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 214.0 − 288.9 93.0          May                  2
79.8 1.2 5.1 5.1 − 52.8 206.3 − 288.9 92.8                                 9
79.7 1.1 4.9 4.9 − 52.8 209.1 − 288.9 92.6                               16
77.1 1.2 5.8 5.8 − 52.8 207.8 − 288.9 92.6                               23
76.5 1.0 5.3 5.3 − 52.8 209.2 − 288.9 92.6                               30
78.3 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 206.3 − 288.9 93.4          June                  6
67.1 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 205.3 − 288.9 93.4                               13
61.6 1.1 6.2 6.2 − 52.8 204.0 − 288.9 95.3                               20
59.7 0.8 5.5 5.5 − 52.8 203.4 − 288.9 95.3                               27
56.9 1.0 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 206.6 − 301.4 95.3          July                  4
53.2 1.1 4.8 4.8 − 53.4 208.1 − 301.4 95.3                               11
52.2 1.3 5.0 5.0 − 53.4 208.5 − 301.4 95.3                               18
48.5 1.1 5.6 5.6 − 53.4 211.1 − 301.4 95.3                               25
44.2 1.3 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 212.8 − 301.4 95.3 2014 Aug                  1
43.8 1.0 6.3 6.3 − 53.4 213.1 − 301.4 95.3                                 8
43.8 1.0 6.1 6.1 − 53.4 213.9 − 301.4 95.3                               15
42.0 1.1 5.9 5.9 − 53.4 213.0 − 301.4 95.3                               22
41.6 1.1 6.1 6.1 − 53.4 217.1 − 301.4 95.3                               29
43.2 0.9 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.7 − 301.4 95.3          Sep                  5
40.6 0.9 7.6 7.6 − 53.4 216.2 − 301.4 95.3                               12
40.9 1.0 6.2 6.2 − 53.4 213.4 − 301.4 95.3                               19
40.3 0.8 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.5 − 301.4 95.3                               26
41.0 0.9 7.3 7.3 − 55.5 221.1 − 315.5 95.3          Oct                  3
39.1 1.2 7.5 7.5 − 55.5 218.4 − 315.5 95.3                               10
36.8 1.1 5.7 5.7 − 55.5 219.7 − 315.5 95.3                               17
36.2 1.1 6.4 6.4 − 55.5 215.7 − 315.5 95.3                               24
39.1 1.3 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 215.9 − 315.5 95.3                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0 2012          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.92007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2012          Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4         Sep 7,746.6 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.6 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.5 3,237.9 2,654.3 2,380.9
 Changes 3
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.6 − 0.5 −257.1 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1
         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 3.6 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.4 13.7 11.7 11.6 9.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012          Dec 266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.2 960.6          Sep 
Changes 3
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 −420.8 2013
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.6 0.1 − 0.6 0.7 2.0 − 2.1 − 1.7 4.1 − 0.2 4.2 4.0 − 1.9 − 17.4          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the
in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.92007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2012          Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.6 1,349.4 1,117.3 232.1 3,172.6 3,079.5 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
 Changes 4
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.6 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 3.6 − 11.5 − 7.4 − 4.2 2.0 − 0.3 2.1 − 3.0 − 4.3 0.6 0.1 1.1 3.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012          Dec 41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.9 3.7 1,084.6 41.9 537.6 550.3 1,040.6          Sep 
Changes 4
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −104.9 − 17.6 −134.1 18.9 −417.1 2013
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan 
− 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.2 0.1 7.3 3.3 13.7 − 2.4 − 10.5          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting
Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets 1 
All categories of banks
 
2014          Apr 1,840 7,595.2 96.0 2,564.9 1,943.5 611.8 3,877.9 386.2 2,732.7 0.5 745.9 132.2 924.3
         May 1,840 7,671.8 88.9 2,614.6 1,993.7 611.2 3,877.3 385.4 2,739.9 0.5 740.2 132.6 958.4         June 1,836 7,640.7 90.1 2,583.6 1,966.6 605.9 3,874.3 387.8 2,731.8 0.5 742.5 132.6 960.1
         July 1,834 7,707.7 79.2 2,617.4 2,003.7 603.1 3,893.6 388.4 2,742.7 0.5 750.7 132.2 985.3
         Aug 1,831 7,801.6 90.5 2,616.1 2,003.5 601.4 3,888.8 376.8 2,752.9 0.5 748.0 132.1 1,074.1         Sep 1,822 7,797.7 113.5 2,587.4 1,973.0 603.3 3,906.0 380.2 2,756.6 0.5 760.4 132.8 1,058.0
Commercial banks 6
2014          Aug 276 2,976.5 45.7 995.5 898.8 93.7 1,087.7 194.0 670.1 0.2 216.3 67.4 780.3
         Sep 276 2,966.8 67.5 975.2 877.4 94.6 1,099.8 194.9 673.2 0.2 226.4 67.6 756.7
   Big banks 7
2014          Aug 4 1,910.5 13.0 621.4 570.2 48.4 470.6 109.9 249.1 0.1 106.8 59.9 745.6
         Sep 4 1,885.1 30.0 597.9 545.9 49.2 475.2 108.6 250.2 0.1 113.4 59.7 722.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2014          Aug 163 830.4 20.1 221.6 177.9 43.5 553.8 65.6 386.9 0.1 100.7 6.6 28.3
         Sep 163 837.6 18.8 224.4 180.4 43.7 559.7 66.7 388.5 0.1 104.0 6.6 28.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2014          Aug 109 235.6 12.6 152.5 150.7 1.7 63.3 18.6 34.0 − 8.8 0.9 6.4
         Sep 109 244.0 18.7 152.9 151.1 1.7 64.9 19.7 34.4 − 9.0 1.3 6.3
Landesbanken
2014          Aug 9 1,087.9 4.9 370.0 263.2 104.2 556.9 64.7 375.4 0.1 114.5 12.6 143.6
         Sep 9 1,091.1 2.9 371.0 263.9 104.6 558.9 65.0 377.0 0.1 114.9 12.6 145.9
Savings banks
2014          Aug 417 1,111.3 14.4 217.5 83.4 133.4 847.2 53.5 661.4 0.1 132.1 15.0 17.2
         Sep 417 1,111.7 14.3 215.1 81.1 133.4 849.8 55.2 661.5 0.1 132.9 15.5 17.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2014          Aug 2 287.3 0.1 165.9 133.9 32.0 63.2 12.9 22.5 0.0 27.8 14.4 43.7         Sep 2 282.4 0.2 162.9 130.4 32.4 62.5 11.6 22.5 0.0 28.3 14.3 42.5
Credit cooperatives
2014          Aug 1,070 776.4 10.1 175.0 57.5 116.9 557.6 32.1 442.2 0.1 83.1 14.1 19.6
         Sep 1,061 777.3 10.3 172.4 54.5 117.5 560.9 33.7 443.3 0.1 83.7 14.2 19.6
Mortgage banks
2014          Aug 17 411.7 0.2 103.5 65.1 35.3 292.4 5.6 217.6 − 69.2 0.6 15.0
         Sep 17 404.7 0.2 100.2 62.3 34.7 289.0 5.5 214.2 − 69.4 0.6 14.8
Building and loan associations
2014          Aug 21 209.4 0.0 61.6 45.1 16.5 141.9 1.6 120.4 . 19.9 0.3 5.5
         Sep 21 210.1 0.0 61.8 45.3 16.5 142.4 1.7 120.8 . 19.9 0.3 5.5
Special purpose banks
2014          Aug 19 941.0 15.1 527.1 456.4 69.4 341.9 12.4 243.5 − 85.1 7.7 49.3
         Sep 19 953.6 18.2 529.0 458.0 69.6 342.6 12.7 244.1 − 84.9 7.7 56.1
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2014          Aug 146 886.2 29.6 339.1 295.8 40.4 415.0 64.7 242.2 0.1 103.7 5.4 97.1
         Sep 146 903.2 35.8 339.8 296.4 40.5 422.5 66.6 242.9 0.1 109.3 5.8 99.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2014          Aug 37 650.6 17.1 186.6 145.1 38.7 351.7 46.2 208.2 0.1 95.0 4.5 90.7
         Sep 37 659.2 17.1 186.9 145.3 38.8 357.6 47.0 208.5 0.1 100.3 4.5 93.1
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,720.7 402.8 1,318.0 3,312.6 1,565.6 312.0 733.0 78.2 616.3 537.0 85.7 1,146.9 439.2 975.8 2014          Apr 
1,728.2 408.8 1,319.4 3,332.9 1,586.7 313.9 732.0 78.5 615.6 536.5 84.6 1,163.5 443.2 1,004.0          May1,700.6 438.8 1,261.8 3,322.7 1,587.1 309.0 728.5 79.8 614.1 536.1 84.1 1,159.5 456.5 1,001.4          June
1,722.0 454.7 1,267.2 3,343.0 1,602.3 319.4 724.7 92.4 613.8 535.1 82.8 1,160.1 460.1 1,022.5          July
1,716.7 418.4 1,298.3 3,349.9 1,599.8 328.5 724.3 85.8 615.3 535.7 82.0 1,164.6 463.8 1,106.5          Aug 1,715.5 448.3 1,267.1 3,352.8 1,609.9 319.4 724.5 80.6 615.8 535.7 83.2 1,168.4 464.9 1,096.1          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
697.4 269.3 428.0 1,228.3 710.3 178.1 200.5 63.3 114.2 100.1 25.2 143.4 156.4 751.0 2014          Aug 698.6 287.4 411.1 1,236.0 722.6 171.0 202.5 56.7 114.4 99.6 25.4 144.1 157.1 731.1          Sep 
Big banks 7
473.3 201.0 272.3 540.6 292.0 92.9 75.1 63.2 71.6 69.3 9.0 105.1 93.8 697.7 2014          Aug 475.4 215.5 259.9 533.6 291.7 86.9 74.6 56.4 71.3 68.9 9.1 105.8 93.9 676.4          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
130.4 42.0 88.5 562.0 339.8 65.0 99.8 0.0 42.4 30.6 15.0 37.9 54.0 46.0 2014          Aug 129.7 42.3 87.4 568.6 344.5 63.9 102.1 0.3 42.9 30.6 15.1 37.6 54.0 47.6          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
93.6 26.4 67.3 125.8 78.4 20.3 25.6 − 0.2 0.1 1.2 0.4 8.6 7.2 2014          Aug 93.4 29.6 63.9 133.8 86.4 20.1 25.8 − 0.2 0.2 1.2 0.6 9.2 7.0          Sep 
Landesbanken
314.9 49.7 265.3 310.5 111.9 61.4 122.5 19.8 14.6 10.9 0.1 256.9 59.8 145.8 2014          Aug 313.3 54.1 259.2 312.6 112.8 62.5 122.7 21.4 14.5 10.9 0.1 255.4 59.7 150.2          Sep 
Savings banks
147.8 14.2 133.6 817.0 433.6 28.4 15.0 − 298.3 257.3 41.8 13.9 89.7 42.8 2014          Aug 151.1 17.2 133.9 812.6 430.8 27.4 13.6 − 297.8 257.1 42.9 13.9 90.0 44.1          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
141.3 29.4 111.9 32.4 9.1 10.4 10.6 2.2 − − 2.2 56.6 15.6 41.4 2014          Aug 137.4 30.5 106.9 31.5 10.3 8.4 10.5 2.2 − − 2.2 55.9 15.6 42.0          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
101.5 5.0 96.5 574.6 316.8 36.9 21.5 − 187.7 166.9 11.7 9.4 59.8 31.1 2014          Aug 102.9 6.7 96.2 572.7 314.5 36.7 21.3 − 188.6 167.8 11.5 9.5 59.9 32.4          Sep 
Mortgage banks
100.2 8.1 92.1 151.7 8.4 8.2 134.9 − 0.2 0.2 . 124.6 16.6 18.6 2014          Aug 
96.3 7.0 89.3 151.1 8.0 8.7 134.1 − 0.2 0.2 . 121.5 16.7 19.1          Sep 
Building and loan associations
24.1 2.4 21.6 157.8 0.5 0.6 155.5 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 3.0 9.1 15.4 2014          Aug 23.8 2.5 21.3 158.5 0.5 0.6 156.1 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 3.0 9.1 15.7          Sep 
Special purpose banks
189.5 40.2 149.3 77.5 9.2 4.4 63.9 0.5 − − . 556.9 56.8 60.4 2014          Aug 192.2 43.0 149.2 77.9 10.3 4.1 63.6 0.3 − − . 565.2 56.8 61.5          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
227.4 73.8 153.6 482.4 308.8 66.7 74.5 10.1 21.7 21.3 10.7 25.4 48.2 102.8 2014          Aug 231.0 79.6 151.3 492.2 318.4 64.3 77.2 10.7 21.7 21.2 10.7 25.5 48.8 105.8          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
133.8 47.4 86.4 356.7 230.3 46.4 48.9 10.1 21.5 21.2 9.5 25.0 39.6 95.6 2014          Aug 137.5 50.1 87.4 358.4 231.9 44.2 51.4 10.7 21.5 21.1 9.5 24.9 39.6 98.7          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
T
reasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2013          Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.3 430.3
         July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.5 2,691.9 0.4 2.1 433.1
         Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6
         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4
         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.4 442.1
         Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9
         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.3 2,697.0 0.3 1.8 448.1
         July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8
         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
Changes *
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 −
0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 −
0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2013          Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
         July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.7
         Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
         July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs) 3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6 2013          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,131.6 149.1 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,144.5 166.2 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.3 155.8 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
Changes *
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 2013          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 17.1 − 4.4 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 19.2 + 13.8 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5          June
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.7 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
T
reasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2013          Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
         July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
         Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4         Dec 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
         Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
         July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
Changes *
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2013          Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.2 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
         Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8
         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
         Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2
         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
         July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1 2013          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0          Dec 
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
Changes *
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 2013          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.9 − 51.7 − 22.2 − 19.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 8.2 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
   
   to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2013          Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 389.9 338.8 338.2 0.6 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,848.2 2,319.6
         July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5         Sep 3,127.5 2,692.3 276.7 226.0 225.3 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
         Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0         Dec 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.7 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
         Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5         June 3,147.3 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
         July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.2 220.9 220.2 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.8
Changes *
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2013          Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
         July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7         Sep + 0.3 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.5
         Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.0 − 4.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.1
         July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3 2013          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May
2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.7 30.0 528.6 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 533.9 277.8 32.3 245.4 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
Changes *
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2 2013          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May− 4.0 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2012 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Sep 2,352.4 1,177.9 1,152.6 933.4 219.2 1,282.8 316.6 130.3 95.7 60.1 124.9 46.2 72.0 104.5
         Dec 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Mar 2,356.3 1,179.3 1,160.3 936.4 223.8 1,283.4 320.0 129.1 97.0 59.5 124.2 46.0 68.9 107.1
         June 2,367.1 1,181.3 1,166.6 940.0 226.7 1,288.3 320.9 129.1 98.1 59.9 124.3 47.0 68.7 104.7         Sep 2,380.6 1,187.9 1,177.1 945.6 231.5 1,293.2 322.9 127.1 98.7 60.3 125.9 47.8 69.4 110.2
 Short-term lending
2012 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Sep 225.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 187.8 4.0 35.9 6.5 13.0 42.2 4.0 6.2 23.9
         Dec 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Mar 219.9 − 8.6 − 8.6 183.5 4.4 35.4 5.9 12.7 41.5 3.6 6.4 23.8
         June 222.6 − 8.6 − 8.6 186.1 4.3 36.3 6.2 12.8 41.5 4.0 6.6 22.3
         Sep 220.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 184.2 4.3 34.5 5.6 12.7 42.9 4.0 6.3 25.6
 Medium-term lending
2012 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Sep 247.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 173.1 12.3 24.8 6.6 9.4 16.5 4.0 11.3 34.5
         Dec 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Mar 249.1 − 35.0 − 35.0 175.0 12.3 25.3 5.9 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.4 35.8
         June 248.9 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.2 12.8 24.7 5.4 9.3 16.9 4.1 11.5 35.5
         Sep 250.3 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 12.7 24.5 5.6 9.7 16.9 4.2 11.7 35.9
 Long-term lending
2012 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Sep 1,879.4 1,177.9 1,108.8 933.4 175.4 922.0 300.3 69.6 82.6 37.7 66.2 38.2 54.5 46.1         Dec 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Mar 1,887.3 1,179.3 1,116.7 936.4 180.3 924.9 303.3 68.4 85.2 37.5 66.1 38.5 51.1 47.5
         June 1,895.6 1,181.3 1,122.8 940.0 182.9 926.1 303.8 68.1 86.5 37.8 66.0 38.9 50.7 46.9         Sep 1,910.0 1,187.9 1,133.4 945.6 187.8 932.4 305.8 68.2 87.5 38.0 66.0 39.6 51.4 48.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2013          Q3 − 18.8 + 2.4 + 9.1 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 26.5 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 22.6         Q4 + 2.0 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 2.6 + 3.5 − 1.5 + 2.1 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.6
2014          Q1 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3
         Q2 + 11.2 + 1.3 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.4         Q3 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 4.6 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 3.7
 Short-term lending
2013          Q3 − 23.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 23.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 21.4         Q4 − 6.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9
2014          Q1 + 2.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.6         Q3 − 2.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3
 Medium-term lending
2013          Q3 − 0.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1         Q4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
2014          Q1 + 1.3 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3         Q3 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3
 Long-term lending
2013          Q3 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.0         Q4 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.7
2014          Q1 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Q2 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 2.5 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4         Q3 + 14.2 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5 2012
649.1 187.4 37.4 176.0 388.7 50.7 1,056.2 832.6 223.6 147.0 12.5 13.4 3.5 2013          Sep 
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5          Dec 
651.5 192.1 37.1 175.9 387.5 49.4 1,059.4 836.8 222.6 148.0 12.0 13.5 3.5 2014          Mar 
656.5 192.8 39.1 176.4 388.0 49.6 1,065.5 842.3 223.2 148.7 11.8 13.3 3.5          June653.8 192.3 38.0 175.4 389.3 49.1 1,074.2 850.7 223.5 149.3 11.9 13.2 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0 2012
56.0 9.2 7.4 12.3 28.8 7.4 36.6 4.1 32.5 1.7 12.5 1.0 0.0 2013          Sep 
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
54.0 8.9 6.6 12.4 27.8 7.0 35.4 4.2 31.2 1.8 12.0 1.0 0.0 2014          Mar 
56.5 8.8 7.8 12.6 28.0 7.2 35.7 4.2 31.5 1.7 11.8 0.9 0.0          June52.6 8.5 6.3 12.2 27.3 6.9 35.3 4.1 31.2 1.6 11.9 0.8 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0 2012
65.9 9.1 7.0 19.5 32.2 3.6 74.0 23.4 50.7 45.4 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Sep 
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
66.8 9.9 6.7 20.1 32.1 3.5 73.6 22.6 51.0 45.8 − 0.4 0.0 2014          Mar 
68.8 10.4 7.2 20.5 31.7 3.6 72.2 22.5 49.7 44.6 − 0.5 0.0          June
68.2 9.9 7.2 20.0 32.0 3.6 73.1 22.5 50.6 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5 2012
527.2 169.1 23.0 144.2 327.6 39.6 945.6 805.1 140.5 99.9 − 11.9 3.4 2013          Sep 
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5          Dec 
530.6 173.3 23.9 143.4 327.6 38.9 950.4 810.0 140.4 100.4 − 12.0 3.5 2014          Mar 
531.2 173.6 24.2 143.3 328.3 38.8 957.6 815.6 142.0 102.3 − 12.0 3.5          June
533.0 173.8 24.5 143.2 330.0 38.6 965.8 824.1 141.7 102.2 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 2013          Q3+ 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 3.3 + 4.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 5.2 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Q3
Short-term lending
− 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2013          Q3
− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2013          Q3
− 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − − 0.0          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
− 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1 2013          Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 8.3 + 7.9 + 0.4 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.92013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2013          Oct 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 247.6 703.0 29.4 673.6 606.4 77.3 33.4 30.1 3.1
         Nov 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 246.4 701.4 29.6 671.7 606.3 76.9 33.3 30.1 1.0         Dec 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014          Jan 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 250.8 695.9 29.0 666.9 609.1 75.4 32.9 29.1 2.5
         Feb 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 255.8 694.0 29.1 664.9 609.8 74.4 32.7 29.0 3.1         Mar 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 257.3 691.5 28.8 662.7 608.6 73.7 32.5 28.8 1.9
         Apr 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 258.2 688.8 28.4 660.4 606.7 72.0 32.4 28.7 4.3
         May 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 262.0 687.0 28.4 658.6 606.0 70.9 31.9 28.6 0.9         June 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 263.7 684.7 28.4 656.3 604.5 70.5 31.4 28.2 1.7
         July 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 264.3 681.1 28.0 653.1 604.4 69.2 31.3 27.9 2.7
         Aug 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 265.6 679.7 28.2 651.5 605.9 68.4 31.3 27.6 2.3         Sep 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 262.0 679.9 28.2 651.7 606.5 69.4 31.2 27.4 2.8
Changes*
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2013          Oct + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9
         Nov + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0         Dec + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 8.3 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 4.2 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 4.4
2014          Jan − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.9
         Feb + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.6         Mar − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.4
         May + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 + 3.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.4         June − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8
         July + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Aug + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4         Sep + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2013          Oct 177.5 46.8 125.5 74.4 51.2 5.4 45.8 3.7 1.4 31.1 5.8 1.5
         Nov 184.7 49.6 130.0 78.6 51.3 5.4 46.0 3.7 1.5 31.1 5.8 0.5
         Dec 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014          Jan 172.1 43.4 123.7 75.3 48.4 5.6 42.8 3.5 1.4 30.7 4.8 0.8
         Feb 178.1 47.1 125.9 76.9 49.0 6.1 43.0 3.6 1.5 30.6 4.8 1.5
         Mar 180.5 47.3 128.2 79.4 48.8 6.1 42.7 3.5 1.5 30.5 4.7 0.7
         Apr 178.1 46.4 126.7 78.1 48.6 6.1 42.5 3.5 1.5 30.4 4.7 2.9
         May 183.4 49.2 129.0 80.5 48.4 6.1 42.4 3.6 1.6 29.9 4.7 0.0
         June 190.1 50.0 135.0 86.6 48.4 6.0 42.4 3.5 1.6 29.5 4.7 0.9
         July 187.1 47.4 134.6 86.5 48.0 5.9 42.2 3.5 1.7 29.5 4.7 1.7
         Aug 189.7 51.1 133.4 85.3 48.1 5.9 42.1 3.4 1.8 29.5 4.7 1.1
         Sep 189.2 47.8 136.1 88.3 47.8 5.7 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.4 4.6 1.6
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2013          Oct − 7.0 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 7.2 + 2.8 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0         Dec − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 4.2
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9
         Feb + 5.5 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7         Mar + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Apr − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2
         May + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.9         June + 7.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 2.8 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Aug + 2.6 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Sep − 0.6 − 3.4 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.0
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.82013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2013          Oct 2,849.7 1,346.0 825.0 173.3 651.8 24.0 627.8 602.7 75.9 2.3 24.3 1.6
         Nov 2,859.7 1,363.8 817.8 167.8 650.0 24.3 625.8 602.7 75.4 2.2 24.3 0.5         Dec 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014          Jan 2,875.1 1,372.6 822.9 175.5 647.4 23.4 624.1 605.6 74.0 2.2 24.3 1.7
         Feb 2,878.5 1,375.5 823.9 178.9 644.9 23.0 621.9 606.2 72.9 2.1 24.2 1.6         Mar 2,867.4 1,369.6 820.6 177.9 642.7 22.7 620.0 605.0 72.2 2.1 24.1 1.2
         Apr 2,879.1 1,385.1 820.3 180.1 640.2 22.2 618.0 603.2 70.5 2.0 24.0 1.4
         May 2,888.8 1,397.0 820.0 181.5 638.6 22.4 616.2 602.4 69.3 2.0 23.8 0.9         June 2,876.1 1,392.8 813.4 177.1 636.2 22.4 613.9 601.1 68.9 1.9 23.5 0.8
         July 2,886.8 1,407.6 810.9 177.8 633.1 22.1 610.9 600.9 67.5 1.9 23.2 1.0
         Aug 2,901.9 1,421.0 811.9 180.3 631.6 22.3 609.4 602.4 66.6 1.8 22.9 1.3         Sep 2,903.4 1,427.1 805.8 173.7 632.1 22.4 609.6 603.1 67.5 1.8 22.7 1.2
Changes*
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2013          Oct + 13.5 + 16.2 − 2.0 + 1.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov + 10.0 + 17.8 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1         Dec + 5.9 − 2.2 + 4.5 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 9.4 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.0
         Feb + 4.0 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Mar − 11.1 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 11.8 + 15.5 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 9.7 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5         June − 12.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1
         July + 10.6 + 14.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Aug + 15.1 + 13.4 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Sep + 1.6 + 6.1 − 6.1 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2013          Oct 1,017.9 430.3 565.0 104.3 460.8 10.2 450.5 7.5 15.1 2.2 17.2 1.6
         Nov 1,007.5 427.8 557.4 99.3 458.0 10.4 447.7 7.4 15.0 2.2 17.3 0.5
         Dec 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014          Jan 1,016.9 434.6 559.6 107.6 452.1 9.9 442.2 7.4 15.2 2.2 17.5 1.7
         Feb 1,011.5 429.4 559.6 110.8 448.8 9.7 439.1 7.4 15.0 2.1 17.4 1.6
         Mar 1,004.6 426.1 555.9 109.7 446.2 9.6 436.6 7.5 15.1 2.0 17.5 1.2
         Apr 1,008.4 430.5 555.8 112.1 443.6 9.4 434.3 7.5 14.7 2.0 17.5 1.4
         May 1,008.7 432.0 554.7 113.3 441.3 9.6 431.7 7.4 14.6 2.0 17.5 0.9
         June 996.5 427.9 546.4 108.1 438.3 9.5 428.9 7.5 14.7 1.8 17.2 0.8
         July 1,000.1 434.5 543.7 108.7 435.0 9.3 425.6 7.5 14.5 1.8 17.2 1.0
         Aug 1,004.8 438.0 544.5 111.5 433.0 9.5 423.5 7.5 14.8 1.8 17.1 1.3
         Sep 1,011.6 449.5 538.4 105.8 432.6 9.3 423.3 7.5 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.2
Changes*
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2013          Oct + 4.7 + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.9 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov − 10.4 − 2.5 − 7.7 − 4.9 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.1         Dec + 3.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 5.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 1.9 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
         Feb − 4.7 − 4.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar − 6.9 − 3.3 − 3.7 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 4.2 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         May + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5         June − 12.5 − 4.0 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July + 3.6 + 6.5 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
         Aug + 4.7 + 3.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep + 6.8 + 11.5 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits
 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014          Apr 1,870.7 954.6 926.0 165.0 627.6 133.4 28.6 264.6 249.1 16.8 217.3 15.0
         May 1,880.1 965.0 935.5 166.3 637.0 132.1 29.5 265.4 249.5 16.8 217.9 14.9
         June 1,879.6 964.9 934.5 162.9 639.7 132.0 30.3 266.9 251.0 16.8 219.0 15.2
         July 1,886.7 973.1 942.7 168.0 642.3 132.5 30.4 267.2 251.1 17.2 218.9 15.0
         Aug 1,897.1 983.0 952.2 170.6 648.9 132.8 30.7 267.4 251.1 17.1 219.2 14.9
         Sep 1,891.9 977.6 946.5 166.7 647.4 132.4 31.1 267.4 251.4 17.0 219.6 14.7
Changes*
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014          Apr + 7.7 + 11.0 + 11.5 + 4.4 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         May + 9.4 + 10.4 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 9.4 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1
         June − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 3.4 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.3
         July + 7.1 + 8.2 + 8.2 + 5.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Aug + 10.4 + 9.9 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Sep − 5.3 − 5.4 − 5.8 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014          Apr 178.1 13.2 2.8 5.4 5.0 0.1 15.6 44.9 11.9 9.8 23.0 0.2 14.4
         May 183.4 10.9 2.7 3.2 5.0 0.1 15.1 44.0 11.0 9.9 22.9 0.2 14.4
         June 190.1 12.8 3.5 4.3 4.9 0.1 14.8 49.7 12.5 13.8 23.1 0.2 14.3
         July 187.1 11.8 3.3 3.5 4.9 0.1 14.8 51.0 13.2 15.0 22.7 0.2 14.3
         Aug 189.7 10.6 2.3 3.4 4.9 0.1 14.9 49.9 12.2 14.9 22.7 0.2 14.2
         Sep 189.2 11.5 2.7 3.8 4.9 0.1 14.9 54.3 11.6 20.0 22.6 0.2 14.2
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014          Apr − 2.6 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 5.3 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         June + 7.0 + 1.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug + 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.6 + 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds 4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 2011
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 201215.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
15.5 68.0 196.6 12.9 183.7 595.7 586.1 9.6 55.8 0.0 6.5 − 2014          Apr 
15.9 68.1 197.2 12.7 184.5 595.0 585.5 9.5 54.8 0.0 6.3 −          May15.9 69.0 197.9 12.9 185.0 593.6 584.1 9.5 54.2 0.0 6.2 −          June
16.1 69.1 198.1 12.8 185.3 593.4 584.0 9.5 52.9 0.0 6.0 −          July
16.3 68.8 198.6 12.8 185.9 594.9 585.5 9.5 51.8 0.0 5.9 −          Aug 16.0 67.9 199.5 13.1 186.4 595.6 586.1 9.5 51.3 0.0 5.7 −          Sep 
Changes*
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
+ 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2014          Apr 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
+ 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −          July
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 201244.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
40.8 19.2 11.0 6.6 4.0 0.4 79.2 12.6 51.9 14.0 0.7 0.0 2014          Apr 
45.1 22.2 12.2 6.6 4.1 0.4 83.2 13.3 55.3 13.9 0.7 0.0          May43.3 21.1 11.5 6.5 4.1 0.4 84.4 12.9 56.9 13.8 0.7 0.0          June
40.5 18.5 11.3 6.5 4.2 0.4 83.8 12.4 56.8 13.9 0.8 0.0          July
46.2 22.9 12.4 6.6 4.3 0.4 83.0 13.7 54.8 13.9 0.7 0.0          Aug 43.5 20.7 11.9 6.6 4.3 0.4 79.8 12.7 52.6 13.8 0.8 0.0          Sep 
Changes*
+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2014          Apr 
+ 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 4.0 + 0.7 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
− 2.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0          July
+ 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
− 2.7 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 3.2 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.92013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014          May 615.6 606.0 528.8 405.4 77.2 64.4 9.6 7.7 0.2 84.6 70.9 55.2 13.7
         June 614.1 604.5 528.4 404.2 76.1 63.3 9.5 7.6 0.2 84.1 70.5 54.7 13.6
         July 613.8 604.4 527.6 402.7 76.7 63.9 9.4 7.5 0.2 82.8 69.2 53.8 13.7
         Aug 615.3 605.9 528.2 402.7 77.7 64.7 9.4 7.5 0.2 82.0 68.4 53.5 13.7
         Sep 615.8 606.5 528.3 402.3 78.2 65.2 9.3 7.5 0.2 83.2 69.4 54.6 13.8
Changes*
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014          May − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 0.1
         June − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.1
         July − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1
         Aug + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper
 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up toand including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non-
maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.12013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014          May 1,124.7 308.1 23.9 331.4 68.4 80.4 2.5 28.7 5.4 1,015.6 1.0 0.2 38.7 1.1
         June 1,121.4 304.5 23.9 335.1 71.7 85.1 2.4 28.7 5.1 1,007.6 1.0 0.2 38.1 1.1
         July 1,122.1 303.9 26.2 343.5 71.9 87.2 2.7 28.1 5.2 1,006.9 1.3 0.2 38.0 1.1
         Aug 1,129.9 302.4 28.6 353.6 80.2 96.8 2.6 29.3 5.2 1,003.8 1.3 0.2 34.7 1.1
         Sep 1,135.5 299.4 29.0 362.3 78.7 96.2 2.5 29.7 5.2 1,009.5 1.3 0.2 32.9 1.1
Changes*
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014          May + 12.8 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 14.7 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 0.2 − + 3.7 −
         June − 3.3 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0
         July + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Aug + 7.8 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 10.1 + 8.3 + 9.7 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 −         Sep + 5.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 8.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014          July 22 209.0 45.0 0.0 16.5 20.0 84.8 17.1 19.8 1.7 22.5 152.1 5.2 3.0 9.2 7.9
         Aug 21 209.4 45.2 0.0 16.5 19.8 85.1 17.1 19.9 1.7 22.4 152.7 5.2 3.0 9.1 7.5
         Sep 21 210.1 45.4 0.0 16.5 19.5 85.8 17.2 19.9 1.7 22.1 153.3 5.2 3.0 9.1 7.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          July 12 146.5 27.8 − 9.5 14.0 66.6 14.7 9.0 1.1 18.9 100.3 5.1 3.0 6.1 4.8         Aug 12 146.5 27.7 − 9.5 13.9 66.8 14.7 8.9 1.1 18.5 100.7 5.1 3.0 6.1 4.7         Sep 12 146.9 27.9 − 9.5 13.7 67.4 14.7 8.8 1.1 18.2 101.1 5.1 3.0 6.1 4.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          July 10 62.5 17.2 0.0 6.9 6.0 18.2 2.4 10.8 0.6 3.6 51.8 0.1 − 3.1 3.1         Aug 9 63.0 17.4 0.0 7.0 5.9 18.3 2.4 11.0 0.6 3.9 52.0 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Sep 9 63.2 17.4 0.0 7.0 5.8 18.5 2.4 11.1 0.6 3.8 52.2 0.1 − 3.0 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised
Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts 
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014          July 2.3 0.0 0.7 4.2 2.5 3.6 1.5 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.6 14.5 8.2 0.9 0.0
         Aug 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.1 3.1 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.4 14.7 8.2 0.8 0.0
         Sep 2.4 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.0 3.2 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.6 14.6 8.1 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          July 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.1 1.8 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.2 9.9 4.7 0.6 0.0
         Aug 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.4 2.3 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.1 10.1 4.7 0.5 0.0         Sep 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.2 10.1 4.7 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          July 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.3 0.0         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.2 0.0         Sep 0.8 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.4 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities 2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.82013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2013          Nov 55 206 1,787.6 485.8 472.0 146.7 325.3 13.8 540.5 428.9 10.3 418.6 111.6 761.4 494.0
         Dec 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014          Jan 56 209 1,814.4 480.7 466.8 146.1 320.7 13.9 543.7 433.4 10.3 423.1 110.3 790.1 457.6
         Feb 56 210 1,769.7 485.5 472.1 147.8 324.3 13.5 543.5 436.9 9.9 426.9 106.7 740.7 433.8
         Mar 56 209 1,695.7 469.6 455.3 159.0 296.3 14.3 558.2 450.2 9.6 440.6 108.1 667.9 425.2
         Apr 56 209 1,731.7 473.1 459.1 157.4 301.7 14.0 569.0 458.2 9.7 448.5 110.8 689.5 431.7
         May 56 207 1,766.9 478.5 465.8 154.9 310.9 12.7 570.9 454.3 9.3 445.0 116.6 717.6 443.0
         June 56 206 1,741.9 483.2 469.0 148.3 320.7 14.3 584.6 469.5 9.0 460.5 115.1 674.1 430.4
         July 56 206 1,828.9 511.1 496.3 137.7 358.6 14.8 603.0 484.9 13.0 471.9 118.1 714.8 428.6
         Aug 56 206 1,876.9 539.9 525.2 170.6 354.5 14.7 564.0 454.2 14.1 440.1 109.8 773.0 468.6
Changes *
2012 − 1 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2013          Dec + 1 + 3 − 52.4 − 45.8 − 45.7 − 5.1 − 40.6 − 0.1 − 17.1 − 14.6 + 0.7 − 15.3 − 2.5 + 10.6 − 8.52014          Jan − − + 76.2 + 40.0 + 40.0 + 4.5 + 35.5 + 0.1 + 18.1 + 17.1 − 0.7 + 17.8 + 0.9 + 18.1 − 28.0
         Feb − + 1 − 31.8 + 11.1 + 11.4 + 1.7 + 9.7 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 8.1 − 0.4 + 8.5 − 2.6 − 48.5 − 23.8
         Mar − − 1 − 74.5 − 16.4 − 17.3 + 11.1 − 28.4 + 0.9 + 14.7 + 13.3 − 0.4 + 13.7 + 1.4 − 72.8 − 8.6
         Apr − − + 37.7 + 4.7 + 5.0 − 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.3 + 11.4 + 8.5 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.9 + 21.7 + 6.5
         May − − 2 + 23.7 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 2.5 + 4.1 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 8.1 + 4.8 + 27.3 + 11.3
         June − − 1 − 24.4 + 5.5 + 3.9 − 6.6 + 10.5 + 1.6 + 13.5 + 15.0 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.5 − 43.4 − 12.6
         July − − + 74.4 + 21.9 + 21.5 − 10.6 + 32.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 4.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 40.1 − 1.8
         Aug − − + 38.9 + 23.9 + 24.0 + 32.9 − 8.9 − 0.1 − 42.7 − 33.7 + 1.1 − 34.8 − 8.9 + 57.6 + 40.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2013          Nov 33 76 425.6 189.4 160.0 95.1 64.9 29.4 184.0 146.8 27.7 119.1 37.2 52.2 −
         Dec 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014          Jan 33 74 425.9 187.3 159.3 92.2 67.1 28.0 181.2 145.8 25.5 120.2 35.4 57.4 −
         Feb 33 74 408.3 170.0 142.7 75.9 66.8 27.4 181.5 145.5 25.5 120.0 35.9 56.8 −
         Mar 32 73 407.3 171.3 145.7 80.0 65.7 25.5 181.5 146.4 25.0 121.4 35.1 54.6 −
         Apr 32 73 401.4 168.3 143.3 79.1 64.1 25.1 178.1 143.0 25.1 117.9 35.2 54.9 −
         May 32 72 404.9 166.4 141.9 77.5 64.4 24.5 177.2 140.9 24.7 116.1 36.3 61.3 −
         June 32 71 410.4 169.0 145.5 84.8 60.7 23.5 181.7 145.9 24.7 121.2 35.8 59.7 −
         July 31 70 403.1 167.3 146.0 86.6 59.4 21.2 172.2 137.5 21.4 116.1 34.7 63.7 −
         Aug 31 70 407.3 169.4 148.8 89.7 59.1 20.5 170.8 136.6 21.5 115.1 34.2 67.1 −
Changes *
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2013          Dec − − 1 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 −
2014          Jan − − 1 − 1.2 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 5.0 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 2.8 − 1.7 + 5.4 −
         Feb − − − 15.8 − 16.2 − 15.7 − 16.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.6 −
         Mar − 1 − 1 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.2 −         Apr − − − 5.6 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
         May − − 1 + 2.0 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 −
         June − − 1 + 5.7 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 3.7 − 1.0 + 4.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 9.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 10.2 − 9.1 − 3.3 − 5.8 − 1.1 + 3.9 −
         Aug − − + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 3.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2014
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,010.6 674.3 347.7 326.6 336.2 28.1 23.4 4.7 308.1 126.8 39.4 610.9 501.1 2013          Nov 
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1          Dec 
1,011.7 672.1 342.4 329.7 339.5 26.8 21.7 5.1 312.7 127.3 40.9 634.6 469.6 2014          Jan 1,008.5 664.1 336.0 328.1 344.4 28.0 23.0 5.0 316.4 130.1 40.4 590.6 450.4          Feb 
964.2 625.5 340.9 284.6 338.7 29.0 24.0 5.0 309.7 125.3 40.5 565.7 435.1          Mar 
1,001.9 653.8 341.1 312.7 348.1 27.4 22.4 4.9 320.7 127.1 40.4 562.4 436.0          Apr 1,011.4 663.0 349.1 313.9 348.4 25.8 20.9 4.9 322.6 134.1 40.3 581.2 452.3          May1,003.6 668.2 351.1 317.1 335.4 23.1 18.7 4.5 312.3 134.3 41.0 563.1 436.7          June
1,103.3 732.0 371.2 360.8 371.4 22.8 18.3 4.5 348.6 133.6 41.6 550.4 434.8          July
1,093.1 727.8 370.2 357.6 365.3 23.7 19.3 4.4 341.6 139.0 41.7 603.0 473.2          Aug 
Changes *
− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013
− 114.0 − 74.7 − 20.7 − 54.0 − 39.3 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 35.4 − 1.4 + 1.8 + 61.2 − 16.9 2013          Dec 
+ 113.2 + 71.6 + 15.4 + 56.2 + 41.6 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 39.0 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 38.6 − 14.6 2014          Jan 
+ 5.5 − 3.2 − 6.4 + 3.2 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 2.8 − 0.4 − 39.7 − 19.2          Feb − 44.6 − 38.8 + 4.9 − 43.8 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 4.9 + 0.0 − 25.0 − 15.3          Mar 
+ 38.8 + 29.0 + 0.2 + 28.7 + 9.9 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 11.5 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 1.9 + 5.2 + 8.0 − 2.8 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 7.0 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 16.3          May− 7.3 + 5.6 + 2.0 + 3.6 − 12.9 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 18.1 − 15.6          June
+ 91.5 + 59.2 + 20.1 + 39.0 + 32.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 32.8 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 17.0 − 1.9          July
− 16.4 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 6.7 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 9.6 + 5.5 + 0.1 + 49.7 + 38.4          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
336.6 193.7 109.7 84.0 142.9 23.0 19.0 4.0 119.9 21.6 29.9 37.5 − 2013          Nov 
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 −          Dec 
333.9 197.0 109.9 87.1 136.9 20.5 18.5 2.0 116.4 21.3 30.4 40.2 − 2014          Jan 
320.7 186.5 94.5 92.0 134.2 19.8 17.8 2.0 114.3 21.0 28.9 37.7 −          Feb 
319.5 186.3 95.0 91.3 133.2 19.6 17.6 2.0 113.6 20.3 29.1 38.4 −          Mar 
312.7 181.1 94.5 86.6 131.5 19.2 17.2 2.0 112.3 20.9 29.2 38.7 −          Apr 
316.4 186.7 95.6 91.1 129.7 18.8 16.7 2.1 110.9 20.5 28.5 39.4 −          May
322.8 189.7 106.4 83.2 133.1 18.6 15.2 3.4 114.5 20.4 27.3 39.9 −          June
315.1 184.0 97.8 86.3 131.1 20.4 15.4 5.0 110.7 20.4 26.8 40.9 −          July
311.3 178.6 98.5 80.1 132.7 19.9 14.8 5.1 112.8 20.3 28.2 47.5 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 1.5 + 7.9 + 3.7 + 4.2 − 9.5 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 2013          Dec 
− 1.7 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 2014          Jan 
− 11.8 − 9.6 − 15.4 + 5.8 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.2 −          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 −          Mar 
− 6.6 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Apr 
+ 2.6 + 4.8 + 1.1 + 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 −          May
+ 6.5 + 3.1 + 10.8 − 7.7 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 −          June
− 9.1 − 6.5 − 8.7 + 2.2 − 2.6 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 −          July
− 4.8 − 6.0 + 0.7 − 6.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 6.4 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2014
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.31997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2014          Mar 10,403.5 104.0 0.5 103.6 195.2 91.6 0.0
         Apr 10,397.4 104.0 0.5 103.5 191.2 87.7 0.0
         May 10,438.9 104.4 0.5 103.9 192.3 88.3 0.0
         June 10,489.4 104.9 0.5 104.4 214.3 109.8 0.0
         July 10,546.8 105.5 0.5 105.0 210.2 105.2 0.0
         Aug 10,568.8 105.7 0.5 105.2 210.1 104.9 0.0
         Sep  p 10,581.0 105.8 0.5 105.3 192.6 87.3 0.0
         Oct  p 10,617.3 106.2 0.5 105.7 ... ... ...
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2014          Mar 2,765,104 27,651 178 27,473 58,580 31,107 0
         Apr 2,769,221 27,692 178 27,515 55,827 28,312 2
         May 2,759,990 27,600 178 27,422 55,483 28,061 0
         June 2,783,746 27,837 177 27,660 64,558 36,898 1
         July 2,814,276 28,143 177 27,966 62,255 34,289 0
         Aug 2,790,404 27,904 176 27,728 61,507 33,779 1
         Sep 2,813,922 28,139 175 27,964 63,078 35,114 0
         Oct  p 2,843,205 28,432 175 28,257 ... ... ...
         Nov 2,868,958 28,690 175 28,515 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio the lump-sum allowance. 
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2014
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2009 Jan                1 1.62         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 0.12
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2011 July                1 0.37
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          July                1 −0.38
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 1.95 2014 Jan                1 −0.63         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75          July                1 −0.73
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 3.19
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ...days
Main refinancing operations
2014 Oct                  1 89,075 89,075 0.05−−−7
         Oct                  8 84,212 84,212 0.05−−−7
         Oct                15 82,518 82,518 0.05−−−7
         Oct                22 92,918 92,918 0.05−−−7
         Oct                29 118,152 118,152 0.05−−−7
         Nov                  5 98,189 98,189 0.05−−−7
         Nov                12 98,421 98,421 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2014 Aug                28 7,244 7,244 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep                24 82,602 82,602 0.15−−− 1,463
         Sep                25 10,971 10,971 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct                30 10,161 10,161 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2014          Apr 0.25 0.23 0.21 0.19 0.16 0.15 0.22 0.25 0.33 0.43 0.60
         May 0.25 0.23 0.19 0.14 0.11 0.10 0.24 0.26 0.32 0.42 0.59         June 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.11 0.15 0.24 0.33 0.51
         July 0.04
4 . 4 . 4 . 4 . 4 . 0.05 0.10 0.21 0.30 0.49
         Aug 0.02 . . . . . 0.04 0.09 0.19 0.29 0.47
         Sep 0.01 . . . . . − 0.01 0.02 0.10 0.20 0.36
         Oct 0.00 . . . . . − 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.18 0.34
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 20 June 2005 to 30 June 2014 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, market-derivatives. As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: method. 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 4Discontinued
Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the as of 1 July 2014. act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate from

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 
1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Sep 1.12 99,321 2.01 223,867 0.53 79,626 3.11 20,467
         Oct 1.07 97,939 2.00 223,989 0.50 80,517 3.11 20,505
         Nov 1.05 97,422 1.98 224,581 0.49 79,894 3.10 20,486
         Dec 1.03 96,913 1.97 226,745 0.48 81,898 3.07 20,531
2014
         Jan 1.01 95,966 1.95 227,207 0.48 83,425 3.04 20,595
         Feb 0.99 95,572 1.94 227,617 0.44 86,581 3.02 20,561
         Mar 0.97 95,257 1.92 227,604 0.45 85,751 3.01 20,226
         Apr 0.95 94,627 1.91 226,848 0.45 86,699 2.98 19,598
         May 0.92 94,570 1.89 226,619 0.46 87,856 2.95 19,903
         June 0.91 95,671 1.87 226,527 0.44 84,165 2.92 19,989
         July 0.87 95,197 1.85 225,989 0.41 85,704 2.87 19,674
         Aug 0.84 94,384 1.84 225,881 0.39 86,373 2.83 19,536
         Sep 0.81 93,703 1.82 225,992 0.39 83,870 2.81 19,601
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Sep 3.29
5,599 3.18 29,073 4.05 973,593 7.64 60,893 5.08 77,444 5.08 308,291
         Oct 3.23 5,786 3.15 29,061 4.02 976,282 7.64 59,053 5.07 77,656 5.06 308,891
         Nov 3.17 5,644 3.13 29,027 4.01 979,253 7.55 56,483 5.03 77,800 5.05 309,729
         Dec 3.29 5,683 3.12 28,778 3.98 978,740 7.61 59,488 5.01 77,624 5.01 307,844
2014          Jan 3.16 5,704 3.10 28,563 3.96 977,215 7.66 57,235 4.99 77,651 5.00 308,100
         Feb 3.20 5,602 3.08 28,337 3.94 979,347 7.61 56,749 4.97 77,550 4.98 308,406
         Mar 3.22 5,707 3.06 28,267 3.92 980,208 7.75 58,723 4.97 77,679 4.97 307,181
         Apr 3.17 5,744 3.03 28,198 3.90 981,947 7.53 57,688 4.91 76,672 4.99 309,107
         May 3.17 5,764 3.01 28,197 3.88 984,889 7.51 56,479 4.94 75,911 4.98 309,887
         June 3.17 5,762 2.99 28,112 3.86 986,700 7.59 59,098 4.92 76,099 4.96 308,827
         July 3.08 5,812 2.96 28,148 3.83 989,997 7.51 56,579 4.89 76,766 4.94 309,761
         Aug 3.09 5,667 2.94 28,220 3.82 994,510 7.36 55,731 4.86 77,128 4.91 309,772
         Sep 3.09 5,630 2.91 28,295 3.80 997,137 7.54 58,107 4.83 77,171 4.89 308,277
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Sep 3.12 135,674 2.87 123,701 3.28 580,155
         Oct 3.08 132,962 2.86 124,612 3.27 581,133
         Nov 3.07 133,346 2.85 124,895 3.26 584,312
         Dec 3.13 131,319 2.86 124,094 3.24 585,809
2014
         Jan 3.10 129,373 2.86 124,931 3.24 585,957
         Feb 3.11 131,524 2.84 125,835 3.23 586,261
         Mar 3.23 133,290 2.84 126,844 3.22 582,771
         Apr 3.17 132,664 2.83 130,113 3.21 583,996
         May 3.14 133,191 2.81 130,069 3.20 586,337
         June 3.11 138,116 2.76 129,524 3.18 582,780
         July 2.97 133,446 2.72 129,959 3.15 583,339
         Aug 2.96 131,893 2.71 130,271 3.14 585,897
         Sep 2.98 132,902 2.65 129,886 3.11 584,473
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The
effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Sep 0.41
905,458 0.73 7,130 1.16 586 1.45 1,237 0.85 527,842 1.09 78,103
         Oct 0.40 915,399 0.71 7,583 1.06 883 1.44 1,553 0.82 527,870 1.06 78,030
         Nov 0.39 935,789 0.74 7,097 1.09 869 1.58 1,750 0.83 527,862 1.02 77,998
         Dec 0.39 931,980 0.66 7,630 1.06 700 1.48 1,406 0.79 532,012 0.99 77,698
2014          Jan 0.38 937,354 0.75 8,957 1.10 837 1.58 1,785 0.77 531,516 0.96 77,239
         Feb 0.38 945,510 0.78 7,933 0.99 810 1.34 1,514 0.80 531,906 0.94 77,471
         Mar 0.37 942,554 0.69 7,426 0.98 583 1.33 1,496 0.72 530,731 0.92 77,451
         Apr 0.36 953,725 0.68 8,300 1.03 808 1.29 1,523 0.73 529,024 0.91 77,285
         May 0.36 964,096 0.66 7,869 0.92 690 1.33 1,895 0.72 528,416 0.88 77,128
         June 0.35 963,948 0.65 7,904 1.02 595 1.36 1,420 0.70 528,104 0.84 76,049
         July 0.30 972,397 0.53 8,497 0.87 691 1.26 1,493 0.66 527,278 0.82 76,712
         Aug 0.30 982,182 0.54 6,962 0.96 600 1.11 1,293 0.61 527,851 0.83 77,648
         Sep 0.29 976,578 0.52 7,217 0.87 557 1.16 1,224 0.60 527,990 0.81 78,170
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Sep 0.16 318,355 0.17 17,489 0.72 463 1.38 224
         Oct 0.16 321,180 0.15 18,642 0.71 381 1.48 277
         Nov 0.16 322,015 0.16 17,258 0.72 383 1.46 232
         Dec 0.16 328,291 0.23 23,419 0.79 367 1.63 428
2014
         Jan 0.15 320,229 0.24 25,407 0.66 391 1.36 417
         Feb 0.15 315,847 0.23 22,970 0.65 371 2.07 265
         Mar 0.17 313,232 0.22 22,601 0.67 525 1.03 389
         Apr 0.17 315,372 0.26 26,114 0.68 576 1.04 345
         May 0.16 318,469 0.25 27,178 0.60 432 0.91 390
         June 0.14 314,270 0.18 24,006 0.54 313 1.02 615
         July 0.12 320,536 0.18 17,300 0.53 335 1.06 436
         Aug 0.12 326,545 0.16 15,252 0.48 188 0.82 186
         Sep 0.11 336,903 0.16 12,441 0.34 279 1.13 281
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Sep 1.93
4,695 3.56 900 3.03 2,472 2.08 2,756 3.67 669 2.96 1,331
         Oct 1.85 5,116 3.48 1,047 3.09 2,141 2.05 2,979 3.62 760 3.04 1,271
         Nov 1.89 3,676 3.61 909 2.99 2,024 2.11 2,160 3.78 666 2.92 1,275
         Dec 1.87 6,139 3.45 1,098 2.90 2,922 2.01 3,261 3.57 858 2.85 1,729
2014          Jan 1.98 5,139 3.38 1,102 2.91 2,188 2.31 2,887 3.49 806 2.83 1,438
         Feb 1.89 3,836 3.32 902 2.94 2,153 2.21 2,252 3.63 622 2.85 1,223
         Mar 2.06 4,627 3.50 1,162 2.89 2,841 2.32 2,832 3.68 694 2.86 1,427
         Apr 2.02 4,931 3.47 1,092 2.91 2,814 2.23 2,924 3.64 778 2.88 1,368
         May 1.96 4,047 3.52 1,023 2.84 2,136 2.26 2,277 3.74 789 2.75 1,213
         June 2.04 4,245 3.46 947 2.77 2,325 2.29 2,615 3.62 712 2.72 1,346
         July 1.88 4,952 3.33 1,196 2.71 2,713 2.15 3,073 3.50 888 2.66 1,470
         Aug 2.14 3,449 3.51 799 2.59 1,996 2.24 2,089 3.66 622 2.57 1,314
         Sep 1.93 4,709 3.48 859 2.51 2,586 2.02 2,858 3.61 632 2.42 1,400
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2013          Sep 6.40 6.32 4,759 5.79 379 5.02 2,195 7.71 2,185
         Oct 6.40 6.33 5,232 5.95 504 5.02 2,417 7.77 2,311
         Nov 6.31 6.22 4,766 5.78 592 5.01 2,218 7.73 1,956
         Dec 5.97 5.87 4,327 5.32 588 5.00 2,254 7.41 1,485
2014          Jan 6.56 6.47 5,445 5.73 538 5.20 2,478 7.93 2,429
         Feb 6.40 6.32 5,076 5.87 591 5.09 2,300 7.73 2,185
         Mar 6.19 6.12 5,954 5.72 832 4.99 2,702 7.51 2,420
         Apr 6.26 6.20 5,613 5.44 395 4.92 2,606 7.59 2,612
         May 6.34 6.25 5,665 5.33 497 5.02 2,520 7.59 2,648
         June 6.26 6.24 5,571 5.17 406 5.00 2,438 7.51 2,727
         July 6.31 6.23 5,983 5.28 414 4.96 2,704 7.57 2,865
         Aug 6.21 6.14 6,277 5.21 486 4.86 2,782 7.47 3,009
         Sep 6.08 5.98 6,207 5.02 543 4.77 2,836 7.37 2,828
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Sep . 4.28 246 3.47 33 4.67 143 3.87 70
         Oct . 4.37 250 3.63 38 4.70 146 4.07 66
         Nov . 4.40 221 3.64 35 4.71 133 4.12 53
         Dec . 4.24 247 3.48 42 4.63 149 3.79 56
2014          Jan . 4.04 245 2.65 61 4.73 122 4.06 62
         Feb . 4.35 217 3.11 33 4.84 119 4.10 65
         Mar . 4.23 261 3.41 53 4.75 138 3.84 70
         Apr . 3.99 248 2.15 52 4.63 133 4.14 63
         May . 4.32 220 3.57 22 4.64 129 3.97 69
         June . 4.21 215 3.43 28 4.64 121 3.76 66
         July . 3.85 299 2.68 102 4.79 128 3.82 69
         Aug . 4.42 193 3.33 20 4.74 120 4.11 53
         Sep . 4.12 203 2.79 27 4.66 116 3.65 60
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Sep 2.92 2.86 15,567 2.86 2,266 2.46 2,017 2.82 6,594 3.07 4,690
         Oct 2.97 2.89 17,153 2.75 3,065 2.53 2,373 2.91 7,044 3.14 4,671
         Nov 2.98 2.90 14,279 2.82 2,106 2.51 1,912 2.91 5,686 3.09 4,575
         Dec 2.90 2.83 14,896 2.75 2,436 2.45 2,119 2.85 6,169 3.04 4,172
2014          Jan 2.94 2.84 16,675 2.70 3,082 2.54 2,460 2.86 6,752 3.07 4,381
         Feb 2.90 2.83 15,089 2.85 2,762 2.43 2,061 2.81 5,540 3.02 4,726
         Mar 2.82 2.75 16,442 2.75 2,449 2.36 2,266 2.73 6,455 2.94 5,272
         Apr 2.85 2.75 17,947 2.69 2,754 2.40 2,574 2.71 7,202 3.02 5,417
         May 2.73 2.66 16,015 2.70 2,259 2.33 2,229 2.63 6,506 2.84 5,021
         June 2.65 2.58 15,767 2.49 2,436 2.31 2,091 2.55 6,359 2.79 4,881
         July 2.55 2.50 19,296 2.50 2,866 2.21 2,638 2.48 7,957 2.65 5,835
         Aug 2.52 2.45 16,207 2.59 2,398 2.17 2,018 2.40 6,422 2.55 5,369
         Sep 2.39 2.34 16,831 2.44 2,127 2.08 2,063 2.31 6,907 2.44 5,734
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Sep . 2.76 7,391 2.65 860 2.36 1,045 2.76 3,193 2.99 2,293
         Oct . 2.84 8,293 2.64 1,219 2.49 1,268 2.87 3,471 3.09 2,335
         Nov . 2.83 6,718 2.68 801 2.45 969 2.85 2,709 3.03 2,239
         Dec . 2.74 6,812 2.55 895 2.34 1,066 2.80 2,849 2.95 2,002
2014          Jan . 2.79 7,816 2.68 1,079 2.48 1,271 2.80 3,255 3.01 2,211
         Feb . 2.80 7,211 2.87 1,276 2.37 1,011 2.76 2,664 2.99 2,260
         Mar . 2.69 7,808 2.69 954 2.31 1,152 2.66 3,125 2.90 2,577
         Apr . 2.73 8,786 2.61 1,159 2.35 1,336 2.65 3,499 3.07 2,792
         May . 2.60 7,592 2.61 923 2.24 1,110 2.58 3,109 2.80 2,450
         June . 2.53 7,151 2.41 901 2.20 1,017 2.50 2,955 2.76 2,278
         July . 2.44 9,007 2.45 1,163 2.14 1,371 2.42 3,718 2.61 2,755
         Aug . 2.39 7,432 2.54 900 2.08 992 2.33 3,015 2.52 2,525
         Sep . 2.28 7,574 2.44 810 1.97 1,014 2.21 3,065 2.41 2,685
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Sep 9.48
46,356 9.54 39,542 14.63 4,254 4.31 69,234 4.33 68,982
         Oct 9.43 44,775 9.44 38,011 14.63 4,258 4.26 66,570 4.28 66,316
         Nov 9.35 42,848 9.30 36,099 14.64 4,288 4.21 67,193 4.23 66,944
         Dec 9.30 45,730 9.41 38,335 14.62 4,358 4.28 66,825 4.30 66,572
2014          Jan 9.36 43,888 9.38 37,050 14.51 4,288 4.27 65,336 4.29 65,106
         Feb 9.31 43,418 9.29 36,571 14.55 4,259 4.28 66,556 4.31 66,281
         Mar 9.33 45,617 9.34 38,706 14.58 4,313 4.39 68,638 4.41 68,379
         Apr 9.20 43,618 9.27 37,048 15.35 3,587 4.38 66,730 4.39 66,493
         May 9.21 42,626 9.22 36,563 15.42 3,566 4.39 66,148 4.41 65,901
         June 9.26 44,696 9.30 38,374 15.43 3,657 4.35 69,615 4.37 69,358
         July 9.20 42,604 9.21 36,390 15.36 3,630 4.17 65,960 4.19 65,707
         Aug 9.08 41,864 9.14 35,283 15.34 3,721 4.13 65,743 4.14 65,562
         Sep 9.16 44,311 9.23 37,654 15.31 3,783 4.17 66,516 4.18 66,287
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Sep 2.97 7,696 3.69 822 2.82 1,074 1.80 38,460 2.84 1,757 2.87 4,817
         Oct 2.92 8,264 3.61 992 2.95 1,181 1.79 42,301 2.86 2,872 3.03 4,462
         Nov 2.99 6,860 3.69 903 2.85 1,022 1.70 32,900 2.43 1,180 2.70 5,032
         Dec 3.01 7,750 3.59 1,032 2.74 1,380 1.86 44,537 2.62 3,368 2.75 8,311
2014          Jan 2.92 7,777 3.50 995 2.93 1,164 1.85 40,304 2.41 1,534 2.82 4,479
         Feb 2.97 6,822 3.67 726 2.87 1,009 1.71 32,393 2.14 1,285 2.91 3,721
         Mar 3.01 8,295 3.54 1,018 2.80 1,121 1.91 37,918 2.53 1,289 2.77 4,529
         Apr 2.95 8,017 3.54 1,087 2.73 1,156 1.83 44,756 2.34 1,752 2.87 4,473
         May 3.06 7,005 3.64 919 2.63 1,102 1.74 36,580 2.19 1,457 2.66 3,829
         June 2.97 7,708 3.62 897 2.59 1,098 1.65 43,000 2.31 2,259 2.42 5,386
         July 2.82 8,292 3.36 1,336 2.55 1,355 1.61 48,992 2.56 2,124 2.58 5,078
         Aug 2.77 6,172 3.26 1,080 2.47 1,156 1.46 36,472 2.22 1,864 2.40 4,379
         Sep 2.77 7,501 3.24 1,178 2.35 1,248 1.56 43,884 2.36 1,638 2.25 5,858
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Sep 2.87 904 2.80 138 2.65 318 2.10 5,972 3.08 926 2.71 1,439
         Oct 2.67 1,133 2.88 153 2.79 326 2.22 8,531 2.99 1,523 2.92 1,288
         Nov 2.88 746 2.97 114 2.77 274 2.11 4,596 2.75 415 2.65 1,445
         Dec 2.83 912 2.75 154 2.55 449 2.24 6,744 2.35 1,542 2.73 3,014
2014          Jan 2.71 1,122 2.69 161 2.85 324 2.16 8,627 2.65 519 2.87 1,224
         Feb 2.86 772 2.72 105 2.66 316 2.16 4,281 2.39 300 2.73 796
         Mar 2.81 1,000 2.72 145 2.70 320 2.27 5,618 2.74 408 2.66 994
         Apr 2.66 1,161 2.73 152 2.60 340 2.09 9,522 2.31 658 2.98 1,495
         May 2.86 862 2.71 118 2.48 358 2.23 5,063 2.60 477 2.64 984
         June 2.87 952 2.67 109 2.46 344 2.07 4,950 2.33 1,055 2.22 1,518
         July 2.61 1,318 2.55 196 2.44 461 2.05 8,769 2.64 786 2.85 1,477
         Aug 2.79 776 2.46 127 2.32 326 1.90 4,212 2.61 854 2.41 815
         Sep 2.68 920 2.52 129 2.23 361 1.97 6,190 3.13 488 2.09 1,535
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with
ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2012          Q2 2,078.0 2,013.1 568.9 259.6 275.6 221.0 561.3 62.6 64.0 64.9
         Q3 2,124.8 2,059.2 566.1 277.5 277.0 223.5 588.0 62.9 64.3 65.6
         Q4 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013          Q1 2,196.3 2,129.1 559.9 304.0 280.3 225.2 629.3 64.9 65.6 67.2
         Q2 2,190.5 2,122.6 554.2 306.4 280.5 224.6 626.6 64.7 65.6 67.9
         Q3 2,207.7 2,138.3 546.9 311.8 284.0 224.3 641.8 64.6 64.9 69.4
         Q4 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2014          Q1 2,289.8 2,216.5 541.6 339.1 286.2 227.2 694.7 64.2 63.5 73.3
         Q2 2,333.9 2,260.0 538.3 355.8 287.6 228.0 722.7 64.1 63.4 73.9
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2012          Q2 1,635.4 1,592.7 412.5 220.6 249.3 209.0 389.9 58.7 52.6 42.7
         Q3 1,671.2 1,628.1 409.4 236.7 250.6 211.3 408.6 58.8 52.7 43.0
         Q4 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013          Q1 1,726.1 1,682.3 402.1 261.5 253.5 212.5 438.2 60.7 53.8 43.8
         Q2 1,719.6 1,675.3 397.2 262.2 253.8 211.9 436.1 60.5 53.7 44.3
         Q3 1,730.7 1,685.2 390.1 266.6 256.8 211.3 447.2 60.4 52.8 45.5
         Q4 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2014          Q1 1,788.4 1,741.3 381.6 289.1 259.1 212.2 488.4 59.7 51.2 47.0
         Q2 1,821.4 1,774.0 378.0 303.0 260.4 212.9 509.1 59.6 51.0 47.4
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2012          Q2 442.6 420.4 156.4 39.0 26.2 12.0 171.4 3.9 11.4 22.2
         Q3 453.6 431.1 156.7 40.9 26.4 12.2 179.4 4.0 11.5 22.5
         Q4 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013          Q1 470.3 446.8 157.8 42.5 26.8 12.7 191.1 4.2 11.8 23.4
         Q2 470.9 447.3 157.0 44.2 26.7 12.8 190.6 4.2 11.9 23.6
         Q3 477.0 453.1 156.8 45.2 27.3 12.9 194.6 4.3 12.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2014          Q1 501.5 475.2 159.9 50.0 27.2 15.0 206.4 4.5 12.4 26.3
         Q2 512.5 486.0 160.4 52.7 27.2 15.1 213.7 4.5 12.5 26.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in Unearned
Debt securities life insurance
premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.5
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.9
2008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.8
2009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2012          Q2 2,078.0 18.7 75.5 123.0 1,667.9 1,398.2 269.7 71.5 121.3
         Q3 2,124.8 19.3 77.2 141.1 1,684.5 1,414.5 270.0 71.4 131.3
         Q4 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013          Q1 2,196.3 21.4 78.1 169.7 1,739.0 1,460.7 278.3 72.8 115.3
         Q2 2,190.5 17.8 79.0 172.1 1,751.6 1,474.0 277.6 73.1 97.0
         Q3 2,207.7 16.5 79.6 177.0 1,766.0 1,488.6 277.3 73.4 95.3
         Q4 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2014          Q1 2,289.8 16.3 83.1 191.3 1,819.9 1,537.9 282.0 71.7 107.5
         Q2 2,333.9 16.2 83.6 184.1 1,837.1 1,555.3 281.8 72.0 141.0
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2012          Q2 1,635.4 18.7 71.5 117.7 1,256.4 987.1 269.3 69.7 101.4
         Q3 1,671.2 19.3 73.2 135.0 1,268.5 998.9 269.6 69.6 105.6
         Q4 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013          Q1 1,726.1 21.4 74.0 162.3 1,308.8 1,031.0 277.8 70.9 88.6
         Q2 1,719.6 17.8 74.8 164.5 1,317.7 1,040.5 277.2 71.2 73.7
         Q3 1,730.7 16.5 75.4 169.2 1,326.8 1,050.0 276.9 71.4 71.4
         Q4 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2014          Q1 1,788.4 16.3 78.8 182.7 1,361.1 1,079.5 281.5 69.8 79.8
         Q2 1,821.4 16.2 79.2 175.7 1,372.6 1,091.2 281.3 70.0 107.7
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2012          Q2 442.6 − 3.9 5.3 411.5 411.1 0.5 1.9 19.9
         Q3 453.6 − 4.0 6.1 416.0 415.6 0.4 1.9 25.7
         Q4 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013          Q1 470.3 − 4.1 7.4 430.1 429.7 0.5 1.9 26.7
         Q2 470.9 − 4.2 7.5 433.9 433.5 0.5 1.9 23.3
         Q3 477.0 − 4.2 7.8 439.1 438.7 0.5 2.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2014          Q1 501.5 − 4.3 8.6 458.8 458.3 0.5 2.0 27.8
         Q2 512.5 − 4.4 8.3 464.5 464.1 0.5 2.0 33.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and otherSupervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing pro- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
visions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2014
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities
 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,1222004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,9382011 36,638 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 23,064 − 17,173 − 94,793 36,805 40,814 53,8112012 54,965 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,382 7,184 − 42,017 − 3,573 52,774 47,7812013 − 11,186 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 90,429 24,256 − 25,778 − 12,708 62,744 − 35,442
2013          Nov 19,214 4,316 − 8,410 − 1,251 13,977 14,898 6,386 7,717 − 167 − 1,164 12,828
         Dec − 38,456 − 39,871 − 24,847 − 4,973 − 10,051 1,415 − 4,338 − 4,647 − 1,215 1,524 − 34,118
2014          Jan 6,624 2,476 3,705 3,516 − 4,744 4,147 − 4,478 − 4,149 − 1,511 1,182 11,102
         Feb 4,043 691 − 8,978 409 9,260 3,352 − 9,935 − 1,895 − 560 − 7,480 13,978         Mar 5,306 − 14,577 − 12,262 − 1,890 − 425 19,883 15,646 641 − 203 15,208 − 10,340
         Apr − 6,811 − 23,586 − 12,132 635 − 12,088 16,775 7,854 1,680 − 1,786 7,960 − 14,665
         May 32,039 28,566 11,336 − 1,127 18,357 3,473 5,235 1,764 − 966 4,437 26,804         June 1,737 − 5,765 − 9,400 − 4,686 8,321 7,502 3,553 − 2,240 − 1,632 7,425 − 1,816
         July 3 − 2,955 − 2,229 5,062 − 5,788 2,958 6,192 32 − 1,640 7,800 − 6,188
         Aug 9,038 14,890 4,695 − 1,327 11,523 − 5,853 − 6,643 − 2,744 − 1,666 − 2,233 15,680         Sep 9,163 − 7,661 − 4,017 − 218 − 3,426 16,824 16,950 7,579 − 373 9,744 − 7,786
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period
purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,0162004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 23,718 21,713 2,005 38,558 670 37,888 − 14,8382012 19,164 5,120 14,044 18,022 10,259 7,763 1,1422013 30,015 10,106 19,910 24,993 11,991 13,002 5,022
2013          Nov − 1,327 153 − 1,480 − 4,639 347 − 4,986 3,312
         Dec − 2,573 1,042 − 3,615 − 7,874 − 2,257 − 5,617 5,301
2014          Jan 3,931 115 3,816 11,526 8,586 2,940 − 7,595
         Feb − 4,284 599 − 4,883 − 9,985 − 11,608 1,623 5,701         Mar 5,095 111 4,984 9,181 10,246 − 1,065 − 4,086
         Apr 2,250 136 2,114 12,035 9,932 2,103 − 9,785
         May 9,679 868 8,811 3,517 − 7,328 10,845 6,162         June 11,395 9,015 2,380 117 168 − 51 11,278
         July 3,313 1,770 1,543 6,650 3,182 3,468 − 3,337
         Aug − 1,493 291 − 1,784 − 2,884 − 2,003 − 881 1,391         Sep 4,762 4,218 544 − 2,752 1,136 − 3,888 7,514
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014          Feb 124,699 75,356 1,798 1,693 56,175 15,689 6,962 42,382 −
         Mar 106,104 67,913 1,311 1,140 51,987 13,474 6,396 31,795 −
         Apr 112,584 64,982 1,556 669 50,865 11,892 8,150 39,451 −
         May 126,094 76,179 147 1,356 58,774 15,902 5,531 44,384 −
         June 97,623 59,724 2,532 816 42,949 13,427 3,509 34,390 −
         July 116,843 61,883 2,752 1,431 43,306 14,394 9,710 45,250 −
         Aug 109,326 75,365 932 940 54,900 18,594 2,172 31,789 −
         Sep 101,795 60,749 4,805 1,218 37,935 16,792 8,843 32,204 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −
2014          Feb 37,065 14,515 1,456 1,193 4,557 7,309 5,831 16,718 −
         Mar 30,525 14,067 1,025 555 8,299 4,188 4,175 12,283 −
         Apr 37,733 11,784 1,456 669 3,499 6,159 6,284 19,665 −
         May 35,993 12,714 147 856 3,161 8,551 3,794 19,485 −         June 34,521 11,498 2,122 632 5,037 3,707 2,280 20,743 −
         July 39,896 13,217 2,585 1,280 4,513 4,839 7,835 18,845 −
         Aug 21,235 8,481 717 410 1,715 5,639 463 12,291 −         Sep 39,315 16,184 2,937 952 3,856 8,439 7,704 15,427 −
Net sales  6 
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,057
2014          Feb 12,134 − 8,752 − 1,965 − 703 − 3,936 − 2,149 4,413 16,473 − 4
         Mar − 16,495 − 14,777 − 862 − 956 − 9,313 − 3,646 505 − 2,223 −
         Apr − 17,187 − 12,316 − 18 − 1,898 − 10,837 438 5,177 − 10,048 − 2,500
         May 31,808 12,395 − 1,996 − 614 11,034 3,971 − 257 19,671 −         June − 5,487 − 5,439 − 544 − 5,692 6,003 − 5,206 − 3,862 3,813 −
         July − 7,850 − 7,611 − 1,612 − 992 − 3,445 − 1,562 5,283 − 5,522 −
         Aug 16,022 4,579 − 1,287 437 595 4,834 − 1,109 12,552 −         Sep − 3,467 − 2,745 493 − 1,208 − 1,082 − 949 1,166 − 1,888 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2014
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,6662004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014          Mar 3,124,310 1,265,480 126,060 101,171 571,566 466,683 226,770 1,632,060 10,419
         Apr 3,107,123 1,253,164 126,042 99,273 560,728 467,121 231,947 1,622,012 7,919
         May 3,138,932 1,265,558 124,045 98,659 571,762 471,092 231,690 1,641,683 7,919
         June 3,133,444 1,260,119 123,501 92,967 577,765 465,886 227,829 1,645,496 7,919
         July 3,125,595 1,252,508 121,889 91,975 574,320 464,324 233,112 1,639,975 7,919
         Aug 3,141,617 1,257,088 120,602 92,412 574,915 469,158 232,002 1,652,527 7,919
         Sep 3,138,149 1,254,343 121,095 91,204 573,834 468,209 233,168 1,650,639 7,919
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2014 
1,198,183 580,773 48,375 43,701 245,977 242,723 47,928 569,481 2,588    less than 2
638,183 283,625 33,341 24,441 140,978 84,863 36,512 318,048 1,876 2 to less than 4
451,815 170,857 23,959 11,131 87,889 47,878 39,963 240,996 204 4 to less than 6
272,606 90,877 8,890 5,998 47,431 28,559 19,354 162,375 341 6 to less than 8
235,316 46,879 4,501 3,339 20,386 18,654 15,351 173,086 1,333 8 to less than 10
76,501 26,269 1,872 2,167 12,491 9,739 6,795 43,437 599 10 to less than 15
68,848 11,792 30 241 5,360 6,162 6,026 51,030 10 15 to less than 20
196,696 43,270 128 186 13,323 29,633 61,240 92,185 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,0012004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014          Mar 171,576 − 62 96 200 0 − − 81 − 246 − 30 1,435,810         Apr 171,385 − 191 100 36 1 − − 215 − 62 − 52 1,428,621
         May 171,398 13 52 1534−5 − 8 1− 1 20 1,455,934
         June 172,946 1,548 1,434 20 233 − − 7 − 24 − 108 1,445,714
         July 173,470 524 668 255 31 − − 48 − 219 − 164 1,409,428
         Aug 173,650 180 189 474 − − − 145 − 115 − 223 1,389,822
         Sep 175,138 1,488 1,621 125 23 − − 29 − 125 − 127 1,401,240
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014          May 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.0 1.9 3.2 136.00 109.49 474.47 9,943.27
         June 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 0.9 1.8 3.0 136.38 109.92 469.36 9,833.07
         July 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 0.8 1.6 2.8 136.83 110.37 447.74 9,407.48
         Aug 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 1.5 2.7 138.12 112.28 450.83 9,470.17         Sep 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.7 1.4 2.7 137.92 111.89 449.76 9,474.30
         Oct 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.6 1.3 2.6 138.01 112.37 444.13 9,326.87
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,497 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,277 39,401 − 7,576 − 694 46,977 1,970 7,0952012 111,639 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,696 115,438 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,500 23,257 − 3,7992013 122,658 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,321 116,657 771 100 115,886 31,220 6,001
2014          Mar 13,527 10,588 − 173 − 205 − 558 192 10,761 2,939 14,325 121 322 14,204 2,617 − 798         Apr 5,268 2,764 192 14 − 254 181 2,573 2,504 8,707 2,236 − 731 6,471 3,235 − 3,439
         May 7,434 6,762 1,519 − 20 1,081 158 5,243 672 4,590 − 2,624 − 220 7,214 892 2,845         June 10,089 4,615 766 − 80 224 290 3,849 5,473 8,840 849 1,001 7,991 4,472 1,249
         July 13,042 8,609 1,430 − 33 1,069 86 7,179 4,433 13,417 504 − 4 12,913 4,437 − 375
         Aug 11,586 9,452 2,328 − 61 1,965 88 7,124 2,134 11,442 − 278 − 325 11,720 2,459 144         Sep 9,298 3,068 − 3,343 − 22 − 3,578 156 6,411 6,230 12,240 1,425 1,110 10,815 5,120 − 2,941
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits −23.78 −34.16 − 9.11 − 59.39 − 22.36 53.54 19.10 − 37.51 − 2.60
Debt securities 4.86 − 2.65 0.28 1.16 − 2.02 1.70 − 0.56 1.33 0.28
short-term debt securities 2.15 − 2.61 1.56 1.79 − 0.63 0.78 − 0.38 1.79 − 0.13
long-term debt securities 2.71 − 0.03 − 1.28 − 0.62 − 1.39 0.92 − 0.18 − 0.46 0.41
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.55 − 4.87 − 1.27 0.68 − 1.55 0.70 − 1.10 − 0.26 1.05
Non-financial corporations . . 0.81 1.06 − 0.11 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34
Financial corporations . . − 2.14 − 0.16 − 1.65 − 0.09 − 0.25 − 0.37 0.05
General government . . 0.07 − 0.22 0.21 0.38 − 0.31 0.08 0.66
Debt securities of the rest of the world 3.32 2.22 1.55 0.48 − 0.47 0.99 0.54 1.59 − 0.77
Loans 10.80 22.45 −15.03 2.21 − 0.44 4.31 − 21.10 11.22 1.54
short-term loans 18.09 13.84 7.07 7.40 − 0.79 2.80 − 2.34 12.22 3.86
long-term loans − 7.30 8.61 −22.09 − 5.19 0.35 1.51 − 18.77 − 1.01 − 2.33
Memo item
to domestic sectors 6.74 19.82 −22.78 − 3.81 − 8.20 2.93 − 13.70 8.24 4.69
Non-financial corporations 0.81 8.94 −16.55 − 1.00 − 7.63 2.32 − 10.24 3.92 1.29
Financial corporations 5.27 10.38 − 6.44 − 2.87 − 0.62 0.55 − 3.51 4.32 3.40
General government 0.67 0.50 0.21 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 4.05 2.63 7.76 6.03 7.76 1.38 − 7.41 2.98 − 3.15
Equity and investment fund shares 58.21 42.04 28.91 16.56 − 6.51 9.65 9.20 11.53 4.73
Equity 49.96 42.24 21.25 12.90 − 6.70 8.20 6.85 10.36 6.91
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 8.70 4.07 0.58 2.99 1.05 − 0.93 − 0.69
Non-financial corporations . . 9.65 4.39 1.12 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79
Financial corporations . . − 0.95 − 0.32 − 0.53 − 0.04 − 0.06 0.02 0.10
Listed shares of the rest of the world . . 13.01 0.30 7.63 2.33 2.75 2.47 6.22
Other equity 1 47.99 43.74 − 0.28 8.93 − 15.13 2.88 3.05 8.82 1.38
Investment fund shares 8.25 − 0.20 7.65 3.66 0.19 1.45 2.35 1.17 − 2.18
Money market fund shares 0.29 0.03 − 0.15 − 0.03 − 0.07 0.22 − 0.27 0.48 − 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.96 − 0.22 7.80 3.69 0.26 1.23 2.62 0.68 − 2.02
Insurance technical reserves − 0.24 − 0.30 − 0.35 − 0.08 − 0.09 − 0.09 − 0.09 − 0.10 − 0.08
Financial derivatives −13.52 0.74 6.44 1.92 2.38 1.54 0.61 − 1.20 1.00Other accounts receivable 63.53 101.75 122.58 31.14 16.39 65.75 9.31 1.35 − 22.65
Total 99.85 129.86 133.73 − 6.47 − 12.65 136.39 16.45 − 13.38 − 17.79
External financing
Debt securities 7.57 18.72 12.78 9.11 3.22 − 0.49 0.94 1.18 − 6.30
short-term securities 4.89 − 1.58 − 1.12 5.28 − 1.03 − 1.24 − 4.13 − 2.75 − 6.35
long-term securities 2.68 20.30 13.90 3.84 4.24 0.75 5.07 3.93 0.05
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 5.29 3.33 0.50 1.23 0.23 2.45 1.78
Non-financial corporations . . 0.81 1.06 − 0.11 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34
Financial corporations . . 3.03 1.65 0.58 0.05 0.77 2.31 1.11
General government . . − 0.05 0.00 − 0.02 − 0.04 0.00 − 0.01 0.00
Households . . 1.50 0.63 0.05 0.81 0.01 0.11 0.32
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 7.49 5.78 2.71 − 1.72 0.71 − 1.26 − 8.07
Loans 47.82 8.06 − 3.67 8.40 7.27 − 14.86 − 4.48 23.41 25.20
short-term loans 40.93 − 1.20 − 2.78 2.27 6.87 − 14.67 2.76 13.09 17.21
long-term loans 6.89 9.26 − 0.89 6.13 0.40 − 0.19 − 7.23 10.31 8.00
Memo item
from domestic sectors 32.67 −18.49 −32.20 3.82 − 6.93 − 12.27 − 16.81 25.97 18.98
Non-financial corporations 0.81 8.94 −16.55 − 1.00 − 7.63 2.32 − 10.24 3.92 1.29
Financial corporations 10.90 − 5.58 10.41 10.43 6.48 1.94 − 8.44 15.23 8.62
General government 20.96 −21.85 −26.06 − 5.62 − 5.78 − 16.53 1.87 6.82 9.07
from the rest of the world 17.68 21.77 31.74 4.65 15.83 − 3.16 14.42 − 3.52 6.76
Equity 26.77 12.29 11.99 1.63 2.19 1.35 6.81 2.31 2.88
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . − 4.57 5.32 − 4.98 2.09 − 7.00 3.32 − 0.33
Non-financial corporations . . 9.65 4.39 1.12 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79
Financial corporations . . − 5.02 2.50 − 5.57 2.03 − 3.98 4.41 − 0.01
General government . . − 0.98 0.01 − 0.93 − 0.07 0.01 0.00 0.00
Households . . − 8.21 − 1.58 0.40 − 2.90 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.47
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 7.90 − 4.69 6.48 − 2.27 8.38 − 2.70 2.20
Other equity 1 18.46 8.99 8.65 1.01 0.69 1.52 5.43 1.69 1.01
Insurance technical reserves 6.38 7.69 6.00 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 14.83 8.09 3.72 − 8.90 14.96 1.68 − 4.03 5.44 5.82
Other accounts payable 46.66 28.22 −12.49 − 1.20 − 16.92 16.90 − 11.27 − 2.48 − 0.92
Total 150.03 83.06 18.33 10.55 12.22 6.08 − 10.52 31.36 28.19
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 380.3 416.8 411.9 372.7 359.1 395.4 411.9 373.1 359.5
Debt securities 52.6 51.9 48.2 50.0 47.4 48.9 48.2 49.7 50.2
short-term debt securities 6.3 3.6 5.1 5.4 4.7 5.5 5.1 6.9 6.8
long-term debt securities 46.4 48.3 43.0 44.6 42.7 43.4 43.0 42.8 43.4
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 24.6 27.0 25.2 25.8 24.6 24.4 25.5
Non-financial corporations . . 4.7 5.0 4.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0
Financial corporations . . 13.8 16.0 14.3 14.1 13.8 13.5 13.6
General government . . 6.1 6.0 6.1 6.5 6.1 6.2 6.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 23.6 23.0 22.2 23.1 23.6 25.3 24.7
Loans 393.1 415.5 400.5 417.7 417.3 421.6 400.5 411.7 413.3
short-term loans 271.2 285.1 292.1 292.5 291.7 294.5 292.1 304.4 308.2
long-term loans 121.9 130.5 108.4 125.3 125.6 127.1 108.4 107.4 105.0
Memo item
to domestic sectors 252.5 272.4 249.6 268.5 260.3 263.3 249.6 257.8 262.5
Non-financial corporations 190.8 199.8 183.2 198.8 191.1 193.4 183.2 187.1 188.4
Financial corporations 55.9 66.3 59.9 63.4 62.8 63.4 59.9 64.2 67.6
General government 5.8 6.3 6.5 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5
to the rest of the world 140.5 143.2 150.9 149.2 157.0 158.3 150.9 153.9 150.8
Equity and investment fund shares 1,436.5 1,597.6 1,756.8 1,647.4 1,607.7 1,669.6 1,756.8 1,761.6 1,780.4
Equity 1,313.3 1,468.7 1,618.7 1,513.3 1,475.8 1,534.1 1,618.7 1,620.8 1,638.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 275.4 226.2 235.2 251.9 275.4 266.3 266.0
Non-financial corporations . . 269.8 221.2 230.1 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5
Financial corporations . . 5.7 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.7 5.7 5.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world . . 63.8 50.6 57.8 60.8 63.8 66.9 73.3
Other equity 1 1,084.2 1,199.7 1,279.5 1,236.6 1,182.8 1,221.4 1,279.5 1,287.6 1,299.2
Investment fund shares 123.1 129.0 138.1 134.1 131.9 135.6 138.1 140.9 141.9
Money market fund shares − − 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.6 1.5
Non-MMF investment fund shares 123.1 129.0 137.0 133.1 130.8 134.2 137.0 139.3 140.4
Insurance technical reserves 41.9 43.3 44.7 43.6 44.0 44.3 44.7 45.1 45.4
Financial derivatives 17.2 18.1 16.8 17.6 17.6 17.7 16.8 14.2 14.0Other accounts receivable 790.4 829.1 856.5 861.8 840.5 852.0 856.5 834.8 818.1
Total 3,112.0 3,372.3 3,535.4 3,410.9 3,333.6 3,449.6 3,535.4 3,490.2 3,480.9
Liabilities
Debt securities 110.7 130.9 138.9 139.6 141.3 137.5 138.9 142.5 138.0
short-term securities 16.1 14.6 13.4 19.8 18.8 17.6 13.4 10.7 4.4
long-term securities 94.6 116.3 125.4 119.8 122.4 119.9 125.4 131.8 133.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 51.7 50.2 50.2 51.4 51.7 55.3 58.0
Non-financial corporations . . 4.7 5.0 4.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0
Financial corporations . . 31.4 29.6 30.4 30.4 31.4 34.9 36.8
General government . . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . . 15.6 15.5 14.9 15.7 15.6 15.7 16.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 87.2 89.4 91.0 86.1 87.2 87.2 80.0
Loans 1,346.6 1,366.6 1,388.7 1,383.9 1,395.2 1,389.2 1,388.7 1,402.6 1,426.9
short-term loans 414.8 415.9 430.0 427.5 438.1 435.7 430.0 441.4 458.8
long-term loans 931.8 950.7 958.7 956.4 957.1 953.5 958.7 961.2 968.1
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,090.3 1,088.5 1,078.9 1,101.1 1,096.6 1,093.8 1,078.9 1,096.3 1,113.8
Non-financial corporations 190.8 199.8 183.2 198.8 191.1 193.4 183.2 187.1 188.4
Financial corporations 852.6 843.3 832.7 854.0 858.1 844.4 832.7 846.8 856.0
General government 46.9 45.4 63.0 48.4 47.4 56.0 63.0 62.3 69.4
from the rest of the world 256.3 278.1 309.8 282.8 298.6 295.4 309.8 306.3 313.1
Equity 1,851.9 2,124.3 2,426.0 2,182.7 2,143.5 2,259.1 2,426.0 2,435.8 2,458.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 567.9 484.6 486.0 525.0 567.9 565.0 569.4
Non-financial corporations . . 269.8 221.2 230.1 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5
Financial corporations . . 120.3 107.5 101.6 113.0 120.3 124.4 125.6
General government . . 31.2 24.4 24.4 28.0 31.2 30.5 32.0
Households . . 146.6 131.6 129.8 137.3 146.6 149.6 151.2
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 674.8 543.8 552.5 594.2 674.8 684.2 696.5
Other equity 1 1,048.6 1,129.3 1,183.4 1,154.3 1,105.0 1,139.9 1,183.4 1,186.7 1,192.2
Insurance technical reserves 229.8 237.5 243.5 239.0 240.5 242.0 243.5 245.0 246.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 31.9 40.2 37.3 26.0 47.5 45.1 37.3 39.5 42.0
Other accounts payable 907.9 928.1 927.2 945.9 908.3 917.5 927.2 906.1 906.1
Total 4,478.8 4,827.6 5,161.6 4,917.1 4,876.2 4,990.5 5,161.6 5,171.6 5,217.5
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 57.45 74.59 66.59 8.81 18.50 10.20 29.08 13.04 19.19
Currency − 2.53 0.12 10.81 2.62 4.30 3.81 0.07 5.27 3.52
Deposits 59.98 74.47 55.79 6.19 14.20 6.39 29.01 7.77 15.67
Transferable deposits 33.64 90.08 89.41 18.45 25.65 16.37 28.95 8.42 19.91
Time deposits 17.75 − 5.21 − 9.78 − 3.97 − 2.34 − 4.94 1.47 2.37 1.31
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 8.60 −10.39 −23.85 − 8.28 − 9.12 − 5.04 − 1.40 − 3.03 − 5.56
Debt securities − 3.03 −17.39 −17.81 − 6.74 − 6.21 − 2.39 − 2.47 − 2.12 − 2.52
short-term debt securities 0.07 − 0.26 − 0.36 0.10 0.01 − 0.28 − 0.20 0.11 − 0.08
long-term debt securities − 3.10 −17.13 −17.45 − 6.84 − 6.22 − 2.11 − 2.28 − 2.24 − 2.44
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . −14.86 − 4.47 − 5.26 − 2.61 − 2.53 − 2.27 − 2.64
Non-financial corporations . . 1.24 0.55 0.00 0.75 − 0.07 0.09 0.27
Financial corporations . . −12.46 − 4.10 − 4.26 − 2.31 − 1.79 − 1.77 − 2.25
General government . . − 3.64 − 0.92 − 1.00 − 1.05 − 0.67 − 0.60 − 0.65
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . − 2.94 − 2.27 − 0.95 0.22 0.06 0.15 0.12
Equity and investment fund shares 6.79 − 3.51 9.63 9.33 6.34 − 2.15 − 3.89 8.19 10.69
Equity 19.41 − 0.08 − 0.41 4.07 2.94 − 3.05 − 4.36 3.44 3.79
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . . − 5.63 1.65 1.10 − 3.49 − 4.89 0.51 2.07
Non-financial corporations . . − 5.29 1.41 0.32 − 2.88 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.44
Financial corporations . . − 0.35 0.25 0.77 − 0.61 − 0.76 0.66 1.63
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 2.99 1.60 0.71 0.18 0.50 1.91 0.65
Other equity 1 5.63 2.58 2.24 0.81 1.13 0.26 0.03 1.02 1.06
Investment fund shares −12.63 − 3.42 10.04 5.27 3.40 0.90 0.47 4.75 6.91
Money market fund shares − 0.37 0.65 − 0.30 − 0.26 − 0.16 − 0.02 0.14 − 0.20 − 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares −12.26 − 4.07 10.34 5.53 3.56 0.92 0.33 4.95 7.07
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 13.12 19.87 16.73 4.76 4.22 3.88 3.88 3.84 3.77
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 13.05 29.66 33.45 15.56 9.11 4.73 4.06 13.66 6.24
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.09 27.37 25.98 5.90 5.08 5.40 9.59 8.96 6.90
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 26.13 16.26 12.45 8.33 − 0.76 11.72 − 6.84 0.96 − 8.22
Total 143.59 146.85 147.02 45.95 36.28 31.39 33.40 46.52 36.06
  External financing
Loans 11.57 15.08 11.38 − 3.66 5.70 8.81 0.54 0.47 5.93
short-term loans − 2.13 − 1.16 − 3.27 − 1.52 − 0.36 0.04 − 1.43 0.83 0.50
long-term loans 13.70 16.24 14.65 − 2.15 6.06 8.76 1.97 − 0.35 5.43
Memo item
Mortage loans 11.24 18.02 18.27 0.93 5.26 8.40 3.68 0.86 5.75
Consumer loans 5.22 − 0.99 − 0.30 − 2.65 1.85 1.69 − 1.19 1.46 0.13
Entrepreneurial loans − 4.90 − 1.95 − 6.59 − 1.95 − 1.41 − 1.28 − 1.95 − 1.84 0.04
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 9.10 15.17 12.60 − 3.04 5.26 8.31 2.07 − 0.99 6.10
Loans from other financial institutions 2.47 − 0.08 − 1.22 − 0.63 0.44 0.50 − 1.53 1.46 − 0.17
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.60 1.36 0.32 0.17 0.06 0.02 0.08 0.23 − 0.01
Total 13.16 16.44 11.71 − 3.50 5.76 8.82 0.62 0.70 5.92
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,772.2 1,847.8 1,914.2 1,856.4 1,874.9 1,885.1 1,914.2 1,926.9 1,946.1
Currency 104.5 104.6 115.4 107.2 111.5 115.3 115.4 120.7 124.2
Deposits 1,667.7 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,749.2 1,763.4 1,769.8 1,798.8 1,806.2 1,821.9
Transferable deposits 727.1 818.3 907.8 836.8 862.5 878.8 907.8 916.0 935.9
Time deposits 261.2 255.9 245.9 251.7 249.4 244.4 245.9 248.2 249.5
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 679.4 669.0 645.1 660.7 651.6 646.5 645.1 642.1 636.5
Debt securities 211.0 200.1 179.0 193.1 184.1 182.0 179.0 177.7 176.4
short-term debt securities 3.1 3.1 2.7 3.1 3.1 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.8
long-term debt securities 208.0 197.0 176.3 190.0 181.0 179.2 176.3 174.9 173.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 116.9 129.2 122.3 119.8 116.9 115.1 112.9
Non-financial corporations . . 14.2 14.2 13.6 14.4 14.2 14.2 14.7
Financial corporations . . 90.7 99.9 94.7 92.5 90.7 89.4 87.4
General government . . 12.0 15.1 13.9 12.9 12.0 11.5 10.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 62.0 63.9 61.8 62.2 62.0 62.7 63.4
Equity and investment fund shares 759.3 820.2 885.9 845.5 835.6 857.2 885.9 901.6 923.4
Equity 403.8 446.8 487.6 458.8 453.6 467.8 487.6 496.3 502.8
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . . 167.4 149.4 148.4 156.5 167.4 170.5 171.5
Non-financial corporations . . 140.4 125.9 124.5 131.7 140.4 143.3 144.9
Financial corporations . . 26.9 23.5 23.9 24.8 26.9 27.1 26.6
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 55.8 51.0 49.4 52.7 55.8 57.9 60.6
Other equity 1 237.4 255.7 264.4 258.4 255.7 258.7 264.4 267.9 270.7
Investment fund shares 355.5 373.4 398.3 386.7 382.0 389.4 398.3 405.3 420.6
Money market fund shares 23.5 23.9 4.4 3.0 4.3 4.3 4.4 4.2 4.1Non-MMF investment fund shares 332.0 349.5 393.8 383.7 377.7 385.1 393.8 401.0 416.5
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 266.2 283.1 297.5 286.8 290.4 293.9 297.5 301.3 305.1
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 774.3 809.1 845.6 825.9 835.8 841.1 845.6 860.1 867.0
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 641.4 675.7 706.1 683.2 689.3 695.5 706.1 715.1 722.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 38.4 37.1 36.5 37.0 37.0 36.7 36.5 36.5 36.5
Total 4,462.8 4,673.0 4,864.8 4,727.9 4,747.2 4,791.6 4,864.8 4,919.3 4,976.5
  Liabilities
Loans 1,523.9 1,537.9 1,548.4 1,534.3 1,539.9 1,548.0 1,548.4 1,548.9 1,554.8
short-term loans 72.8 71.5 66.4 69.1 68.8 68.7 66.4 67.2 67.7
long-term loans 1,451.0 1,466.4 1,482.0 1,465.2 1,471.2 1,479.4 1,482.0 1,481.6 1,487.1
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,053.4 1,072.2 1,091.7 1,073.7 1,079.4 1,087.9 1,091.7 1,092.6 1,098.4
Consumer loans 200.4 194.3 188.7 190.7 191.9 190.2 188.7 190.1 189.9
Entrepreneurial loans 270.1 271.4 268.0 269.8 268.6 270.0 268.0 266.2 266.5
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,432.5 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,443.6 1,448.8 1,456.4 1,458.4 1,457.4 1,463.5
Loans from other financial institutions 91.3 91.3 90.0 90.6 91.1 91.6 90.0 91.5 91.3
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 13.1 14.9 15.5 17.1 16.1 16.2 15.5 16.8 16.6
Total 1,536.9 1,552.8 1,563.9 1,551.4 1,556.0 1,564.3 1,563.9 1,565.7 1,571.4
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2008 − 0.5 − 14.7 − 1.5 + 9.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 74.5 − 38.0 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 14.4 − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2 − 104.8 − 82.2 − 20.4 − 6.2 + 3.9 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 23.3 − 27.1 − 13.0 + 1.4 + 15.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.6 − 14.7 − 5.7 + 4.7 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 p + 4.2 − 4.5 − 2.8 + 5.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
2012          H1  p + 9.4 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 4.2 + 11.8 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  p − 6.8 − 8.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 6.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
2013          H1  p + 7.8 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 6.2 + 3.9 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  p − 3.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          H1  pe + 17.4 + 4.3 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 7.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2008 1,660.2 1,010.8 539.1 125.6 1.5 64.9 39.5 21.1 4.9 0.1
2009 1,778.5 1,079.7 581.3 132.0 1.3 72.4 43.9 23.7 5.4 0.1
2010 p 2,067.4 1,318.4 628.0 137.4 1.3 80.3 51.2 24.4 5.3 0.1
2011 p 2,095.6 1,327.4 642.8 141.8 1.3 77.6 49.2 23.8 5.3 0.0
2012 p 2,173.6 1,372.3 671.5 145.6 1.2 79.0 49.9 24.4 5.3 0.0
2013 pe 2,159.5 1,376.1 652.5 148.2 1.3 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
2012          Q1 p 2,125.8 1,348.2 649.8 145.1 1.3 78.2 49.6 23.9 5.3 0.0
         Q2 p 2,172.0 1,377.1 669.1 144.4 1.3 79.6 50.5 24.5 5.3 0.0
         Q3 p 2,166.7 1,360.7 678.9 143.8 1.3 79.1 49.7 24.8 5.2 0.0
         Q4 p 2,173.6 1,372.3 671.5 145.6 1.2 79.0 49.9 24.4 5.3 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,162.1 1,372.5 663.3 147.0 1.2 78.6 49.9 24.1 5.3 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,162.6 1,380.3 653.1 146.7 1.1 78.1 49.8 23.6 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,143.9 1,365.8 646.1 147.4 1.1 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,159.5 1,376.1 652.5 148.2 1.3 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
2014          Q1 pe 2,147.4 1,373.0 642.4 147.5 1.2 75.6 48.3 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,154.7 1,381.4 640.2 148.3 1.1 75.4 48.3 22.4 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP
in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Including ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2008 1,111.8 585.9 412.4 113.4 1,112.3 592.5 189.1 68.5 51.4 210.8 − 0.5 1,003.1
2009 1,090.8 554.5 415.6 120.6 1,165.3 625.2 197.8 64.8 56.2 221.2 − 74.5 974.1
2010 1,110.4 556.2 426.2 128.1 2 1,215.3 634.7 203.5 63.3 58.9 2 254.8 2 − 104.8 986.5
2011 p 1,179.5 598.9 442.2 138.3 1,202.7 634.6 208.2 67.1 61.2 231.7 − 23.3 1,045.8
2012 p 1,217.8 624.1 454.3 139.5 1,215.2 645.6 212.7 63.2 62.1 231.7 + 2.6 1,082.9
2013 p 1,249.4 642.5 465.4 141.6 1,245.3 666.8 217.6 56.3 62.8 241.8 + 4.2 1,112.2
as a percentage of GDP
2008 43.5 22.9 16.1 4.4 43.5 23.2 7.4 2.7 2.0 8.2 − 0.0 39.2
2009 44.4 22.6 16.9 4.9 47.4 25.4 8.1 2.6 2.3 9.0 − 3.0 39.7
2010 43.1 21.6 16.5 5.0 2 47.2 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 2 9.9 2 − 4.1 38.3
2011 p 43.7 22.2 16.4 5.1 44.6 23.5 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.6 − 0.9 38.7
2012 p 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.2 23.5 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.4 + 0.1 39.4
2013 p 44.5 22.9 16.6 5.0 44.3 23.7 7.7 2.0 2.2 8.6 + 0.1 39.6
Percentage growth rates
2008 + 2.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 7.9 + 9.8 . + 2.8
2009 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.4 + 9.3 + 5.0 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.2 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.8 + 15.1 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 8.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 9.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.1 − 5.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.6 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.3 − 10.8 + 1.0 + 4.3 . + 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and ceived from the 2010 frequency auction, which are deducted from other expenditure
social contributions plus customs duties. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds re- in the national accounts. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2007 642.8 538.2 18.1 644.0 176.5 256.5 66.0 33.7 9.5 − 1.2 475.3 466.5 + 8.8 1,023.6 1,016.0 + 7.6
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.72009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 
p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 p 744.1 600.0 14.6 765.4 217.8 285.1 69.9 41.0 25.5 − 21.3 536.1 518.8 + 17.3 1,170.0 1,174.0 − 4.0
2013 p 761.6 619.7 14.7 771.0 224.3 286.6 66.2 42.4 23.8 − 9.4 537.4 531.7 + 5.7 1,198.5 1,202.2 − 3.7
2012          Q1 p 174.0 142.9 2.5 192.5 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 18.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.8 292.6 − 17.8
         Q2 p 190.4 150.4 2.7 179.8 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 10.6 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.2 281.5 + 14.7
         Q3 p 178.1 147.5 4.3 182.4 53.7 66.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 4.3 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.5 285.6 − 3.0
         Q4 p 199.1 159.4 4.9 209.3 58.7 73.4 6.8 14.2 14.8 − 10.2 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 313.3 313.4 − 0.1
2013          Q1 p 177.8 148.6 2.6 187.2 53.5 74.8 22.5 5.9 2.9 − 9.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.2 294.3 − 13.1
         Q2 p 193.5 155.3 4.8 184.2 54.4 68.6 14.2 8.4 8.0 + 9.3 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 301.7 291.9 + 9.9
         Q3 p 183.4 151.8 2.4 191.4 54.9 70.8 20.1 11.4 3.2 − 8.1 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.0 299.1 − 9.1
         Q4 p 204.4 164.2 4.6 206.4 60.5 70.9 9.9 15.4 8.3 − 2.0 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.6 315.1 + 6.5
2014          Q1 p 186.8 153.6 2.0 192.3 56.0 77.7 20.1 7.6 2.3 − 5.5 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 294.6 303.4 − 8.8
         Q2 p 191.9 157.4 2.2 186.3 56.2 71.8 9.8 9.5 8.2 + 5.6 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 303.3 297.1 + 6.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2007 278.1 292.8 − 14.7 273.1 265.5 + 7.6 169.7 161.5 + 8.2
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.42009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 
p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 324.2 + 0.1 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.8 − 2.9 82.1 86.4 − 4.3 58.9 56.5 + 2.4
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.5 − 10.7 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 1.0 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 ... 135,699 75,711 55,194 4,794 ... ... 7,577
2013          Sep . 51,003 27,907 20,820 2,276 . . 2,251
2014          Sep . 53,444 30,194 21,981 1,269 . . 2,259
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,5172012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059         Q3 144,482 60,839 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783
2013          Sep 54,748 27,444 11,873 10,552 3,921 1,098 16,825 12,803 4,022 0 8,773 1,295 410 3,7452014          Sep 57,335 29,057 12,485 10,902 4,357 1,313 17,312 13,313 4,000 5 9,017 1,512 433 3,891
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2013: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2013: 22.3:77.7. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,377
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 ... ... ...
2013          Sep 3,538 1,295 1,611 520 616 532 180 481 . 694 377 223 . . .2014          Sep 3,560 1,251 1,690 559 838 562 170 385 . 838 459 215 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency
Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Total new borrowing
 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 399,900 21 382,670 945,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,600 102 408,934 982,4002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,790,284 4,440 425,700 70 284,374 1,075,7002013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 
p 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 262,550 1,109,900
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,765,630 4,440 398,100 91 347,999 1,015,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,779,703 4,440 409,900 92 317,771 1,047,500
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,771,856 4,440 429,400 92 277,624 1,060,300
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,790,284 4,440 425,700 70 284,374 1,075,700
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 p 1,801,947 4,440 430,200 20 259,087 1,108,200
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 p 1,806,017 4,440 424,900 23 283,254 1,093,400
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 p 1,794,367 4,440 423,700 28 270,699 1,095,500
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 p 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 262,550 1,109,900
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 1,809,142 4,440 437,500 21 235,781 1,131,400
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 1,821,390 4,440 439,300 16 249,334 1,128,300
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
T
reasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,396 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,179 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,765,630 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 647,077 2,134 302,494 91 109,759 4,440 2
         Q2 1,779,703 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,695 2,137 295,204 92 116,431 4,440 2
         Q3 1,771,856 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,513 1,893 286,106 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,790,284 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 287,836 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,947 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,193 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,806,017 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,105 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,794,367 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 279,657 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 p 1,809,142 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,238 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,821,390 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,290 16 110,859 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
State government
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 535,494 2,531 283,629 .... 153,643 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2 536,354 2,814 287,249 .... 143,830 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 p 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 p 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 p 540,545 261 309,346 .... 132,432 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 p 542,959 1,098 314,024 .... 128,920 5 98,913 . 1
Local government11
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 375 . 121,695 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 381 . 128,331 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q1 136,308 . − . . 381 . 130,957 40 4,930 . .
         Q2 135,898 . − . . 381 . 130,547 40 4,930 . .
         Q3 135,205 . − . . 381 . 129,854 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 136,430 . − . . 423 . 132,960 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,976 . − . . 423 . 134,505 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 p 136,506 . − . . 523 . 132,935 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 p 137,227 . − . . 523 . 133,656 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 p 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,712 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 p 139,643 . − . . 1,046 . 135,256 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 p 139,977 . − . . 1,046 . 135,590 11 3,330 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2012   2013   2014
  2011   2012   2013   2011   2012   2013   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 105.8 107.3 107.5 5.8 1.4 0.2 0.1 − 3.5 0.9 1.1 2.5 3.3 − 0.3
Construction 104.0 104.1 103.8 4.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 6.9 − 0.4 1.8 2.7 11.6 1.3
Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.0 101.6 101.6 4.0 − 2.3 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.5 0.3 1.3 0.8 2.9 1.2
Information and communication 111.0 116.8 118.2 11.0 5.3 1.2 4.6 1.1 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.8 1.5Financial and insuranceactivities 100.8 102.8 101.3 0.8 2.0 − 1.5 2.3 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 2.0 0.1 − 0.1
Real estate activities 103.4 101.3 101.9 3.4 − 2.0 0.5 − 2.2 0.7 0.3 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.2
Business services 
1 102.2 102.8 103.8 2.2 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.9 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.8 1.6
Public services, education andhealth 101.1 102.2 102.1 1.1 1.0 − 0.1 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.7Other services 100.7 100.7 99.1 0.7 0.1 − 1.6 0.3 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 0.8 − 0.5
Gross value added 103.6 104.0 104.1 3.6 0.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.7 0.3 0.7 1.2 2.5 0.7Gross domestic product 
2 103.6 104.0 104.1 3.6 0.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.5 0.8
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 102.3 103.0 103.8 2.3 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 0.4 1.0 2.0 0.7 1.0 1.0
Government consumption 100.7 101.9 102.7 0.7 1.2 0.7 1.0 1.1 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.8 1.0
Machinery and equipment 105.8 102.8 100.0 5.8 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 4.0 − 9.8 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 6.9 2.1Premises 108.4 109.1 109.0 8.4 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 6.7 0.7 2.6 2.2 12.7 0.7Other investment 
4 106.8 106.9 108.2 6.8 0.1 1.3 0.0 2.0 1.3 0.7 1.1 1.6 1.7
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.1 − 1.4 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.3
Domestic demand 103.0 102.1 102.7 3.0 − 0.9 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.4 0.9 2.3 1.0 2.5 1.4Net exports 
6 . . . 0.7 1.3 − 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 0.0 0.2 − 0.5
Exports 108.0 111.1 112.8 8.0 2.8 1.6 0.1 − 1.5 1.9 1.6 4.3 4.3 2.5Imports 107.2 107.1 110.5 7.2 − 0.0 3.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 3.1 5.2 4.9 4.4 4.1
Gross domestic product 
2 103.6 104.0 104.1 3.6 0.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.5 0.8
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,506.8 1,539.5 1,571.5 4.2 2.2 2.1 1.8 0.8 2.4 3.3 1.8 2.2 2.1
Government consumption 505.7 521.3 541.2 2.4 3.1 3.8 3.2 4.2 3.3 4.6 3.2 3.9 4.0
Machinery and equipment 184.5 180.6 176.1 6.2 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 3.1 − 9.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 7.2 2.6
Premises 264.7 273.9 279.2 11.6 3.4 1.9 1.3 − 4.9 2.7 4.6 4.2 14.6 2.1
Other investment 4 93.6 95.6 98.8 8.3 2.1 3.3 1.8 4.1 3.2 2.7 3.3 3.8 3.8
Changes in inventories 5 13.3 − 22.7 − 20.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,568.7 2,588.2 2,646.2 5.2 0.8 2.2 0.9 0.3 2.6 3.7 2.3 4.0 2.7Net exports 130.4 161.7 163.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,209.4 1,262.9 1,280.1 11.0 4.4 1.4 1.7 − 1.2 1.9 1.0 3.8 3.9 2.0Imports 1,078.9 1,101.1 1,116.9 12.8 2.1 1.4 0.4 − 1.3 1.3 3.1 2.6 2.5 2.2
Gross domestic product 
2 2,699.1 2,749.9 2,809.5 4.8 1.9 2.2 1.4 0.3 2.8 2.7 2.9 4.5 2.6
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 101.9 103.4 104.7 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.5 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1
Gross domestic product 101.1 102.7 104.8 1.1 1.5 2.1 1.7 2.1 2.3 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.8
Terms of trade 97.6 97.1 98.5 − 2.4 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.1 1.0 1.8 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,338.7 1,389.7 1,428.3 4.3 3.8 2.8 3.8 2.9 2.6 2.8 2.8 3.8 3.6
Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 688.7 665.7 671.6 7.7 − 3.3 0.9 − 6.9 − 5.5 4.7 1.3 4.5 7.0 − 1.2
National income 2,027.3 2,055.3 2,099.9 5.4 1.4 2.2 0.6 − 0.1 3.2 2.3 3.3 4.9 2.1
Memo item: Gross nationalincome 2,768.5 2,822.2 2,881.9 5.3 1.9 2.1 1.4 0.2 3.0 2.3 2.8 4.3 2.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2014. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy 3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2010 99.5 99.2 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.5 99.3 99.3 99.2
2011 106.7 107.0 95.7 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.62012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.82013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.7 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
 
2013          Q3 107.3 117.4 91.1 108.0 106.0 112.9 98.8 101.3 109.4 106.1 112.2 114.0
         Q4 111.0 119.3 99.7 111.2 103.6 121.0 102.8 105.8 109.2 108.3 123.1 116.8
2014          Q1 105.1 87.5 99.0 108.4 106.6 113.4 102.3 100.4 111.5 106.6 107.7 123.1
         Q2 107.2 109.3 85.7 109.6 107.3 115.8 98.1 100.4 112.8 106.7 112.2 122.5
         Q3 x 107.6 116.0 85.3 109.3 106.7 114.9 96.1 103.3 111.3 110.5 115.1 114.6
 
2013          Sep 112.6 119.3 92.8 114.2 108.8 122.7 114.2 104.4 114.9 111.3 120.7 128.1
         Oct 112.3 120.0 99.1 112.9 110.9 116.9 107.1 108.2 115.5 110.4 112.9 120.3
         Nov 116.1 121.2 99.4 117.6 110.1 128.1 111.7 109.1 117.5 115.5 122.9 134.1
         Dec 104.5 116.8 100.6 103.2 89.7 117.9 89.7 100.1 94.6 99.1 133.6 96.1
2014          Jan 98.1 73.2 103.9 100.8 101.6 101.4 93.5 98.7 105.3 98.3 96.9 108.2
         Feb 102.4 85.3 94.3 105.9 103.8 111.6 101.0 96.4 108.4 104.5 103.5 124.0
         Mar 5 114.9 5 104.1 98.9 118.6 114.5 127.2 112.4 106.1 120.9 117.1 122.8 137.2
         Apr 5 106.8 5 107.4 88.5 109.1 107.8 113.6 98.1 101.9 112.7 105.4 108.1 123.1
         May 5 105.1 5 106.4 85.5 107.4 105.6 113.2 94.7 98.4 110.5 103.7 108.9 120.9
         June 5 109.6 5 114.2 83.0 112.3 108.6 120.6 101.5 100.9 115.3 110.9 119.5 123.4
         July x,6 5 110.6 5 119.0 82.4 113.0 110.0 120.6 96.5 102.7 114.8 111.3 114.4 130.1
         Aug x,6 5 99.8 5 111.4 84.5 100.1 101.7 99.5 83.7 101.2 104.5 105.6 106.7 84.3
         Sep x,p 5 112.5 5 117.5 89.0 114.9 108.4 124.6 108.2 105.9 114.6 114.5 124.1 129.5
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.4 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.4 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 9.7 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
 
2013          Q3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.8
         Q4 +
2.9 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 4.4 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 8.1
2014          Q1 + 3.9 + 13.7 − 5.6 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 9.6
         Q2 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 4.8 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 1.6 − 1.4 + 5.7
         Q3 x + 0.3 − 1.2 − 6.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 0.6
 
2013          Sep + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 3.1
         Oct + 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.9
         Nov +
3.8 + 1.6 − 1.0 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 6.0 + 4.5 + 3.4 + 6.0 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 10.9
         Dec + 3.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 9.7
2014          Jan + 4.9 + 13.3 − 2.0 + 4.9 + 3.7 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 6.0 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 12.7
         Feb + 4.4 + 16.4 − 5.4 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 − 0.7 + 9.7
         Mar 5 + 2.7 5 + 11.9 − 9.3 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 7.1
         Apr 5 + 1.7 5 + 2.4 − 6.2 + 2.5 + 4.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.2 − 3.0 + 4.2
         May 5 + 1.5 5 − 0.5 − 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 9.3
         June 5 + 0.1 5 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 3.7
         July x,6 5 + 2.7 5 − 0.7 − 9.5 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 8.0 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 3.5 + 5.8 + 1.1 + 19.2
         Aug x,6 5 − 1.9 5 − 1.5 − 5.4 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 4.5 − 1.9 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 3.9 − 19.6
         Sep x,p 5 − 0.1 5 − 1.5 − 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 5.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 1.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, sector in the base year 2010. 5Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to to the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December Statistical Office (on average + 3%). 6Influenced by a change in holiday
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of es-
ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- timates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the Quarterly Survey in
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.5 − 5.5 105.3 + 1.9
2013 109.4
+ 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 2.0
2013          Sep 112.3 + 7.3 102.0 + 1.5 119.7 + 11.5 111.9 + 4.5 111.5 + 0.0 112.2 + 6.3
         Oct 111.2
+ 2.9 107.6 + 3.6 113.7 + 2.5 112.0 + 3.9 110.0 + 7.3 112.8 + 2.8
         Nov 114.6 + 6.9 106.0 + 2.7 120.8 + 9.3 112.8 + 8.5 107.6 + 9.9 114.6 + 8.0
         Dec 107.8 + 5.6 90.2 + 0.7 122.0 + 8.6 94.8 + 2.5 88.5 + 6.2 97.0 + 1.4
2014          Jan 111.4 + 6.3 108.0 + 2.8 113.7 + 8.4 112.6 + 10.6 100.8 + 1.9 116.7 + 13.6
         Feb 113.0 + 5.9 106.0 + 4.1 117.4 + 6.6 116.9 + 8.7 97.6 + 2.2 123.5 + 10.7
         Mar 120.4 + 0.5 113.7 − 1.4 126.0 + 1.3 113.3 + 3.5 113.1 + 1.7 113.4 + 4.1
         Apr 112.4 + 5.9 105.7 + 2.6 117.9 + 8.4 107.2 + 4.9 108.2 + 7.3 106.9 + 4.1
         May 110.5 + 5.0 103.1 + 0.2 116.3 + 8.2 106.4 + 5.2 99.6 + 1.1 108.7 + 6.6
         June 113.3 − 2.2 106.2 + 1.7 119.0 − 5.5 108.4 + 6.0 105.4 − 2.7 109.5 + 9.3
         July 115.4 + 6.0 106.2 + 1.8 122.2 + 9.4 113.7 + 1.9 97.3 − 1.8 119.4 + 2.9
         Aug 100.7 + 0.9 95.4 − 0.3 103.1 + 1.0 111.0 + 7.0 94.4 + 3.1 116.8 + 8.2
         Sep p 111.5 − 0.7 101.4 − 0.6 118.5 − 1.0 112.6 + 0.6 107.5 − 3.6 114.4 + 2.0
From the domestic market
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.5 + 2.0 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2013          Sep 106.0 + 3.6 100.9 + 0.0 111.2 + 7.3 105.1 + 2.1 113.6 − 1.0 102.1 + 3.4
         Oct 105.4
+ 2.1 103.6 + 0.9 107.2 + 3.7 105.5 + 1.0 117.3 + 4.6 101.4 − 0.4
         Nov 109.6 + 5.3 105.4 + 1.4 114.6 + 9.0 104.5 + 5.9 108.7 + 4.9 103.0 + 6.2
         Dec 94.0 + 1.6 87.9 + 1.7 101.7 + 1.3 84.5 + 3.3 81.4 + 1.2 85.6 + 4.0
2014          Jan 106.2 + 3.3 106.2 + 1.2 106.5 + 5.0 104.9 + 6.3 102.6 − 1.8 105.7 + 9.3
         Feb 107.0 + 3.3 104.2 + 2.8 109.4 + 3.8 109.7 + 3.6 99.9 − 1.9 113.1 + 5.3
         Mar 116.8 + 1.1 109.3 − 3.4 125.3 + 5.0 111.0 + 4.2 113.8 − 0.4 110.0 + 6.1
         Apr 107.7 + 5.0 104.3 + 2.7 112.3 + 7.3 100.0 + 4.7 107.5 + 5.1 97.4 + 4.6
         May 104.7 + 4.6 102.8 + 1.6 107.8 + 8.1 96.9 + 1.8 96.8 + 1.3 96.9 + 1.9
         June 105.7 − 0.8 102.9 + 0.4 109.4 − 2.5 100.3 + 3.5 107.1 + 4.0 97.9 + 3.4
         July 108.0 + 1.3 103.8 − 0.3 112.3 + 2.6 107.9 + 3.0 100.3 + 1.3 110.6 + 3.6
         Aug 98.7 − 1.4 95.4 − 1.1 101.2 − 2.3 103.8 + 2.4 95.7 + 3.1 106.7 + 2.2
         Sep p 101.9 − 3.9 96.7 − 4.2 106.6 − 4.1 104.7 − 0.4 110.1 − 3.1 102.8 + 0.7
From abroad
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.5 + 29.7 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.6 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.7 − 0.5 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.8 100.9 + 3.7 114.1 + 2.5
2013          Sep 117.5 + 10.1 103.4 + 3.4 124.9 + 13.8 117.8 + 6.4 109.6 + 0.9 120.7 + 8.3
         Oct 116.0 + 3.6 112.4 + 6.6 117.7 + 1.8 117.6 + 6.2 103.6 + 10.1 122.5 + 5.2
         Nov 118.6 + 8.0 106.8 + 4.4 124.7 + 9.5 119.9 + 10.5 106.6 + 14.7 124.4 + 9.2
         Dec 119.0 + 8.3 93.0 − 0.4 134.5 + 12.5 103.6 + 2.0 94.6 + 10.3 106.7 − 0.3
2014          Jan 115.7 + 8.7 110.1 + 4.5 118.2 + 10.4 119.2 + 14.2 99.2 + 5.4 126.0 + 16.9
         Feb 117.8 + 7.8 108.1 + 5.7 122.3 + 8.2 123.0 + 13.1 95.6 + 6.1 132.4 + 14.9
         Mar 123.3 + 0.0 118.9 + 0.8 126.5 − 0.8 115.3 + 2.9 112.5 + 3.7 116.2 + 2.6
         Apr 116.3
+ 6.7 107.3 + 2.5 121.4 + 9.0 113.4 + 5.0 108.9 + 9.4 114.9 + 3.6
         May 115.2 + 5.3 103.4 − 1.3 121.6 + 8.3 114.5 + 7.9 102.1 + 1.1 118.8 + 10.1
         June 119.5 − 3.3 110.0 + 3.1 125.0 − 7.0 115.4 + 8.0 104.0 − 8.0 119.4 + 13.9
         July 121.5 + 9.8 109.1 + 4.3 128.3 + 13.4 118.6 + 0.9 94.6 − 4.5 126.8 + 2.4
         Aug 102.3 + 2.8 95.5 + 0.7 104.2 + 3.0 117.1 + 10.8 93.3 + 3.0 125.3 + 13.0
         Sep p 119.3 + 1.5 106.9 + 3.4 125.8 + 0.7 119.4 + 1.4 105.3 − 3.9 124.2 + 2.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.3 − 5.3 94.2 − 12.2 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.2 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.4 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.9 + 13.2 96.0 − 3.8
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.5 − 0.3 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.0 103.2 + 7.5
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.4 + 4.1 140.7 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.4 111.7 + 3.8 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.3
 
2013          Aug 123.8 − 1.2 124.1 − 11.7 144.8 + 5.9 121.1 − 19.3 92.4 − 23.3 123.4 + 12.3 119.3 − 10.8 119.9 + 7.1
         Sep 125.9 + 4.8 135.7 + 4.8 152.8 + 10.0 132.8 + 1.2 110.8 + 4.4 116.1 + 5.0 130.5 + 2.9 110.5 + 4.6
         Oct 117.5 − 11.1 128.6 − 2.4 141.4 + 3.9 134.6 − 2.2 85.6 − 19.1 106.5 − 19.7 125.3 − 9.3 100.0 − 19.7
         Nov 106.6 + 16.6 119.6 + 18.4 122.9 + 0.8 132.4 + 34.1 75.0 + 12.4 93.6 + 14.4 123.1 + 30.8 83.2 + 8.9         Dec 106.2 + 13.7 120.0 + 11.0 136.8 + 11.7 121.3 + 6.9 82.9 + 29.9 92.5 + 17.5 113.6 + 8.0 86.5 + 24.3
2014          Jan 93.0 + 13.3 106.5 + 17.9 112.9 + 10.8 113.3 + 22.5 73.7 + 20.8 79.6 + 7.7 110.7 + 28.0 67.0 − 3.9
         Feb 102.3 + 4.2 112.9 + 12.0 134.0 + 23.6 114.3 + 9.6 67.0 − 11.4 91.7 − 4.2 106.4 + 2.0 85.3 − 3.0         Mar 138.8 + 5.9 146.5 + 9.9 165.1 + 9.0 148.0 + 12.6 105.2 + 1.7 131.2 + 1.9 141.2 + 8.7 125.9 + 1.5
         Apr 134.0 + 8.5 133.3 + 2.5 170.1 + 17.2 121.6 − 3.0 95.9 − 16.1 134.7 + 15.1 125.4 + 6.5 128.3 + 6.3
         May 127.7 + 1.8 130.9 − 3.3 157.1 + 10.5 122.9 − 12.5 103.0 − 3.5 124.5 + 7.6 120.3 − 5.4 123.5 + 5.6         June 132.1 − 9.5 140.0 − 11.2 163.0 − 10.4 133.2 − 15.8 114.8 + 6.3 124.3 − 7.4 131.8 − 12.9 120.1 − 4.6
         July 136.5 − 4.1 139.8 − 1.5 144.0 − 8.9 147.2 + 3.4 109.5 + 0.6 133.2 − 6.9 139.5 + 4.8 130.4 − 10.5
         Aug 121.5 − 1.9 122.5 − 1.3 127.0 − 12.3 130.7 + 7.9 89.4 − 3.2 120.4 − 2.4 124.9 + 4.7 115.8 − 3.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail tradeclothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 
2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles  3  (R)
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 100.1 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.2 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 4 106.3 + 1.7 101.3 + 0.4 109.1 + 3.7 103.4 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
 
2013          Sep 104.6 + 1.2 99.6 + 0.3 103.5 + 1.2 115.0 + 1.7 93.6 + 0.3 101.9 − 1.7 101.5 + 5.8 105.2 − 0.6
         Oct 109.5 + 0.9 103.9 + 0.0 110.8 + 3.6 117.9 − 0.3 96.3 − 2.6 109.0 − 2.7 106.2 + 4.1 115.6 + 2.7
         Nov 112.1
+ 2.6 106.5 + 1.6 112.2 + 5.0 110.9 + 6.8 106.1 − 2.1 110.2 − 1.5 106.2 + 2.8 112.3 + 2.9
         Dec 122.7 + 1.2 117.1 + 0.3 124.3 + 1.7 120.2 − 1.6 141.1 − 4.5 103.4 − 3.0 116.3 + 7.5 97.7 + 4.02014          Jan 99.3 + 2.1 94.8 + 1.0 101.4 + 1.8 89.6 + 3.5 98.8 − 2.1 88.0 − 1.1 104.8 + 5.1 91.9 + 8.5
         Feb 96.1 + 3.2 91.4 + 2.4 100.6 + 2.8 81.6 + 6.8 82.6 − 3.1 90.4 + 2.5 102.3 + 6.7 96.1 + 6.4
         Mar 111.1 + 2.8 104.8 + 1.8 115.7 + 3.5 109.2 + 11.1 86.2 − 9.9 111.6 + 3.3 108.9 + 3.7 119.4 + 5.1         Apr 108.5 + 1.6 102.4 + 1.0 113.6 + 4.8 104.2 − 5.1 82.9 − 2.6 108.5 + 0.3 109.3 + 7.7 113.7 + 2.3
         May 107.6 +
 0.0 101.8 − 0.2 111.6 + 1.2 106.1 + 1.9 84.1 + 1.3 104.3 − 3.2 106.4 + 5.6 110.6 + 0.7
         June 107.1
+ 2.7 101.4 + 2.4 113.8 + 3.4 101.4 + 0.5 83.2 − 1.3 100.0 − 1.2 108.9 + 10.1 111.9 + 1.9
         July 107.8 + 1.4 102.5 + 1.1 112.2 + 0.4 102.6 − 0.3 89.9 + 5.3 100.3 − 2.7 113.8 + 7.2 109.4 + 3.1         Aug 106.0 + 2.6 100.9 + 2.0 108.9 + 0.8 105.6 + 8.3 84.6 − 3.3 100.2 + 2.1 106.3 + 7.4 101.0 + 3.5         Sep 104.5 − 0.1 98.9 − 0.7 106.2 + 2.6 105.7 − 8.1 90.8 − 3.0 99.5 − 2.4 106.4 + 4.8 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, previously based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2013 are provi-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In sional, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to es-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from timates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3,4 Short time workers 5 Unemployment 6 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 6,8 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 6,7 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2009 40,892 + 0.1 27,729 − 0.1 8,513 18,450 545 5,043 1,144 1,078 9 3,415 9 1,190 9 8.1 301
2010 41,020 + 0.3 28,008 + 1.0 8,421 18,693 675 5,025 503 429 3,239 1,076 7.7 359
2011 41,571 + 1.3 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 42,033 + 1.1 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 42,281 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2011          Q3 41,778 + 1.3 28,806 + 2.4 8,633 19,108 832 5,033 76 64 2,894 843 6.9 497
         Q4 41,991 + 1.3 29,228 + 2.6 8,729 19,444 827 5,000 102 72 2,744 788 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,564 + 1.3 28,967 + 2.7 8,630 19,367 758 4,943 201 82 3,075 999 7.3 472
         Q2 41,948 + 1.1 29,223 + 2.5 8,706 19,510 771 4,983 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 42,226 + 1.1 29,416 + 2.1 8,776 19,604 798 5,006 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 42,394 + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,834 + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 42,198 + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459         Q3 42,482 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471         Q4 42,611 + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1
r 42,141 r + 0.7 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 r 42,587 r + 0.9 10 30,081 10 + 1.7 10 8,828 10 20,254 10 753 10 5,030 ... 10 56 2,886 900 11 6.6 487
         Q3 12 42,866 12 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,860 909 6.6 512
2011          June 41,639 + 1.4 28,644 + 2.4 8,578 19,016 816 5,066 110 96 2,894 805 6.9 480
         July 41,628 + 1.3 28,601 + 2.4 8,587 18,958 826 5,067 81 68 2,940 860 7.0 492         Aug 41,764 + 1.4 28,886 + 2.4 8,654 19,160 840 5,009 71 59 2,946 868 7.0 497         Sep 41,943 + 1.3 29,217 + 2.5 8,739 19,397 841 4,981 76 65 2,796 803 6.6 502         Oct 42,017 + 1.3 29,274 + 2.6 8,746 19,456 837 4,981 81 70 2,738 779 6.5 500         Nov 42,069 + 1.3 29,278 + 2.6 8,744 19,476 832 5,017 85 76 2,714 770 6.4 492         Dec 41,888 + 1.3 29,046 + 2.7 8,656 19,402 782 5,021 140 72 2,781 814 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,538 + 1.4 28,916 + 2.9 8,620 19,330 755 4,944 206 82 3,085 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,513 + 1.3 28,922 + 2.7 8,610 19,352 749 4,909 230 87 3,110 1,029 7.4 473         Mar 41,640 + 1.2 29,082 + 2.7 8,663 19,437 756 4,935 167 78 3,028 956 7.2 491         Apr 41,802 + 1.1 29,199 + 2.6 8,698 19,505 763 4,964 83 71 2,964 893 7.0 499         May 41,973 + 1.1 29,289 + 2.4 8,724 19,548 778 5,002 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 42,069 + 1.0 29,280 + 2.2 8,733 19,519 790 5,032 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 42,103 + 1.1 29,255 + 2.3 8,737 19,478 804 5,038 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 42,208 + 1.1 29,477 + 2.0 8,793 19,645 801 4,986 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 42,367 + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,463 + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,483 + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 42,237 + 0.8 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,808 + 0.7 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb 41,809 + 0.7 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448         Mar 41,885 + 0.6 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463         Apr 42,044 + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460         May 42,230 + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457         June 42,321 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459         July 42,375 + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,460 + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,611 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,680 + 0.5 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,690 + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,463 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 
r 42,071 r + 0.6 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb r 42,109 r + 0.7 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456
         Mar r 42,244 r + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476
         Apr r 42,447 r + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485
         May r 42,598 r + 0.9 10 30,127 10 + 1.7 10 8,833 10 20,294 10 751 10 5,033 ... 10 57 2,882 893 11 6.6 481
         June r 42,716 r + 0.9 10 30,181 10 + 1.9 10 8,853 10 20,300 10 780 10 5,062 ... 10 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July r 42,769 r + 0.9 10 30,131 10 + 1.8 10 8,859 10 20,228 10 800 10 5,084 ... 10 41 2,871 909 6.6 502
         Aug r 42,837 r + 0.9 10 30,323 10 + 1.6 10 8,906 10 20,368 10 803 10 5,012 ... 10 29 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep 12 42,992 12 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,733 836 6.3 517
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 9From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- private employment agencies. 10Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Em-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: ployment Agency. In 2012 and 2013, the estimated values for Germany deviated
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal from the final data by a maximum of 0.4 % for employees subject to social contribu-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Including number of cases tions, by a maximum of 0.9 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contribu-
in the category "Not specified/classified". 5Number within a given tions, and by a maximum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 11From
month. 6Mid-month level. 7Relative to the total civilian labour force. 8Excluding May 2014, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 12Initial preliminary
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 
1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 99.1 98.5 88.1 97.0 93.4 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 r 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 r 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 r 120.8 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
 
2012          Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 107.1 r 124.8 104.8 107.4 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 107.7 r 124.2 104.8 107.3 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 107.1 107.5 r 124.6 104.7 107.6 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 r 124.2 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 r 124.8 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 r 124.5 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 r 122.2 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 r 119.4 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 r 119.2 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 r 120.9 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 r 121.4 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 r 122.4 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 r 122.5 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 p 119.6 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 p 119.5 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 p 120.5 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 p 121.2 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 p 118.9 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 p 117.8 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 p 114.0 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 p 111.7 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3
         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 p 108.8 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 ... ... ... ... 111.9 95.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.5 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 r + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 r + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 r + 1.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
 
2012          Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.4 r + 10.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan +
1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 r + 11.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.9 r + 8.9 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar +
1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 r + 6.2 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 r + 6.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 r + 8.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 r + 7.5 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 r + 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 r + 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 r − 0.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 r − 1.4 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 r − 2.5 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 r − 1.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 p − 3.7 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 p − 4.1 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 3.0 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 2.9 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 p − 4.5 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 p − 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 p − 4.5 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 p − 6.3 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 p − 10.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 ... ... ... ... − 14.0 + 0.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2006 938.1
1.5 630.7 0.5 358.9 − 0.5 989.6 0.2 1,514.0 2.6 151.6 2.3 10.0
2007 969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,540.7 1.8 157.1 3.6 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.4 0.6 1,029.2 2.4 1,579.0 2.5 165.1 5.1 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.5 7.0 1,056.1 2.6 1,564.2 − 0.9 155.7 − 5.7 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 388.0 1.2 1,090.1 3.2 1,605.1 2.6 159.4 2.4 9.9
2011 1,087.7 4.7 728.5 3.7 383.2 − 1.2 1,111.6 2.0 1,666.2 3.8 159.4 − 0.0 9.6
2012 1,131.7 4.0 756.4 3.8 389.4 1.6 1,145.7 3.1 1,699.1 2.0 159.6 0.2 9.4
2013 1,165.5 3.0 777.2 2.8 398.3 2.3 1,175.6 2.6 1,729.0 1.8 157.5 − 1.3 9.1
2013          Q1 271.0 3.1 181.2 2.9 101.5 2.6 282.7 2.8 427.8 0.2 53.3 − 3.9 12.4
         Q2 284.4 2.8 185.6 2.5 99.0 2.5 284.6 2.5 429.8 1.9 37.3 − 2.3 8.7
         Q3 288.1 3.1 196.4 3.1 99.9 2.3 296.3 2.8 436.6 3.1 34.3 1.2 7.9
         Q4 321.9 3.0 214.0 2.6 98.0 1.8 311.9 2.3 434.8 1.8 32.6 1.6 7.5
2014          Q1 281.6 3.9 187.6 3.5 103.9 2.4 291.5 3.1 437.8 2.3 55.1 3.5 12.6
         Q2 294.9 3.7 192.0 3.4 100.4 1.4 292.4 2.7 439.1 2.1 38.4 2.9 8.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2014. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2006 92.8 1.0 92.5 1.2 92.0 0.8 91.6 0.8 94.1 0.7
2007 93.9 1.2 93.7 1.4 93.4 1.5 93.0 1.4 95.3 1.42008 96.5 2.7 96.4 2.8 96.2 3.0 95.9 3.2 97.6 2.42009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.3 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.3 3.32012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.7 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.1 2.72013 107.0 2.4 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.1
2013          Q2 100.2 2.1 100.2 2.1 100.4 2.1 106.7 2.2 106.1 1.9
         Q3 109.0 2.3 109.1 2.3 109.4 2.4 107.9 2.4 106.8 2.2         Q4 119.7 2.4 119.8 2.5 120.1 2.5 108.1 2.4 118.5 2.2
2014          Q1 102.3 3.2 102.3 3.2 102.1 2.7 109.3 2.7 104.8 3.0
         Q2 103.6 3.3 103.5 3.3 103.8 3.3 110.3 3.4 108.9 2.6         Q3 112.1 2.8 112.1 2.8 112.5 2.8 111.0 2.9 . .
2014          Mar 102.2 3.0 102.1 3.0 102.5 3.1 109.7 3.0 . .
         Apr 103.5 3.0 103.5 3.0 103.7 3.1 109.8 3.1 . .
         May 104.0 3.4 104.0 3.4 104.2 3.3 110.5 3.5 . .
         June 103.2 3.6 103.1 3.6 103.4 3.6 110.7 3.6 . .
         July 129.6 2.9 129.6 2.8 130.0 2.9 110.9 3.0 . .
         Aug 103.4 2.7 103.3 2.7 103.7 2.7 111.0 2.8 . .
         Sep 103.4 2.8 103.4 2.7 103.7 2.7 111.1 2.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2014. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2010 1,748.4 1,077.5 334.5 459.6 213.2 670.9 169.5 170.2 132.6 514.7 1,233.7 657.9 354.8 575.8 147.1 151.4
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.2 176.8 161.1
2012 1,904.5 1,178.1 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.4 189.8 179.1 126.0 561.5 1,343.0 719.5 380.8 623.5 179.5 160.6
2013 1,938.3 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.2 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.2 726.3 383.0 635.9 191.5 166.8
2013          Q2 1,946.6 1,196.1 394.8 494.0 247.7 750.5 195.7 195.0 118.0 552.4 1,394.2 743.7 385.6 650.5 203.9 160.0
         Q3 1,933.1 1,197.6 392.6 495.6 250.5 735.4 196.3 183.9 130.3 566.5 1,366.6 730.5 375.6 636.1 200.7 161.5         Q4 1,938.3 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.2 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.2 726.3 383.0 635.9 191.5 166.8
2014          Q1
p 1,970.1 1,202.5 387.9 501.8 252.6 767.6 196.5 192.9 142.2 576.9 1,393.2 740.1 383.5 653.1 194.1 163.9
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 61.6 19.1 26.3 12.2 38.4 9.7 9.7 7.6 29.4 70.6 37.6 20.3 32.9 8.4 8.7
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2013          Q2 100.0 61.5 20.3 25.4 12.7 38.6 10.1 10.0 6.1 28.4 71.6 38.2 19.8 33.4 10.5 8.2
         Q3 100.0 62.0 20.3 25.6 13.0 38.1 10.2 9.5 6.7 29.3 70.7 37.8 19.4 32.9 10.4 8.4
         Q4 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014          Q1 p 100.0 61.0 19.7 25.5 12.8 39.0 10.0 9.8 7.2 29.3 70.7 37.6 19.5 33.2 9.9 8.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2010 1,383.0 814.2 213.9 355.8 189.5 568.8 152.2 135.1 105.4 400.6 982.4 515.3 258.3 467.1 125.4 108.1
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.72012 1,540.6 921.2 258.9 387.9 222.1 619.5 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.8 1,096.8 581.7 286.6 515.1 161.0 116.52013 1,559.5 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.3 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.6 118.6
2013          Q2 1,575.4 932.4 265.3 392.0 231.7 642.9 179.7 152.9 92.3 438.1 1,137.3 601.2 293.2 536.1 180.9 117.2
         Q3 1,565.4 936.1 263.3 395.1 234.4 629.3 180.7 143.1 104.2 450.4 1,114.9 593.6 287.8 521.3 174.7 118.1         Q4 1,559.5 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.3 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.6 118.6
2014          Q1
p 1,594.1 941.0 259.9 400.6 236.3 653.1 180.6 152.0 110.2 456.5 1,137.6 596.7 289.8 540.9 173.7 121.4
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 58.9 15.5 25.7 13.7 41.1 11.0 9.8 7.6 29.0 71.0 37.3 18.7 33.8 9.1 7.8
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2013          Q2 100.0 59.2 16.8 24.9 14.7 40.8 11.4 9.7 5.9 27.8 72.2 38.2 18.6 34.0 11.5 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 15.0 40.2 11.6 9.1 6.7 28.8 71.2 37.9 18.4 33.3 11.2 7.6
         Q4 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014          Q1 p 100.0 59.0 16.3 25.1 14.8 41.0 11.3 9.5 6.9 28.6 71.4 37.4 18.2 33.9 10.9 7.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2010 365.4 263.3 120.6 103.8 23.7 102.1 17.4 35.1 27.2 114.0 251.4 142.6 96.5 108.8 21.7 43.3
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.42012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.22013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.2
2013          Q2 371.2 263.7 129.5 102.0 16.0 107.5 16.0 42.1 25.7 114.3 256.9 142.5 92.4 114.4 23.0 42.9
         Q3 367.7 261.5 129.3 100.4 16.1 106.2 15.5 40.8 26.2 116.0 251.7 136.9 87.8 114.8 26.0 43.3         Q4 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.2
2014          Q1
p 376.0 261.5 128.0 101.2 16.4 114.6 16.0 40.8 32.0 120.4 255.6 143.4 93.8 112.3 20.3 42.5
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 72.1 33.0 28.4 6.5 27.9 4.8 9.6 7.4 31.2 68.8 39.0 26.4 29.8 5.9 11.9
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.2
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2013          Q2 100.0 71.0 34.9 27.5 4.3 29.0 4.3 11.4 6.9 30.8 69.2 38.4 24.9 30.8 6.2 11.6
         Q3 100.0 71.1 35.2 27.3 4.4 28.9 4.2 11.1 7.1 31.6 68.4 37.2 23.9 31.2 7.1 11.8
         Q4 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014          Q1 p 100.0 69.5 34.0 26.9 4.4 30.5 4.3 10.9 8.5 32.0 68.0 38.1 24.9 29.9 5.4 11.3
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2005 1,077.4 . 150.6 . 14.0 . 6.4 12.0 17.7 72.7 . 6.8 . 3.1 6.9 11.7
2006 1,209.4 10.6 155.0 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.5 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.0 4.4 173.8 15.0 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,339.1 13.2 184.7 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.3 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,444.8 8.4 180.1 − 0.3 12.5 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 96.9 − 5.4 6.7 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,550.7 6.6 192.6 1.4 12.4 − 0.6 5.2 10.1 17.5 98.1 − 7.1 6.3 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 11.0
2013 1,558.5 − 0.5 189.2 − 0.6 12.1 − 0.0 5.1 10.3 18.5 99.8 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.9
2011          Q3 357.2 6.9 43.6 − 2.9 12.2 − 1.3 5.4 11.3 17.9 24.1 2.7 6.7 − 0.3 2.5 7.3 12.7
         Q4 397.5 6.9 48.3 − 4.8 12.2 − 1.5 4.9 11.8 17.1 19.7 − 32.8 5.0 − 2.7 1.7 6.9 11.3
2012          Q1 379.9 9.0 47.6 − 0.3 12.5 − 1.2 3.9 9.2 16.4 29.0 − 3.8 7.6 − 1.0 0.2 5.0 11.0
         Q2 382.4 7.2 47.1 9.3 12.3 0.2 4.8 9.9 17.0 27.7 10.6 7.2 0.2 1.2 6.5 11.4
         Q3 383.3 7.1 48.7 − 3.7 12.7 − 1.3 4.8 10.3 17.2 17.8 − 49.8 4.6 − 3.9 1.7 6.3 11.9
         Q4 406.2 3.3 49.1 0.7 12.1 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 24.1 5.8 1.0 0.1 6.4 12.4
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.2 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 385.6 − 1.6 47.9 7.2 12.4 1.0 5.2 10.4 16.5 25.5 99.8 6.6 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.3 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.2 5.2 11.2 19.6 20.5 − 12.3 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 p 380.7 0.1 49.1 8.9 12.9 1.1 3.8 8.7 15.9 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.2 10.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2005 807.7 . 109.5 . 13.6 . 6.5 12.0 17.7 52.3 . 6.5 . 2.9 7.8 11.5
2006 898.7 9.8 114.9 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.7 12.2 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.42007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.8 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.1 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 998.3 15.7 139.0 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,192.9 7.6 144.1 2.9 12.1 − 0.5 5.2 10.2 15.9 84.2 2.9 7.1 − 0.3 1.8 6.2 9.82013 1,197.1 − 0.6 140.9 0.3 11.8 0.1 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.9 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 9.8
2011          Q3 271.9 8.8 31.5 − 3.9 11.6 − 1.6 5.4 11.2 15.7 16.9 0.1 6.2 − 0.6 2.2 7.4 11.4
         Q4 294.9 8.7 30.7 − 14.3 10.4 − 2.9 3.9 10.6 15.3 12.9 − 37.4 4.4 − 3.3 0.4 6.2 10.1
2012          Q1 297.1 10.6 38.9 2.7 13.1 − 1.0 4.8 9.7 15.5 25.8 − 0.9 8.7 − 1.0 0.8 5.8 11.0
         Q2 294.0 8.2 35.8 9.8 12.2 0.2 5.4 10.2 15.8 22.0 12.5 7.5 0.3 1.6 6.6 10.2         Q3 291.4 8.3 35.0 − 6.2 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.3 15.0 20.4 − 11.0 7.0 − 1.2 1.7 5.9 10.7         Q4 311.4 3.7 34.3 5.3 11.0 0.2 3.4 10.5 16.6 16.0 14.5 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 11.0
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.4 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 292.0 − 2.2 34.1 11.2 11.7 1.4 4.9 10.3 15.1 17.4 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.4 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.6 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.5 4.6 − 0.4 0.4 6.1 10.4
2014          Q1
p 297.3 0.2 38.1 6.5 12.8 0.8 3.3 8.8 14.3 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.2 5.5 9.3
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2005 269.7 . 41.0 . 15.2 . 6.3 12.0 17.7 20.4 . 7.6 . 3.1 5.3 12.1
2006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 44.2 9.3 13.3 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.7 8.7 13.4 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 345.9 1.5 48.2 7.6 13.9 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 22.0 − 0.8 6.4 − 0.1 3.2 6.5 13.82012 357.8 3.0 48.5 − 3.3 13.6 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.2
2011          Q3 85.3 0.9 12.1 − 0.2 14.2 − 0.2 5.5 12.0 22.6 7.2 9.3 8.4 0.7 3.3 7.1 15.2
         Q4 102.6 0.9 17.6 28.1 17.2 3.5 7.0 14.0 23.3 6.7 − 11.8 6.6 − 0.7 4.2 7.9 15.3
2012          Q1 82.8 3.1 8.7 − 13.4 10.6 − 1.9 2.9 7.7 20.3 3.2 − 27.2 3.8 − 1.3 − 0.7 4.0 11.9
         Q2 88.4 3.8 11.3 7.8 12.8 0.5 4.1 9.7 20.9 5.7 2.6 6.5 − 0.1 0.7 5.2 14.6         Q3 91.9 3.1 13.7 3.3 14.9 0.0 4.4 11.1 20.6 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5         Q4 94.8 1.9 14.8 − 10.1 15.6 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.6 55.9 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1
p 83.3 − 0.5 11.0 19.3 13.2 2.2 4.1 8.6 19.0 5.6 49.5 6.8 2.2 − 0.8 4.6 12.6
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item 2011
2012 2013 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug p
Current account + 12,059 + 133,091 + 227,810 + 87,712 + 31,629 + 56,353 + 24,844 + 32,830 + 15,086 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,792,948 1,921,514 1,936,218 496,397 482,542 489,317 164,170 174,905 144,475
Imports (fob) 1,792,075 1,832,463 1,770,911 448,305 445,626 438,387 145,494 153,841 136,679
Balance + 874 + 89,048 + 165,309 + 48,092 + 36,916 + 50,932 + 18,676 + 21,064 + 7,795
2 Services
Receipts 590,798 633,551 663,058 173,346 158,192 170,540 59,141 65,914 58,679
Expenditure 512,900 538,515 549,854 142,879 138,601 136,036 47,807 49,934 50,850
Balance + 77,897 + 95,037 + 113,202 + 30,467 + 19,592 + 34,504 + 11,334 + 15,980 + 7,829
3 Income + 39,571 + 56,262 + 69,847 + 23,555 + 17,645 + 67 + 6,356 + 3,692 + 6,753
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 95,827 98,623 99,800 34,667 28,279 19,717 7,131 5,311 4,829
Transfers to non-residents 202,112 205,881 220,347 49,070 70,802 48,870 18,655 13,218 12,120
Balance − 106,284 − 107,257 − 120,547 − 14,403 − 42,523 − 29,152 − 11,524 − 7,907 − 7,291
Capital account + 10,687 + 6,477 + 21,497 + 9,281 + 5,527 + 2,736 + 1,382 − 1,160 + 939 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 50,943 − 165,046 − 252,854 − 101,571 − 28,667 − 58,512 − 28,344 − 25,855 − 16,078 C)
1 Direct investment − 101,719 − 71,566 − 32,164 − 16,305 − 24,376 − 189 + 7,875 − 1,873 + 8,585
By resident units abroad − 500,864 − 410,125 − 360,726 − 188,432 + 8,675 − 32,040 − 1,516 − 3,409 − 11,594
By non-resident units in the euro area + 399,147 + 338,559 + 328,561 + 172,127 − 33,051 + 31,852 + 9,391 + 1,537 + 20,179
2 Portfolio investment + 238,594 + 95,440 + 110,264 + 58,989 + 65,631 − 9,825 + 18,363 − 12,363 − 27,775
By resident units abroad + 53,663 − 194,261 − 250,519 − 50,682 − 74,526 − 151,733 − 38,469 − 24,137 − 36,025
Equity + 66,257 − 57,983 − 163,667 − 39,626 − 23,475 − 58,363 − 4,683 − 9,766 − 7,358
Bonds and notes + 21,785 − 133,895 − 78,591 − 12,350 − 36,253 − 64,224 − 31,016 − 7,796 − 17,164
Money market instruments − 34,379 − 2,384 − 8,259 + 1,295 − 14,798 − 29,146 − 2,771 − 6,575 − 11,503
By non-resident units in the euro area + 184,930 + 289,703 + 360,782 + 109,671 + 140,157 + 141,908 + 56,832 + 11,774 + 8,250
Equity + 64,393 + 164,940 + 241,801 + 63,550 + 76,297 + 119,507 + 67,667 + 13,460 + 28,677
Bonds and notes + 165,290 + 128,769 + 77,846 + 87,619 + 72,383 + 43,168 − 19,995 − 643 − 22,857
Money market instruments − 44,752 − 4,009 + 41,136 − 41,498 − 8,522 − 20,768 + 9,159 − 1,043 + 2,429
3 Financial derivatives − 5,552 + 5,294 + 17,332 + 3,402 + 2,935 + 6,015 + 3,567 + 2,730 − 13,061
4 Other investment − 171,998 − 179,260 − 343,875 − 147,349 − 70,301 − 54,205 − 58,637 − 14,989 + 17,375
Eurosystem + 137,861 + 13,179 − 58,932 − 9,298 − 23,488 − 16,706 − 17,475 − 14,409 + 5,894
General government + 69,918 − 3,712 + 7,126 − 14,015 + 3,073 + 1,116 + 2,859 + 2,483 − 5,000
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 341,608 − 111,858 − 267,279 − 112,429 − 69,021 − 71,036 − 50,989 − 17,219 − 7,351
Long-term − 16,768 + 6,476 + 43,463 + 19,872 − 12,318 + 1,243 + 6,036 − 3,081 − 12,265
Short-term − 324,842 − 118,337 − 310,743 − 132,300 − 56,703 − 72,277 − 57,023 − 14,138 + 4,914
Other sectors − 38,172 − 76,872 − 24,794 − 11,609 + 19,136 + 32,421 + 6,969 + 14,156 + 23,833
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,266 − 14,957 − 4,409 − 308 − 2,556 − 308 + 488 + 641 − 1,203
Errors and omissions + 28,197 + 25,477 + 3,545 + 4,577 − 8,489 − 575 + 2,119 − 5,815 + 54 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments accordance with the 6th edition of this manual can be accessed via: 
Manual in the 5th edition of the International Monetary Fund. First selected figures in http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/external/balance/html/index.en.html 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
Goods
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total (fob/fob) 1 items 2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
1999 − 29,220 + 68,017 + 983 − 53,298 − 17,237 − 26,702 − 937 + 4,590 − 12,535 + 34,747
2000 − 36,958 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,346 − 12,747 − 29,927 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,6642001 − 7,907 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,151 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1122002 + 41,656 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,600 − 29,408 − 4,010 + 25,935 − 2,065 − 11,7102003 + 31,725 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,695 − 18,513 − 31,088 + 5,920 + 63,349 − 445 + 25,703
2004 + 102,057 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 17,657 − 30,018 − 119 + 127,106 − 1,470 + 25,167
2005 + 107,399 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 22,173 − 31,124 − 2,334 + 118,364 − 2,182 + 13,2992006 + 138,066 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 43,627 − 32,249 − 1,328 + 178,011 − 2,934 + 41,2732007 + 173,132 + 201,989 − 922 − 36,958 + 41,835 − 33,733 − 1,597 + 213,938 + 953 + 42,4022008 + 147,821 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 32,026 + 29,675 − 34,349 − 893 + 168,457 + 2,008 + 21,530
2009 + 143,173 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 21,430 + 58,365 − 34,930 − 1,858 + 136,851 − 3,200 − 4,464
2010 + 146,652 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 28,892 + 54,049 − 39,651 + 1,219 + 112,031 + 1,613 − 35,8392011 + 163,970 + 163,241 − 9,043 − 33,661 + 69,204 − 34,815 + 1,690 + 161,039 + 2,836 − 4,6212012 + 196,242 + 197,116 − 10,086 − 36,849 + 74,668 − 38,692 + 1,298 + 213,430 + 1,297 + 15,8902013 
r) + 189,242 + 207,795 − 4,513 − 47,957 + 72,747 − 43,343 + 2,013 + 245,803 + 838 + 54,548
2011          Q4 + 52,512 + 40,055 − 2,310 − 3,788 + 26,073 − 9,828 + 193 + 33,891 + 366 − 18,815
2012          Q1 + 46,888 + 49,318 − 1,708 − 7,914 + 19,435 − 13,951 − 259 + 33,717 + 963 − 12,912
         Q2 + 44,482 + 49,896 − 2,976 − 8,303 + 8,329 − 5,439 + 632 + 46,454 + 769 + 1,339         Q3 + 48,376 + 52,429 − 2,137 − 15,357 + 19,731 − 8,426 + 846 + 52,846 + 59 + 3,624         Q4 + 56,495 + 45,473 − 3,265 − 5,275 + 27,173 − 10,876 + 79 + 80,413 − 494 + 23,838
2013          Q1 
r) + 44,645 + 51,801 − 1,625 − 11,256 + 19,283 − 15,184 + 756 + 41,503 + 86 − 3,897
         Q2 r) + 46,362 + 55,556 + 2,842 − 11,658 + 9,905 − 7,441 + 847 + 67,186 + 72 + 19,977
         Q3 r) + 38,874 + 49,123 − 4,085 − 17,879 + 17,188 − 9,557 + 369 + 62,212 − 785 + 22,969
         Q4 r) + 59,361 + 51,314 − 1,644 − 7,164 + 26,371 − 11,160 + 41 + 74,901 + 1,464 + 15,499
2014          Q1 r) + 49,409 + 53,107 + 1,335 − 7,138 + 18,219 − 14,780 + 1,667 + 66,747 − 565 + 15,671
         Q2 r) + 46,305 + 55,401 − 727 − 8,732 + 6,556 − 6,919 + 624 + 64,175 − 610 + 17,245
         Q3 p) + 52,595 + 61,039 − 2,771 − 18,158 + 17,948 − 8,234 + 877 + 78,744 + 332 + 25,272
2012          Apr + 13,082 + 14,818 − 634 − 1,458 + 2,043 − 2,320 + 282 + 15,061 + 581 + 1,697
         May + 11,515 + 16,307 − 1,312 − 3,592 − 19 − 1,181 + 363 + 20,504 + 207 + 8,626         June + 19,886 + 18,772 − 1,029 − 3,253 + 6,305 − 1,938 − 13 + 10,889 − 19 − 8,983
         July + 17,010 + 17,659 − 752 − 4,906 + 6,453 − 2,197 − 35 + 1,700 − 48 − 15,274
         Aug + 13,749 + 17,085 − 793 − 6,509 + 6,508 − 3,335 + 610 + 19,153 + 389 + 4,795         Sep + 17,618 + 17,685 − 592 − 3,942 + 6,769 − 2,894 + 271 + 31,992 − 281 + 14,103
         Oct + 16,095 + 16,318 − 1,084 − 4,358 + 7,296 − 3,160 + 195 + 18,059 + 176 + 1,769
         Nov + 19,510 + 17,584 − 724 − 2,211 + 7,112 − 2,974 + 409 + 30,705 − 308 + 10,786         Dec + 20,890 + 11,571 − 1,458 + 1,295 + 12,766 − 4,742 − 525 + 31,649 − 361 + 11,284
2013          Jan  
r) + 10,906 + 14,545 − 520 − 4,058 + 5,837 − 5,419 + 50 − 9,365 + 493 − 20,321
         Feb  r) + 12,326 + 16,191 − 1,633 − 3,732 + 6,623 − 6,756 + 92 + 16,620 − 321 + 4,202
         Mar  r) + 21,413 + 21,065 + 528 − 3,466 + 6,823 − 3,010 + 614 + 34,249 − 86 + 12,223
         Apr  r) + 16,700 + 20,116 + 662 − 2,752 + 1,675 − 2,339 + 309 + 22,471 + 56 + 5,463
         May r) + 12,656 + 16,583 + 1,997 − 4,511 + 2,819 − 2,235 + 247 + 13,502 − 22 + 600
         June r) + 17,007 + 18,858 + 182 − 4,395 + 5,411 − 2,867 + 291 + 31,213 + 38 + 13,915
         July r) + 12,100 + 16,107 − 1,081 − 6,783 + 6,027 − 3,250 + 141 + 10,409 − 654 − 1,832
         Aug  r) + 7,785 + 12,624 − 1,786 − 7,130 + 5,851 − 3,560 + 121 + 30,077 + 425 + 22,172
         Sep  r) + 18,989 + 20,393 − 1,218 − 3,966 + 5,310 − 2,747 + 107 + 21,726 − 556 + 2,630
         Oct  r) + 16,992 + 19,347 − 170 − 6,140 + 6,427 − 2,643 + 479 + 19,684 − 212 + 2,213
         Nov  r) + 21,122 + 18,496 − 257 − 1,961 + 6,831 − 2,244 + 176 + 22,382 + 407 + 1,085
         Dec  r) + 21,248 + 13,471 − 1,217 + 937 + 13,112 − 6,273 − 614 + 32,834 + 1,269 + 12,200
2014          Jan  r) + 13,561 + 16,096 − 753 − 3,176 + 5,060 − 4,419 + 867 + 4,153 − 375 − 10,276
         Feb  r) + 14,228 + 17,456 + 128 − 2,289 + 6,199 − 7,137 + 455 + 24,451 − 898 + 9,768
         Mar  r) + 21,619 + 19,556 + 1,960 − 1,673 + 6,961 − 3,224 + 345 + 38,143 + 708 + 16,179
         Apr  r) + 16,892 + 18,513 − 121 − 2,034 + 3,789 − 3,375 + 145 + 30,524 + 151 + 13,487
         May r) + 12,242 + 18,199 − 1,519 − 2,647 − 2,010 − 1,301 + 41 + 17,190 − 631 + 4,907
         June r) + 17,171 + 18,688 + 913 − 4,051 + 4,777 − 2,243 + 439 + 16,461 − 130 − 1,149
         July r) + 19,812 + 23,184 − 1,648 − 5,912 + 5,591 − 3,051 + 11 + 17,008 + 431 − 2,815
         Aug  r) + 10,523 + 14,764 − 609 − 7,502 + 5,744 − 2,483 + 441 + 19,787 + 166 + 8,822
         Sep  p) + 22,260 + 23,090 − 514 − 4,744 + 6,614 − 2,701 + 424 + 41,949 − 265 + 19,265
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net acquisition/disposal of
transactions for the account of residents and the deduction of goods returned. non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from
Deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing; the difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3Including freight and current account and the capital account. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2014
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2014
Country / group of countries  2011
 2012  2013 r May r Jun r Jul r Aug r Sep p Jan / Aug r 
All countries 1 Exports 1,061,225 1,095,766 1,093,115 743,562 92,081 93,507 101,065 84,078 102,464
Imports 902,523 905,925 898,164 606,596 74,280 76,949 77,566 70,040 80,574Balance + 158,702 + 189,841 + 194,950 + 136,966 + 17,801 + 16,558 + 23,500 + 14,038 + 21,890
I Exports 752,295 751,071 748,156 508,190 62,616 64,373 67,040 56,346 ...European countries
Imports 622,870 629,305 633,706 431,526 53,322 55,089 54,715 47,724 ...Balance + 129,425 + 121,766 + 114,451 + 76,664 + 9,295 + 9,284 + 12,325 + 8,622 ...
Exports 629,953 622,674 623,472 431,835 53,142 54,772 56,918 47,664 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 506,211 504,494 513,463 352,025 43,367 45,696 44,967 38,834 ...
Balance + 123,742 + 118,180 + 110,009 + 79,810 + 9,775 + 9,076 + 11,950 + 8,830 ...
Euro-area (18) Exports 421,845 407,666 403,592 273,723 33,775 34,876 35,650 29,314 ...countries Imports 338,988 339,072 342,401 232,541 28,558 30,574 29,764 25,410 ...
Balance + 82,857 + 68,593 + 61,191 + 41,182 + 5,218 + 4,302 + 5,886 + 3,904 ...
of which
Austria Exports 57,671 56,591 56,276 37,075 4,535 4,625 4,863 4,235 ...
Imports 37,028 36,419 36,793 24,104 3,090 3,001 3,269 2,603 ...Balance + 20,643 + 20,172 + 19,484 + 12,970 + 1,445 + 1,624 + 1,594 + 1,631 ...
Belgium and Exports 53,161 49,424 47,980 31,517 3,893 4,000 3,878 3,610 ...Luxembourg Imports 41,302 40,528 42,033 28,526 3,527 3,700 3,602 3,482 ...
Balance + 11,859 + 8,896 + 5,947 + 2,991 + 366 + 300 + 275 + 127 ...
France Exports 101,444 102,911 99,980 67,366 8,184 8,793 9,157 6,635 ...
Imports 65,948 64,035 64,018 44,341 4,689 6,643 5,507 4,448 ...Balance + 35,496 + 38,875 + 35,962 + 23,025 + 3,495 + 2,150 + 3,651 + 2,187 ...
Italy Exports 62,044 55,529 53,247 36,067 4,586 4,731 4,905 3,316 ...
Imports 47,844 47,957 46,930 32,568 4,046 4,258 4,475 3,276 ...Balance + 14,200 + 7,572 + 6,317 + 3,499 + 540 + 473 + 430 + 40 ...
Netherlands Exports 69,423 70,381 70,970 48,424 5,771 5,923 6,038 5,768 ...
Imports 81,804 85,738 88,680 58,542 7,448 7,133 7,182 6,838 ...Balance − 12,382 − 15,357 − 17,709 − 10,118 − 1,677 − 1,210 − 1,144 − 1,070 ...
Spain Exports 34,811 31,047 31,349 22,855 2,988 2,977 2,993 2,292 ...
Imports 22,491 23,206 23,639 16,499 2,119 2,289 2,192 1,521 ...Balance + 12,320 + 7,841 + 7,709 + 6,357 + 868 + 688 + 801 + 771 ...
Other EU member Exports 208,108 215,008 219,880 158,112 19,367 19,896 21,268 18,350 ...states Imports 167,223 165,421 171,062 119,484 14,810 15,122 15,204 13,425 ...
Balance + 40,885 + 49,587 + 48,818 + 38,628 + 4,557 + 4,774 + 6,064 + 4,925 ...
of which
United Exports 65,570 73,283 75,488 55,211 6,708 6,607 7,893 6,214 ...Kingdom Imports 44,741 42,820 42,513 28,316 3,601 3,479 3,334 3,324 ...
Balance + 20,829 + 30,462 + 32,975 + 26,895 + 3,107 + 3,128 + 4,559 + 2,890 ...
Exports 122,342 128,398 124,684 76,354 9,474 9,601 10,122 8,682 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,660 124,811 120,242 79,501 9,954 9,393 9,747 8,889 ... countries
Balance + 5,683 + 3,586 + 4,442 − 3,146 − 480 + 208 + 375 − 207 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 47,875 48,933 46,924 30,951 3,823 3,856 4,009 3,589 ...
Imports 36,996 37,775 38,321 27,127 3,418 3,314 3,764 2,889 ...
Balance + 10,879 + 11,158 + 8,603 + 3,825 + 405 + 542 + 245 + 700 ...
II Exports 308,193 340,980 341,213 232,912 29,131 28,825 33,704 27,296 ...Non-European
Imports 279,653 276,620 264,459 175,070 20,959 21,860 22,851 22,317 ... countries
Balance + 28,541 + 64,360 + 76,754 + 57,842 + 8,173 + 6,965 + 10,852 + 4,980 ...
Exports 20,717 21,920 21,803 14,723 1,922 1,947 2,017 1,667 ... 1 Africa
Imports 21,944 24,145 23,108 13,207 1,570 1,608 1,756 1,568 ...
Balance − 1,227 − 2,224 − 1,305 + 1,517 + 352 + 339 + 261 + 99 ...
Exports 110,424 128,703 130,427 87,783 10,843 10,574 12,549 10,275 ... 2 America
Imports 80,568 80,549 75,023 49,621 6,028 6,571 6,143 6,046 ...
Balance + 29,856 + 48,154 + 55,404 + 38,162 + 4,815 + 4,003 + 6,406 + 4,229 ...
of which
Exports 73,776 86,971 89,348 61,318 7,542 7,261 8,804 7,211 ... United States
Imports 48,531 51,070 48,582 32,950 3,977 4,260 3,863 4,127 ...Balance + 25,244 + 35,901 + 40,766 + 28,368 + 3,565 + 3,001 + 4,942 + 3,084 ...
Exports 167,574 179,630 179,038 124,064 15,625 15,458 18,224 14,590 ... 3 Asia
Imports 173,115 167,873 162,960 110,277 13,172 13,431 14,707 14,424 ...
Balance − 5,541 + 11,757 + 16,077 + 13,786 + 2,454 + 2,027 + 3,517 + 166 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,711 32,503 32,754 22,584 3,163 2,679 3,349 2,465 ...
Imports 8,874 8,134 8,921 5,061 715 484 682 595 ...Balance + 19,837 + 24,369 + 23,833 + 17,523 + 2,448 + 2,196 + 2,668 + 1,870 ...
Japan Exports 15,115 17,138 17,076 11,119 1,255 1,331 1,632 1,256 ...
Imports 23,595 21,910 19,492 12,744 1,560 1,550 1,718 1,466 ...Balance − 8,480 − 4,772 − 2,416 − 1,625 − 304 − 219 − 86 − 210 ...
Exports 64,863 66,746 66,912 48,740 6,200 6,281 7,141 5,736 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,528 78,529 74,544 50,335 5,885 6,383 6,721 6,765 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 14,665 − 11,783 − 7,633 − 1,595 + 315 − 102 + 420 − 1,029 ...Exports 41,569 45,651 45,894 31,426 3,817 3,927 4,619 3,847 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,546 37,428 36,672 25,483 3,129 3,038 3,327 3,266 ... in South-East Asia 
3 
Balance + 2,023 + 8,223 + 9,222 + 5,943 + 688 + 890 + 1,292 + 581 ...Exports 9,479 10,727 9,946 6,341 741 847 914 765 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,026 4,054 3,368 1,965 189 250 246 279 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,453 + 6,672 + 6,578 + 4,376 + 552 + 597 + 669 + 486 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Latvia. 1Including fuel and other supplies Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for
cations,
the use of Other Government computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment Manufacturing intellectual Compensation
Period Total services 1 Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 income of employees
2009 − 21,430 + 1,264 − 3,259 − 33,341 + 8,449 + 120 + 932 − 3,122 + 2,644 + 872 + 55,375
2010 − 28,892 + 1,070 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 7,347 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 + 50,8962011 − 33,661 + 567 − 8,615 − 33,755 + 6,833 + 2,407 + 817 − 6,871 + 2,939 + 1,787 + 66,3362012 − 36,849 + 178 − 10,201 − 33,566 + 6,806 + 2,753 + 1,356 − 10,017 + 3,117 + 2,594 + 71,1212013 − 47,957 + 84 − 12,241 − 37,764 + 5,794 + 3,379 − 929 − 6,711 + 3,084 + 354 + 71,199
2013          Q1 − 11,256 − 32 − 3,209 − 5,687 + 920 + 650 − 1,771 − 2,136 + 795 + 618 + 19,611
         Q2 − 11,658 − 6 − 2,807 − 8,187 + 932 + 638 − 473 − 1,971 + 807 − 141 + 10,921         Q3 − 17,879 − 38 − 2,608 − 16,868 + 2,094 + 794 + 256 − 1,351 + 760 − 474 + 18,583         Q4 − 7,164 + 160 − 3,618 − 7,022 + 1,848 + 1,297 + 1,059 − 1,252 + 722 + 351 + 22,083
2014          Q1 − 7,138 + 170 − 3,670 − 4,893 + 791 + 1,049 + 152 − 580 + 754 + 605 + 18,614
         Q2 − 8,732 + 64 − 3,223 − 8,519 + 1,447 + 947 + 560 − 374 + 779 − 179 + 7,583         Q3 − 18,158 − 63 − 3,141 − 17,408 + 2,221 + 871 + 203 − 1,083 + 759 − 520 + 19,465
2013          Nov − 1,961 + 122 − 1,338 − 1,778 + 531 + 520 + 27 − 81 + 265 + 116 + 7,099
         Dec + 937 − 6 − 991 − 738 + 1,010 + 453 + 1,000 + 11 + 198 + 134 + 8,275
2014          Jan − 3,176 + 18 − 1,305 − 1,483 + 211 + 276 − 122 − 510 + 259 + 199 + 5,198
         Feb − 2,289 + 40 − 1,185 − 1,181 + 94 + 426 − 139 − 382 + 241 + 202 + 6,301         Mar − 1,673 + 112 − 1,180 − 2,229 + 486 + 347 + 413 + 312 + 254 + 204 + 7,115
         Apr − 2,034 + 4 − 1,178 − 1,760 + 522 + 397 − 49 − 192 + 288 − 56 + 4,101
         May − 2,647 + 21 − 1,029 − 2,407 + 612 + 451 − 82 − 519 + 239 − 46 − 1,708         June − 4,051 + 38 − 1,016 − 4,352 + 314 + 100 + 691 + 337 + 252 − 76 + 5,190
         July − 5,912 − 53 − 1,134 − 4,895 + 839 + 334 − 341 − 658 + 236 − 183 + 6,020
         Aug − 7,502 + 2 − 975 − 7,207 + 712 + 314 + 95 − 495 + 255 − 164 + 6,260         Sep  
p) − 4,744 − 11 − 1,032 − 5,306 + 671 + 224 + 450 + 70 + 268 − 174 + 7,185
1Includes fees for processing goods that are not owned by the processor. 2Since side. 3Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not
2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2009 − 34,930 − 20,922 − 3,944 + 4,329 − 14,008 − 2,995 − 2,995 − 1,858 + 34 − 1,891
2010 − 39,651 − 24,935 − 4,702 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,0852011 − 34,815 − 21,264 − 4,436 + 6,715 − 13,551 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,690 + 1,137 + 5532012 − 38,692 − 24,792 − 4,570 + 5,270 − 13,900 − 3,080 − 3,080 + 1,298 + 1,366 − 682013 − 43,343 − 28,978 − 4,332 + 6,825 − 14,365 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 2,013 + 2,339 − 327
2013          Q1 − 15,184 − 11,866 − 1,630 + 1,038 − 3,318 − 807 − 807 + 756 + 545 + 211
         Q2 − 7,441 − 3,937 − 871 + 3,588 − 3,504 − 807 − 807 + 847 + 661 + 185         Q3 − 9,557 − 6,211 − 825 + 1,164 − 3,347 − 820 − 807 + 369 + 666 − 298         Q4 − 11,160 − 6,965 − 1,006 + 1,035 − 4,196 − 815 − 807 + 41 + 466 − 426
2014          Q1 − 14,780 − 11,917 − 1,577 + 1,308 − 2,863 − 870 − 863 + 1,667 + 367 + 1,300
         Q2 − 6,919 − 2,853 − 732 + 5,014 − 4,066 − 869 − 863 + 624 + 889 − 265         Q3 − 8,234 − 4,660 − 1,052 + 943 − 3,575 − 870 − 863 + 877 + 771 + 105
2013          Nov − 2,244 − 1,424 − 156 + 99 − 820 − 271 − 269 + 176 + 218 − 42
         Dec − 6,273 − 3,919 − 619 + 718 − 2,354 − 271 − 269 − 614 + 23 − 637
2014          Jan − 4,419 − 3,442 − 1,112 + 591 − 977 − 291 − 288 + 867 + 26 + 841
         Feb − 7,137 − 6,254 − 335 + 305 − 883 − 290 − 288 + 455 + 185 + 270         Mar − 3,224 − 2,221 − 130 + 413 − 1,004 − 290 − 288 + 345 + 156 + 189
         Apr − 3,375 − 1,757 − 242 + 936 − 1,619 − 289 − 288 + 145 + 125 + 19
         May − 1,301 − 75 − 318 + 2,665 − 1,226 − 290 − 288 + 41 + 451 − 410         June − 2,243 − 1,021 − 171 + 1,414 − 1,222 − 289 − 288 + 439 + 313 + 126
         July − 3,051 − 2,045 − 489 + 237 − 1,006 − 289 − 288 + 11 + 251 − 240
         Aug − 2,483 − 1,617 − 323 + 259 − 865 − 291 − 288 + 441 + 263 + 178         Sep  
p) − 2,701 − 997 − 240 + 447 − 1,703 − 290 − 288 + 424 + 257 + 167
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item
2011 2012 2013 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 p) July Aug Sep p)
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 263,085 + 388,492 + 38,789 − 36,639 + 92,513 + 109,572 + 74,930 + 25,034 + 17,722 + 32,174
1 Direct investment + 78,164 + 89,900 + 61,568 + 1,130 + 27,095 + 23,151 + 19,325 + 3,083 + 4,907 + 11,336
Equity + 63,213 + 68,215 + 43,065 + 4,072 + 19,992 + 18,711 + 12,042 + 4,609 + 4,792 + 2,642
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 31,349 + 31,692 + 30,054 + 6,126 + 11,349 + 8,452 + 8,091 + 3,172 + 3,449 + 1,470
Debt instruments + 14,951 + 21,685 + 18,504 − 2,942 + 7,103 + 4,439 + 7,283 − 1,526 + 115 + 8,694
2 Portfolio investment + 21,627 + 109,814 + 140,956 + 23,661 + 40,511 + 41,344 + 26,641 + 7,711 − 5,171 + 24,100
Shares 2 − 2,713 + 11,736 + 19,206 − 2,861 + 3,443 + 4,944 − 86 + 321 − 1,452 + 1,045
Investment fund shares 3 + 1,277 + 21,696 + 31,321 + 8,340 + 9,686 + 8,649 + 12,797 + 4,433 + 2,134 + 6,230
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 18,272 + 76,487 + 86,676 + 17,704 + 22,487 + 27,554 + 15,553 + 2,560 − 4,606 + 17,600
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 4,791 − 105 + 3,754 + 478 + 4,895 + 196 − 1,624 + 398 − 1,246 − 775
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 26,709 + 25,619 + 18,146 + 6,043 + 5,030 + 9,024 + 6,948 + 1,908 + 1,550 + 3,489
4. Other investment 7 + 133,749 + 161,862 − 182,718 − 68,937 + 20,441 + 36,664 + 21,684 + 11,900 + 16,270 − 6,486
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 50,275 − 66,082 − 56,647 − 6,557 + 31,733 + 45,182 + 1,768 + 39,512 − 14,095 − 23,649
Long-term + 12,977 − 47,913 − 50,495 − 12,314 + 3,254 − 4,487 + 9,832 − 1,198 + 4,243 + 6,787Short-term − 165,691 − 79,733 − 6,152 + 5,757 + 44,313 + 49,669 − 8,064 + 40,710 − 18,338 − 30,436
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 24,890 − 14,332 + 11,209 − 7,814 + 27,273 − 1,970 − 2,705 − 11,763 + 6,936 + 2,122
Long-term − 311 + 401 + 943 + 1,432 − 685 − 1,108 + 741 + 295 + 633 − 187Short-term + 25,381 − 17,468 + 10,266 − 9,246 + 11,375 − 863 − 3,446 − 12,057 + 6,303 + 2,308
General government + 21,061 + 49,597 + 8,238 + 5,601 + 2,086 + 1,709 + 4,518 + 2,420 + 2,674 − 576
Long-term + 2,232 + 49,608 + 15,919 + 3,939 − 4,424 + 3,279 − 858 − 422 − 434 − 2Short-term + 18,829 − 10 − 7,681 + 1,662 + 1,120 − 1,570 + 5,376 + 2,842 + 3,108 − 574
Bundesbank + 138,073 + 192,679 − 145,519 − 60,167 − 40,651 − 8,258 + 18,103 − 18,268 + 20,754 + 15,617
5. Reserve assets + 2,836 + 1,297 + 838 + 1,464 − 565 − 610 + 332 + 431 + 166 − 265
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 102,046 + 175,062 − 207,014 − 111,540 + 25,766 + 45,397 − 3,814 + 8,026 − 2,065 − 9,775
1 Direct investment + 63,624 + 39,053 + 38,637 + 11,086 + 1,750 + 7,358 − 7,449 − 4,465 + 5,387 − 8,371
Equity + 15,527 + 11,109 + 5,918 + 5,757 + 3,222 + 513 + 2,727 + 872 + 1,085 + 770
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 − 701 + 6,039 + 3,580 + 188 + 3,601 + 712 + 2,926 + 845 + 1,039 + 1,042
Debt instruments + 48,097 + 27,944 + 32,719 + 5,329 − 1,472 + 6,844 − 10,176 − 5,337 + 4,302 − 9,141
2 Portfolio investment + 49,581 + 45,076 − 24,113 − 10,326 + 9,344 + 18,647 + 4,056 − 9,928 + 17,214 − 3,231
Shares 2) − 11,325 + 1,094 + 5,328 + 4,180 − 5,315 + 7,668 + 5,523 − 3,364 + 1,390 + 7,497
Investment fund shares 3 + 7,095 − 3,799 + 6,001 + 5,351 − 80 + 655 − 3,173 − 375 + 144 − 2,941
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 51,088 + 52,220 − 12,402 + 10,945 + 7,914 + 10,969 − 6,913 − 12,340 + 7,253 − 1,826
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 2,723 − 4,438 − 23,040 − 30,801 + 6,825 − 645 + 8,618 + 6,152 + 8,427 − 5,961
3. Other investment 7 − 11,160 + 90,934 − 221,538 − 112,300 + 14,672 + 19,392 − 420 + 22,418 − 24,666 + 1,827
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 158,453 − 70,382 + 32,528 + 3,347 + 28,914 + 39,682 − 9,374 − 1,394
Long-term − 18,368 − 10,250 − 16,955 − 1,586 − 3,213 − 5,172 − 6,721 − 3,428 − 2,704 − 589Short-term − 78,340 + 61,758 − 141,498 − 68,796 + 78,769 + 8,519 + 35,635 + 43,110 − 6,671 − 805
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 35,056 + 10,264 − 11,743 − 29,728 + 8,861 + 2,019 − 321 + 5,314 − 6,228 + 594
Long-term − 840 + 1,711 − 16,916 − 7,757 − 3,288 − 269 + 30 + 633 + 1,608 − 2,212Short-term + 35,896 + 8,553 + 5,173 − 21,971 + 545 + 2,288 − 351 + 4,680 − 7,837 + 2,806
General government + 18,539 − 30,775 − 2,066 − 3,470 − 3,952 + 5,207 − 3,687 + 3,459 − 7,491 + 345
Long-term + 5,104 + 36,230 + 9,474 + 689 − 1,793 + 1,429 − 361 + 37 − 34 − 364Short-term + 13,436 − 67,005 − 11,540 − 4,160 − 2,159 + 3,777 − 3,326 + 3,422 − 7,457 + 709
Bundesbank + 31,952 + 59,936 − 49,275 − 8,720 − 22,766 + 8,820 − 25,327 − 26,036 − 1,573 + 2,282
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 161,039 + 213,430 + 245,803 + 74,901 + 66,747 + 64,175 + 78,744 + 17,008 + 19,787 + 41,949
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on
Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,1062012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,5062013 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2012          Feb 814,053 195,654 145,234 22,073 28,346 50 559,678 58,672 13,460 800,593
         Mar 875,780 186,628 135,777 22,177 28,674 50 628,223 60,880 17,564 858,215
         Apr 909,192 189,556 137,380 22,624 29,551 50 656,813 62,773 15,312 893,879
         May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 20,907 27,473 50 557,391 56,280 70,398 691,332         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 21,110 28,388 50 512,734 54,154 53,965 662,902
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 20,589 27,165 50 511,610 54,225 43,789 674,528         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 20,586 27,850 50 482,453 54,440 34,434 653,123
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 20,950 27,534 50 490,066 52,792 53,041 639,916
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 21,125 27,550 50 479,240 52,649 52,748 628,140         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 20,795 27,622 50 474,195 50,875 43,267 634,869
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 21,162 28,406 50 455,926 49,660 17,254 643,267
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 21,133 29,199 50 476,681 48,182 15,697 665,626         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 21,864 29,873 50 492,298 48,088 18,051 678,751
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 21,753 30,450 50 481,086 46,521 25,515 656,275
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,7262012 740,715 271,964 468,751 294,248 174,503 158,818 15,685 910,746 170,262 740,484 578,340 162,145 94,288 67,8572013 779,511 280,238 499,272 319,792 179,480 164,391 15,089 916,078 142,399 773,679 611,566 162,113 95,166 66,947
2014          Apr 813,925 298,994 514,931 335,161 179,770 165,077 14,692 928,221 154,873 773,348 615,525 157,823 90,812 67,011
         May 831,113 319,202 511,911 333,937 177,974 162,750 15,225 932,776 152,666 780,110 621,757 158,352 90,387 67,965         June 825,847 309,917 515,930 332,352 183,578 168,744 14,834 942,936 147,829 795,108 633,759 161,349 94,028 67,320
         July 815,742 300,651 515,091 334,090 181,001 165,994 15,007 945,118 159,873 785,246 624,520 160,726 92,648 68,078
         Aug 825,518 305,787 519,731 341,206 178,525 163,514 15,012 946,229 153,661 792,568 634,330 158,238 89,413 68,825         Sep 842,168 308,897 533,271 347,042 186,229 171,498 14,730 945,886 154,305 791,581 625,826 165,755 97,919 67,836
Industrial countries 1
 
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,0302011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,7602012 653,158 269,560 383,598 265,387 118,211 104,954 13,256 824,054 167,853 656,201 542,924 113,276 79,106 34,1702013 690,027 276,935 413,092 291,029 122,063 108,731 13,332 829,313 141,030 688,282 574,176 114,106 79,440 34,667
2014          Apr 718,393 294,457 423,937 301,820 122,117 109,151 12,966 843,799 153,628 690,171 579,058 111,113 76,251 34,862
         May 738,646 314,655 423,990 303,480 120,510 107,033 13,477 847,645 151,404 696,241 585,388 110,853 75,704 35,149         June 731,122 304,870 426,252 301,832 124,420 111,287 13,132 856,420 146,540 709,879 597,103 112,776 78,059 34,717
         July 719,604 295,436 424,168 302,989 121,179 108,025 13,154 860,155 158,795 701,361 588,482 112,878 77,365 35,513
         Aug 729,415 300,415 429,000 310,426 118,573 105,380 13,193 859,506 152,514 706,992 597,886 109,106 73,398 35,708         Sep 744,970 303,943 441,027 315,931 125,096 112,069 13,027 858,872 153,067 705,805 588,440 117,365 81,551 35,814
EU member states 1
 
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,7272011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,6232012 541,517 247,534 293,983 209,426 84,556 74,165 10,392 695,091 156,550 538,541 458,437 80,104 53,606 26,4992013 582,447 262,506 319,942 233,051 86,891 76,363 10,528 694,266 126,283 567,983 488,528 79,456 53,132 26,324
2014          Apr 610,199 279,036 331,162 242,729 88,433 78,155 10,277 710,807 141,161 569,646 491,031 78,616 51,741 26,875
         May 629,025 299,702 329,322 242,178 87,145 76,425 10,720 714,789 139,132 575,657 497,208 78,449 51,346 27,103         June 621,582 289,928 331,655 241,665 89,989 79,495 10,494 723,671 136,325 587,346 507,180 80,166 53,353 26,813
         July 610,635 280,679 329,957 242,618 87,339 76,751 10,588 725,176 147,010 578,166 498,206 79,961 52,880 27,081
         Aug 620,821 285,532 335,289 250,099 85,190 74,576 10,614 722,360 140,298 582,062 505,611 76,451 49,129 27,322         Sep 630,491 288,791 341,699 252,196 89,504 79,038 10,466 718,164 139,828 578,336 495,596 82,741 55,423 27,317
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,4602011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,3312012 392,618 188,317 204,301 149,452 54,849 48,973 5,877 572,421 110,053 462,368 408,434 53,934 36,740 17,1942013 422,879 195,819 227,060 171,141 55,918 49,743 6,175 587,507 99,659 487,848 434,589 53,259 36,427 16,832
2014          Apr 438,434 205,356 233,078 176,611 56,467 50,279 6,189 605,200 115,502 489,698 437,096 52,602 35,117 17,485
         May 453,598 222,928 230,671 174,955 55,715 49,502 6,213 606,495 108,519 497,976 445,488 52,487 34,844 17,643         June 451,200 220,019 231,181 174,352 56,830 50,767 6,063 619,449 107,496 511,953 458,374 53,579 36,175 17,404
         July 445,191 214,407 230,784 175,492 55,291 49,171 6,121 622,285 120,143 502,142 448,623 53,519 36,036 17,483
         Aug 453,108 218,380 234,728 181,079 53,649 47,478 6,171 617,354 112,056 505,298 454,375 50,923 33,387 17,536         Sep 458,434 219,970 238,464 182,608 55,856 49,562 6,294 609,313 109,095 500,218 445,856 54,363 36,921 17,441
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,4662011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,9662012 87,544 2,404 85,139 28,858 56,281 53,853 2,428 86,661 2,409 84,252 35,415 48,837 15,178 33,6592013 89,477 3,303 86,175 28,762 57,412 55,656 1,757 86,762 1,368 85,393 37,390 48,003 15,723 32,280
2014          Apr 95,529 4,537 90,992 33,340 57,652 55,926 1,726 84,421 1,245 83,176 36,467 46,709 14,560 32,150
         May 92,465 4,547 87,919 30,455 57,464 55,716 1,748 85,130 1,262 83,868 36,369 47,498 14,682 32,816         June 94,723 5,047 89,676 30,519 59,158 57,456 1,702 86,516 1,289 85,227 36,656 48,572 15,969 32,603
         July 96,136 5,215 90,920 31,099 59,821 57,968 1,853 84,962 1,078 83,884 36,037 47,847 15,282 32,565
         Aug 96,100 5,371 90,729 30,778 59,951 58,133 1,818 86,722 1,147 85,575 36,444 49,131 16,014 33,117         Sep 97,198 4,955 92,243 31,111 61,132 59,429 1,703 87,012 1,237 85,774 37,385 48,389 16,367 32,022
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not Latvia. 3All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- December 2010 including Netherlands Antilles; from January 2011 including Bonaire,
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 includingextended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2013          July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
         Aug 1.4742 1.3853 8.1477 7.4580 130.34 7.9386 8.7034 1.2338 0.85904 1.3310
         Sep 1.4379 1.3817 8.1690 7.4579 132.41 7.9725 8.6758 1.2338 0.84171 1.3348
         Oct 1.4328 1.4128 8.3226 7.4592 133.32 8.1208 8.7479 1.2316 0.84720 1.3635
         Nov 1.4473 1.4145 8.2221 7.4587 134.97 8.2055 8.8802 1.2316 0.83780 1.3493
         Dec 1.5243 1.4580 8.3248 7.4602 141.68 8.4053 8.9597 1.2245 0.83639 1.3704
2014          Jan 1.5377 1.4884 8.2368 7.4614 141.47 8.3927 8.8339 1.2317 0.82674 1.3610
         Feb 1.5222 1.5094 8.3062 7.4622 139.35 8.3562 8.8721 1.2212 0.82510 1.3659
         Mar 1.5217 1.5352 8.5332 7.4638 141.48 8.2906 8.8666 1.2177 0.83170 1.3823
         Apr 1.4831 1.5181 8.5984 7.4656 141.62 8.2506 9.0329 1.2189 0.82520 1.3813
         May 1.4755 1.4951 8.5658 7.4641 139.74 8.1513 9.0298 1.2204 0.81535 1.3732
         June 1.4517 1.4728 8.4698 7.4588 138.72 8.2149 9.0914 1.2181 0.80409 1.3592
         July 1.4420 1.4524 8.3940 7.4564 137.72 8.3880 9.2327 1.2150 0.79310 1.3539
         Aug 1.4306 1.4548 8.1965 7.4551 137.11 8.2522 9.1878 1.2118 0.79730 1.3316
         Sep 1.4246 1.4196 7.9207 7.4449 138.39 8.1798 9.1929 1.2076 0.79113 1.2901
         Oct 1.4436 1.4214 7.7635 7.4448 136.85 8.3136 9.1797 1.2078 0.78861 1.2673
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2014
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-39  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
25 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
25 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.7 99.4 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.0 86.6 86.1 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.5 97.1 85.0 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.6 84.5 90.4 87.1 91.3 96.1 85.8 90.0 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.3 89.6 87.8 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.3 90.6 93.6 92.0 91.8
2003 100.6 101.5 100.6 98.8 106.8 101.6 95.4 94.2 97.5 94.9 97.1 96.6 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.4 102.4 111.4 105.2 95.7 93.1 99.8 95.2 98.5 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.7 101.4 100.4 109.4 102.7 94.5 91.8 98.8 93.0 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.7 100.7 99.3 109.4 102.0 93.4 90.2 98.4 91.3 98.7 96.5 95.9
2007 106.2 106.4 102.7 101.0 112.8 104.0 94.3 89.4 102.3 91.7 100.9 97.9 97.0
2008 109.3 108.5 103.9 103.8 117.0 106.0 94.5 88.0 105.4 90.7 102.3 97.8 97.1
2009 110.6 109.1 104.8 106.1 119.8 106.9 94.6 88.7 104.5 91.2 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.6 96.7 98.8 111.5 98.2 92.1 88.4 98.0 87.7 98.9 93.9 92.3
2011 103.4 100.7 95.0 p 96.8 112.2 97.7 91.8 88.1 97.5 87.0 98.3 93.2 91.8
2012 97.9 95.6 89.8 p 91.7 107.1 92.9 90.0 88.1 92.5 84.6 96.1 90.4 88.9
2013 101.7 98.9 p 93.4 p 94.0 112.0 96.2 92.3 88.6 98.2 86.5 98.4 92.2 90.9
2011          May 104.8 102.1 96.9 99.4 113.3 98.7 92.7 88.1 100.0 87.9 99.1 93.9 92.3
         June 104.9 102.2 113.5 98.8 99.1 93.8 92.3
         July 104.0 101.1 112.4 97.8 98.7 93.4 91.8
         Aug 103.8 100.8 94.9 97.4 113.0 98.1 91.7 88.1 97.4 86.9 98.3 93.2 92.0         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.1 97.5 97.9 92.8 91.7
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.9 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 93.7
p 93.5 112.1 97.4 91.0 88.0 95.4 86.2 97.6 92.7 91.5
         Dec 100.8 98.2 110.3 95.8 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.3 108.1 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.3 91.3 p 93.7 108.4 94.3 90.2 87.9 93.5 85.0 96.9 91.4 89.8
         Mar 99.9 97.4 108.7 94.4 97.1 91.4 89.8
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.5 94.2 96.8 91.2 89.7
         May 98.1 95.7 90.2 p 92.5 107.3 93.1 90.0 88.0 92.6 84.7 96.0 90.5 89.0
         June 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.7 90.1 88.7
         July 95.4 93.2 104.3 90.7 95.0 89.2 87.6
         Aug 95.2 93.1 88.1 p 90.2 104.5 90.6 89.3 88.2 90.5 83.8 95.0 89.1 87.6
         Sep 97.2 95.0 106.6 92.5 95.8 90.0 88.6
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.3 92.9 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Nov 97.2 94.9 89.7 p 90.2 106.7 92.3 90.3 88.3 93.2 84.8 95.9 90.0 88.5
         Dec 98.7 96.3 108.3 93.6 96.5 90.5 89.1
2013          Jan 100.4 98.0 109.9 94.9 97.5 91.6 90.0
         Feb 101.6 99.0 92.6 p 94.9 111.1 95.7 91.6 88.2 96.7 86.0 98.2 92.1 90.5
         Mar 100.2 97.9 109.5 94.5 97.6 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 97.9 109.8 94.4 98.0 91.7 89.9
         May 100.5 98.1 p 93.1 p 94.5 110.0 94.6 92.2 88.6 97.8 86.3 98.2 91.8 90.0
         June 101.6 99.0 112.0 96.2 98.3 92.2 90.9
         July 101.5 98.9 112.0 96.2 98.6 92.3 91.0
         Aug 102.2 99.5 p 93.5 p 95.4 113.4 97.3 92.4 88.6 98.4 86.5 98.6 92.5 91.4
         Sep 102.0 99.1 113.3 97.0 98.6 92.4 91.4
         Oct 102.8 99.8 114.2 97.4 98.9 92.7 91.6
         Nov 102.6 99.5 p 94.3 p 91.2 114.2 97.3 93.2 89.0 99.9 87.3 98.8 92.7 91.6
         Dec 103.9 100.7 115.8 98.6 99.3 93.3 92.4
2014          Jan 103.4 100.3 115.9 98.6 99.2 93.2 92.4
         Feb 103.6 100.4 p 95.4 p 96.9 116.3 98.9 p 93.5 p 89.1 100.5 p 87.9 99.1 93.2 92.5
         Mar 104.6 101.4 117.5 99.6 99.3 93.6 92.9
         Apr 104.5 101.0 117.0 98.9 99.2 93.6 92.7
         May 103.8 100.1 p 95.0 p 97.0 116.1 97.8 p 93.3 ... 99.8 p 87.8 98.9 93.1 92.1
         June 103.0 99.3 115.1 97.0 98.6 92.8 91.7
         July 102.6 p 98.8 114.6 p 96.4 98.7 p 92.8 p 91.6
         Aug 101.9 p 98.2 ... ... 114.0 p 95.9 ... ... ... ... 98.5 p 92.5 p 91.3
         Sep 100.4 p 96.7 112.4 p 94.5 p 98.2 p 91.8 p 90.6
         Oct 99.6 p 95.9 111.9 p 94.0 p 97.9 p 91.4 p 90.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Hungary, Japan, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, EER-39 group (see footnote 2). Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis-tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2013 see the index attached 
to the January 2014 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro
-
economic projections for 2014 and 2015
– Outlook for 
European retail payments
– German enterprises‘ profitability and finan -
cing in 2012
– The financial system in transition: the new 
importance of repo markets
January 2014–
 Adjustment processes in the member states of 
economic and monetary unionFebruary 2014–
 The curr
ent economic situation in Germany
March 2014–
 The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implica-tions
–
 German balance 
of payments in 2013
– Manufacturing enterprises in Germany and 
their vulnerability to crises – findings of a risk 
analysis using annual financial statement 
data
April 2014–
 On the reliability of international organisa -
tions’ estimates of the output gap
– Implications of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
operations during the financial crisis
– Some approaches to explaining the behav -
iour of inflation since the last financial and 
economic crisis
May 2014–
 The curr
ent economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
83•

June 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro
-
economic projections for 2014 and 2015 
and an outlook for 2016
– Europe’
s new recovery and resolution regime 
for credit institutions
– Changes in the methodology and classifica
-
tions of the balance of payments and the 
international investment position
– Cash 
withdrawals at the point of sale: motives 
for use and implications for cash holding
July 2014–
 Exchange r
ates and financial stress
– Germany’s statutory health insur
ance scheme: 
past developments and future challenges
– Consolidated financial statement statistics as 
a contribution to the extended corporate 
analysis: approach and initial results
– Analyses of the importance of the insurance industry 
for financial stability
August 2014–
 The curr
ent economic situation in Germany
September 2014–
 Ownership structure in the German equity market: general trends and changes in the 
financial crisis
– The reform of financial r
elations in the Ger -
man federal system
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2013
October 2014–
 Methodological changes in the financial 
 ac
counts – background, approach and se -
lected results
– The German economy in the international division of labour: a look at value added 
flows
– Launch of the banking union: the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism in Europe
November 2014–
 The curr
ent economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange r ate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh-rungsunion, April 2005
 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik K undensystematik,  
January 20142, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 
20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2008 to 
2013, June 20142
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahr es-
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
2006 bis 2012, December 20132, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 2
010 bis 
2011, May 20142, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of payments statistics, 
September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20141, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
25/2014  
Bank capital, the state contingency of banks’ 
assets and its role for the transmission of shocks 
26/2014  
MIDAS and bridge equations27/2014  
How is the low-interest-rate environment af -
fecting the solvency of German life insurers?  
(auch in deutsch)28/2014  
Contingent convertible bonds and the stability 
of bank funding: the case of partial writedown29/2014  
A one-off wealth levy? Assessing the pros, the 
cons and the importance of credibility
30/2014  
International capital flows, external assets and 
output volatility31/2014  
Banks, markets, and financial stability32/2014  
Pro-cyclical capital regulation and lending
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act and S tatute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January  
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsveror dnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
tained in the German originals are available in English.2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2014  
86•

