Monthly Report
February 2014
Vol 66  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 14 February 2014.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Japanese goods exports in the aftermath of the strong yen depreciation  ...........................  16
Distinctive features of unit labour cost developments in Spain  ............................................  21
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Interest rates in the repo market: approximation of short-term risk-free interest rates  ........  34
On the decline in assets in the bank balance sheets of the four large euro-area countries  . 37
Change in households’ assets and portfolio behaviour in Germany  ....................................  45
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  48
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  56
House prices in 2013 in Germany  .......................................................................................  64
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  69
The structural development of public finances in Germany –  
results of the disaggregated framework for 2013  ...............................................................  70Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  56 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  63 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  70 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  79 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
5

Overview
German economy  
displays upward underlying 
momentum
The global economy progressively improved 
during 2013 after getting off to a slow start. In 
the final quarter of 2013, the world economy 
probably just about maintained the moderate 
pace of growth it had generated up to then. 
This was due mainly to the strong performance 
of major industrial countries. In the United 
States and the United Kingdom, for instance, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth 
quarter grew as robustly as in the third quarter. 
The euro area’s aggregate output expanded 
slightly more strongly in the fourth quarter 
than in the previous three months. The emer -
ging markets as a whole apparently did not 
quite match the third- quarter growth rate in 
the final months of 2013. However, the finan -
cial market turbulence that some emerging 
markets encountered in the summer has so far 
had no serious impact on the real sector of the 
economies concerned.
Global growth momentum could strengthen 
somewhat during the current year. A key con -
tributory factor is that fiscal policy in the indus -
trial countries is likely to have less of a dampen -
ing effect than last year, while the overall mon -
etary policy stance remains very expansionary, 
despite the US Federal Reserve’s gradual taper -
ing of its asset purchases. Mixed economic sig -
nals emanated from the emerging market 
economies at the beginning of 2014. While the 
expansion of the Chinese economy still appears 
to be on a relatively smooth path, tensions on 
the financial markets have deepened in several 
countries. Many central banks in the countries 
affected have responded to the, at times, con -
siderable capital outflows and currency depre -
ciation by pushing up interest rates, in some 
instances substantially. Although this may 
dampen overall economic growth in the coun -
tries concerned, their small global weight means that this is unlikely to hamper the global 
economic recovery to a marked degree.
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the international 
financial markets were buoyed by the brighten -
ing economic outlook in the United States, 
which prompted a decision by the US Federal 
Reserve (Fed) in late December to gradually 
scale back its quantitative easing programme. 
The economic recovery in the euro area like -
wise picked up somewhat. In the wake of these 
developments, bond yields in the most import -
ant economies rose considerably towards the 
end of 2013 and stock markets recorded fur -
ther share price gains. Bank shares outper -
formed the market, profiting notably in Europe 
inter alia  from an easing of tensions in the gov -
ernment bond markets of the periphery states.
At the start of this year, the global financial 
markets encountered renewed uncertainty for 
a time. This was triggered by the aforemen -
tioned developments in several emerging mar -
ket economies. A reassessment of the risk-  
return trade- off in the context of the Fed’s 
tapering of its quantitative easing programme 
was a key factor in these developments, under -
pinned by domestic macroeconomic imbal -
ances and, in some countries, rising political 
tensions. In the industrial nations, growing risk 
aversion eroded share prices and caused a 
flight into liquid government bonds. Nonethe -
less, equity valuations remain comparatively 
high on both sides of the Atlantic. On the for -
eign exchange markets, the yen, in particular, 
appreciated at the start of 2014. The euro has 
traded in a relatively narrow band since the be -
ginning of the fourth quarter of 2013. It posted 
slight net gains on a weighted average against 
the currencies of 20 major trading partners.
After lowering the interest rate on its main refi -
nancing operations by another 25 basis points 
to 0.25% at its meeting of 7 November 2013, 
the Governing Council of the ECB left the key Global economyFinancial 
 markets
Monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
6

interest rates unchanged at its subsequent 
meetings. Since then interest rates on the mar -
ginal lending facility and main refinancing 
 operations have stood at 0.75% and 0.25%, 
respectively, while the rate of remuneration 
 applying to the deposit facility has been 0.00% 
since mid-  July 2012.
The Governing Council of the ECB also con -
firmed its forward guidance for interest rates, 
which it first communicated in July of last year. 
It expressly confirmed its intention of leaving 
the key interest rates at present or lower levels 
for an extended period of time and under -
scored its determination to maintain an accom -
modative monetary policy stance for as long as 
necessary.
These decisions were based on the view that 
the accommodative monetary policy stance 
will continue to assist the gradual economic 
 recovery in the euro area and that the euro 
area will experience a prolonged period of low 
inflation given low price pressure and subdued 
monetary dynamics. With an economic recov -
ery expected, inflation is likely, however, to rise 
to rates below, but close to, 2% again later on 
in the recovery process.
The downward trend in monetary growth since 
the beginning of 2013 continued in the report -
ing period. Balance sheet cleansing in the 
banking sector was a major determinant of 
monetary developments. Besides year- end 
 effects, this was influenced mainly by the forth -
coming comprehensive balance sheet assess -
ment ahead of the launch of the Single Super -
visory Mechanism (SSM). This was reflected 
particularly in an accelerated reduction in 
 securitised lending. The decline in lending to 
the private sector also continued, although it 
slowed perceptibly in view of the better eco -
nomic developments. Monetary growth was 
again underpinned by inflows of funds from 
outside the euro area, which were once more 
significantly larger than in the preceding quar -
ters, fuelled by ongoing current account sur -pluses and higher demand for euro- area secur -
ities.
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, Germany’s economic output 
grew by 0.4% in the final quarter of 2013 com -
pared with the preceding three months after 
adjustment for seasonal and calendar factors. 
As before, the rise in aggregate output was 
bolstered by domestic demand. Private con -
sumption is benefiting from a favourable con -
sumer climate and continues to show a rising 
underlying dynamic. While the surge in hous -
ing investment abated, this can be seen as 
more of a normalisation than a trend deceler -
ation given the weather- related and catch- up 
effects during the earlier part of 2013. Foreign 
demand provided a distinct boost for the first 
time in over a year, benefiting industry in par -
ticular. Consequently, investment in some ma -
chinery and equipment components and in 
new buildings also increased. At year- end, 
 aggregate output showed slightly stronger 
growth than potential output, and capacity 
utilisation was high.
In contrast to the reduction in lending in the 
euro area as a whole, credit business in Ger -
many remained on the positive path begun in 
the previous quarter. This was mainly due to 
marked growth in securitised lending to gen -
eral government and a noticeable increase in 
loans to the private sector. The latter still con -
sisted primarily of loans to households, which, 
for several quarters, have largely been fuelled 
by housing mortgages due, inter alia,  to the 
fact that financing conditions remain favour -
able.
However, loans to domestic non- financial cor -
porations also developed increasingly positively 
after contracting during the previous quarters, 
in some cases significantly. The distinct increase 
in lending in December marked the end of the 
downward tendency evident in this credit seg -
ment since late 2012. This is most likely due to 
the fact that German enterprises have slowly German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
7

upped their investment activities since the third 
quarter of 2013.
German firms’ foreign business picked up again 
in the fourth quarter of 2013 in the wake of the 
economic revival in the industrial countries. 
 Although exports to euro- area countries only 
increased slightly because the economic upturn 
there has, until now, been very subdued, ex -
ports to non- euro- area countries expanded 
considerably. During the reporting period, 
 exports of intermediate goods, in particular, 
showed an increase. Following the recovery in 
foreign trade and the ongoing adjustment pro -
cesses, imports from the euro area, above all, 
rose markedly. It is striking that Portugal and 
Spain, two of the euro- area countries strongly 
affected by the crisis, have significantly in -
creased their exports to Germany.
The German labour market situation is still 
characterised by continuous employment 
growth and persistently high levels of immigra -
tion. Over the course of the fourth quarter, un -
employment initially rose before falling a little, 
owing mainly to favourable weather condi -
tions. Employment subject to social security 
contributions continued to follow the upward 
tendency of the previous quarters. However, 
the sectoral base of the increase in employ -
ment expanded to include areas which are par -
ticularly sensitive to the business cycle, such as 
manufacturing and temporary employment. 
The leading indicators for the labour market 
suggest that, over the next few months, the 
upward employment trend will strengthen and 
that unemployment could ease slightly. How -
ever, the DIHK survey from the beginning of 
2014, while agreeing that the outlook for em -
ployment is generally positive, also points to 
the risks stemming from the shortage of skilled 
workers and the planned introduction of a min -
imum wage.
In 2013, collective wage bargaining was typi -
fied by extended employment contracts with a 
graduated increase in basic rates of pay. Nego -
tiations proved difficult in some sectors, which led to delays in the introduction of pay in -
creases. According to Bundesbank calculations, 
collectively agreed wages therefore rose by 
only 2.4% on average during 2013. At 5½% on 
average, the trade unions’ wage demands to 
date for the 2014 pay round are only slightly 
lower than in 2013, while demands for public 
sector employees are somewhat higher still. 
This implies similarly sizeable pay rises to those 
agreed for 2013. The first major pay agreement 
of the year in the chemical industry is in keep -
ing with this picture. Therefore, with the drop -
out of last year’s one- off retarding effect, col -
lectively agreed wages are expected to rise 
strongly on the whole. With regard to the 
planned introduction of a statutory minimum 
wage of €8.50 per hour from January 2015, 
special agreements for the lowest wage groups 
might be introduced in some industries in order 
to make use of the transitional arrangements 
up to 2017 announced in the coalition agree -
ment.
The fall in prices at the upstream stages of the 
economy observed during the course of 2013 
largely came to a halt in the final quarter. On a 
quarterly average, seasonally adjusted import 
prices fell only slightly on the previous quarter. 
External industrial producer prices remained 
unchanged, while domestic industrial producer 
prices pointed slightly upwards. As a result, the 
terms of trade improved again, reaching their 
highest level in three years. Despite the un -
usually high utilisation of equipment in the 
main construction sector, the increase in prices 
for construction work remained within fairly 
narrow bounds. According to calculations 
made by the Association of German Pfandbrief  
Banks ( Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken ), 
residential property prices grew by an annual 
rate of 2.4% in the final quarter of 2013. Con -
sumer price inflation weakened significantly in 
the final quarter of 2013 on the back of the 
euro’s appreciation. The flatter price trend was 
mainly due to  energy prices. Furthermore, the 
extremely sharp rise in food prices in the third 
quarter, caused by inclement weather condi -
tions, decelerated distinctly. Year- on- year infla -Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
8

tion fell slightly to 1.3% according to both the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP).
The underlying growth dynamics in the Ger -
man economy are likely to have strengthened 
distinctly in the latter part of 2013 and early 
part of 2014. This is suggested by the virtually 
continuous improvement in firms’ and house -
holds’ assessments of the current situation and 
outlook. However, the improved situation is 
unlikely to be fully reflected in GDP growth 
rates until after the turn of the year, when the 
higher inflow of orders has an impact on out -
put. Key factors behind the acceleration in eco -
nomic growth are increased stimuli from exter -
nal demand against the background of consist -
ently robust domestic activity. Although the 
debt crisis continues to impose some strains 
within the euro area, there are nonetheless 
growing signs that the euro- area economy is 
gradually recovering, and other advanced 
economies should likewise pick up speed. The 
difficulties facing a number of emerging market 
countries are likely to be of lesser importance 
by comparison. With industrial capacity utilisa -
tion levels now largely at normal levels and 
 financing conditions still favourable, the steady 
improvement in economic prospects means 
that the key prerequisites are now in place for 
firms to overcome their reluctance to invest 
and for domestic demand to surge further on 
the basis of increasing purchases of machinery 
and equipment and of industrial and commer -
cial buildings. The DIHK survey carried out at 
the beginning of 2014 suggests, however, that 
growth could face impediments from eco -
nomic policy factors relating to energy and the 
labour market alongside a growing shortage of 
skilled workers. According to surveys by the 
consumer research institution, Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK), the already exception -
ally buoyant level of consumer confidence has 
improved still further since the fourth quarter, 
chiefly on the back of higher economic and 
 income expectations. The clear upturn in the 
already very pronounced propensity to pur -
chase is consistent with this view. Against this backdrop, wage growth in the coming quarters 
can be expected to feed through via private 
consumption and bolster the domestic com -
ponent of growth. This is likely to give a dis -
tinct impetus to imports and open up add -
itional sales opportunities for enterprises from 
European partner countries, which in turn will 
ease the adjustment processes in the euro area.
General government ran a budget deficit of 
-0.1% of GDP last year, which means that the 
budget has been close to balance for two years 
in succession (2012: surplus of +0.1% of GDP). 
While cyclical factors had a marked positive im -
pact on the budget balance in 2012, their ef -
fect was largely neutral last year. The structural 
fiscal balance improved somewhat thanks to 
lower refunding costs and buoyant labour mar -
ket conditions, which meant that it, too, was 
close to balance. The various levels of govern -
ment showed different developments. The high 
surplus run up previously by the social security 
funds contracted significantly, while central, 
state and local government saw their existing 
deficit diminish markedly, not least owing to a 
shifting of financial burdens from the central 
government budget to the social security 
funds. The drop in the debt ratio to 78.4% at 
the end of the third quarter of 2013 (end-2012: 
81.0%) owed something to nominal GDP 
growth in the ratio’s denominator but was 
chiefly attributable to portfolio sales at govern -
ment- owned bad banks. These factors clearly 
outweighed the increases in debt brought 
about by further payments related to the euro- 
area assistance mechanisms.
The fiscal balance is expected to barely change 
in 2014 from the current perspective. Cyclical 
factors and, among other things, an easing of 
the debt servicing burden could improve public 
finances slightly, but otherwise the structural 
position could well remain largely static. The 
additional expenditures planned by the coali -
tion government might turn out to be relatively 
small, not least because the benefit increases 
by the statutory pension insurance scheme are 
not scheduled to become effective until mid-  Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
9

year, and the announced increase in govern -
ment infrastructure investment will probably 
only come about with a time lag. The debt 
ratio looks set to diminish further this year but, 
at 75%, it is still well in excess of the ceiling laid 
down in the Maastricht Treaty.
In order to implement the Fiscal Compact with 
its European partner countries, Germany once 
again explicitly enshrined its medium- term tar -
get of a general government structural deficit 
ratio of no more than 0.5% in national legisla -
tion. However, in light of the high debt ratio 
and the burdens associated with demographic 
change, there is much to be said for targeting 
budget surpluses in the financial plans, rather 
than exploiting this deficit ceiling to the full. It 
would be sensible, not least in view of the na -
tional budget rules, to make the most of the 
current exceptionally favourable conditions and 
swiftly reduce the structural deficits still remain -
ing at the central, state and local government 
levels and to build up safety margins below the 
strict long- term national upper limits. In this 
setting, it would be appropriate for new fiscal 
policy measures, such as the planned additional 
expenditure in the areas of public infrastructure 
and education, to be neutral in budgetary 
terms. A key challenge for the social security 
funds is to maintain their sustainability in the 
face of demographic change. Close attention 
needs to be paid, too, to the substantial bur -
den that is already weighing on younger gener -
ations. With demographic factors foreseeably 
diminishing the labour force, extending the 
working life will play an important role in this regard. By contrast, any attempt to shorten the 
working life would only tend to aggravate the 
problem still further.
Central government narrowed its budget def -
icit slightly in 2013. Whereas the core budget’s 
structural deficit distinctly overshot the per -
manent upper limit of 0.35% of GDP that will 
apply from 2016, the structural deficit already 
complied with this ceiling when off- budget en -
tities are included. This owed much to the out -
turn of the flood assistance fund, which ran a 
high surplus owing to the advance funding re -
ceived from the central government budget 
last year and only very limited outflows. Gener -
ally speaking, it would be consistent to include 
the structural balances of off- budget entities in 
the assessment in line with the European fiscal 
framework procedure. That is to say, the def -
icits that the flood assistance fund is expected 
to accumulate should also be accounted for in 
2014 and in the coming years. What this ultim -
ately means is that the target mapped out in 
the coalition agreement of achieving a structur -
ally balanced budget this year will only be 
within reach if the core budget runs a surplus 
to compensate for this. Central government’s 
multi- year financial planning had originally pro -
jected increasing surpluses for the years there -
after. These funds ought to be used to pay 
down debt to make allowance for the rising 
demographic burdens. In light of all this, there 
appears to be very limited scope for unfunded 
expenditure compared to earlier budget and fi -
nancial plans.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economy progressively improved 
during 2013 after getting off to a slow start. In 
the final quarter of 2013, the world economy 
probably just about maintained the moderate 
pace of growth it had generated up to then. 
This was due mainly to the strong performance 
of major industrial countries. In the United 
States and the United Kingdom, for instance, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth 
quarter grew as robustly as in the third quarter. 
The euro area’s aggregate output expanded 
slightly more strongly in the fourth quarter 
than in the previous three months. No official 
growth estimates for the fourth quarter were 
available for Japan yet as this report went to 
press. According to commonly used indicators, 
economic growth was considerably stronger 
than in the previous period, in which it had 
been only moderate. However, anticipatory de -
mand in advance of the increase in the con -
sumption tax, which is due to take effect on 
1 April 2014, may have contributed to this in -
crease. The generally quite favourable eco -
nomic activity in key industrial countries also 
made itself felt in the labour markets: un -
employment rates have fallen, in some cases 
markedly. By contrast, the emerging markets as 
a whole did not, it seems, quite maintain their 
previous growth rates in the final months of 
2013. This is suggested by preliminary official 
reports from some Asian countries, including 
China. The financial market turbulence that 
some emerging markets encountered in the 
summer of 2013 has had no serious impact on 
the real sector of the economies concerned.
Somewhat stronger momentum was gener -
ated in autumn by the industrial sector, with 
global output in October- November up by a 
seasonally adjusted 1% compared with the 
summer quarter. At the same time, world trade 
picked up; its volume grew by 2% in the same 
period. This brisk growth was regionally broadly based, with exports by the advanced econ -
omies and the emerging economies alike on a 
pronounced upward trajectory.
Global growth momentum could strengthen 
further during the current year. A key contribu -
tory factor is that fiscal policy is likely to have 
less of a dampening effect on the overall eco -
nomic recovery in the industrial countries than 
last year. The global purchasing managers’ in -
dices for manufacturing and services, which in 
January were able to maintain their December 
level above the expansion threshold, suggest at 
least a continuation of the moderate global 
economic growth in the new year. The mild 
temperatures could well have a beneficial im -
pact on Western Europe’s economic perform -
ance in the current quarter; however, experi -
ence shows that such effects are usually offset 
in subsequent quarters. Following the increase 
in the consumption tax rate in April, the Japan -
ese economy will probably be put to a serious 
test. Mixed economic signals emanated from 
the emerging market economies at the begin -
ning of 2014. Whereas the Chinese economy 
still appears to be on a relatively smooth path, 
several countries, some of which had already 
been at the epicentre of financial market turbu -
lence in the second and third quarters of 2013, 
experienced at times significant capital out -
flows and currency depreciation following the 
US Federal Reserve’s decision in December to 
“taper” its previously very expansionary monet -
ary policy. In the meantime, many central banks 
have responded by pushing up interest rates, in 
some instances substantially. Although this may 
dampen GDP growth in the countries con -
cerned, their small global weight means that 
this is unlikely to hamper the global economic 
recovery to a marked degree.
According to estimates by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), global economic growth 
in 2013 was, with aggregate output up 3.0% 
(calculated at purchasing power parities), still Moderate global 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2013
Vibrant growth 
of industrial  output and world tradeOutlook for the world economy predominantly favourable
Slight upward 
revision of IMF forecast for 2014 in JanuaryDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
11

considerably below its long- term trend growth 
rate of 3¾%; however, it improved progres -
sively during the year. Against this background, 
the IMF staff revised its growth forecast for 
2014 slightly up in January to 3.7%, while 
maintaining its autumn projection for 2015 
(+3.9%). The adjustment for 2014 was based 
on a slight upward revision of the growth rate 
for the group of advanced economies to 2.2%, 
the most prominent component of which is a 
more favourable assessment of the outlook for 
Spain, Japan and the United Kingdom. The pro -
jection for the group of emerging market and 
developing economies was confirmed at 
+5.1%. Noteworthy developments here, how -
ever, are positive revisions for China and India, 
contrasting with a strong downward revision 
for Russia. Although the IMF expects global 
trade to grow much more strongly in the cur -
rent year, at 4.5%, than in 2013, it has mark -
edly reduced its projection compared to the 
autumn forecast. The IMF still sees risks to 
 financial stability in the industrial countries. In 
addition, it emphasises the risks associated 
with low inflation, and has raised the likelihood 
of deflation following an adverse shock. As 
 regards the emerging market economies, the 
IMF particularly stresses the risks of increasingly 
volatile capital flows, which it sees in connec -
tion with monetary policy decisions, specifically 
in the United States.
In autumn 2013, the international commodity 
markets remained largely calm. As measured by 
the HWWI index on a US dollar basis, the prices 
of commodities (excluding energy), on an aver -
age of the last quarter of the year, remained 
virtually unchanged on the quarter. Whereas 
industrial commodity prices picked up slightly 
amid stronger growth in the global manufac -
turing sector, food, tobacco and sugar prices 
still fell noticeably. In addition, the spot price 
per barrel of Brent crude oil fluctuated around 
the US$110 mark. Specifically, expectations 
that oil production would return to normal in 
Libya caused prices to fall somewhat at the be -
ginning of the year. As this report went to 
press, the spot market price for a barrel of Commodity 
markets in calm watersAn international comparison of standardised unemployment rates
*
Source: national data. * Number of unemployed as a percent-
age of the labour force.  1 Centred three-month moving aver-
age.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 143456789101112%, seasonally adjusted
JapanUnited 
Kingdom1Euro area
United States
World market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and food,beverages and sugar
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
7 February or 1 to 12 February 2014 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201460708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood, beverages
and sugarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
12

Brent was US$108½, whereas oil futures con -
tinued to trade at perceptible discounts.
At the same time, consumer price inflation in 
the industrial countries stabilised during the 
final quarter of 2013. After falling from +1.7% 
in July to +1.0% in October, the annual infla -
tion rate calculated from the aggregate index 
climbed back up to +1.3% by December. The 
main reason behind the turnaround was that 
weak developments in the 2012 reference 
period caused annual energy price inflation to 
return to positive territory. Core inflation, which 
relates to the basket of consumer goods ex -
cluding energy and food, was similarly muted 
at the end of 2013 as in the preceding months 
(+1.3%). There is therefore still nothing to sug -
gest that the group of advanced economies as 
a whole is facing any imminent deflationary 
tendencies.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the initial estimate presented by 
the National Bureau of Statistics of China, the 
year- on- year growth rate of real GDP in the 
final quarter of 2013 was +7¾% and thus just 
as high as in the third quarter. Looking at the 
official seasonally adjusted data, economic ac -
tivity has weakened somewhat as of late, how -
ever. Real GDP growth for full- year 2013 like -
wise amounted to 7¾%. Nominal value added 
in the services sector surpassed that of the pro -
duction sector (industry and construction) for 
the first time. With regard to the expenditure 
components of GDP , however, no tangible pro -
gress seems to have been made towards the 
authorities’ goal of rebalancing the Chinese 
economy. The relevant national accounts data 
are not yet available, but official estimates of 
the contributions made by various demand 
components to GDP growth indicate that real 
gross investment again outpaced aggregate 
consumption last year. Net exports were once 
again a drag on overall economic activity, in 
statistical terms. This was because a significant increase in exports was more than offset by 
even livelier import growth. Consumer price in -
flation, which had climbed to 3.2% in October, 
tailed off again towards the end of the year, 
with CPI inflation reported at 2.5% in Decem -
ber. Average inflation for 2013 is roughly the 
same level.
Along with several other emerging market 
economies, India experienced heavy financial 
market turbulence in the summer months. Al -
though the turmoil has flared up again in many 
places over the past few weeks, the situation in 
India has remained relatively calm. In the third 
quarter, the most recent quarter for which na -
tional accounts data are available, India’s eco -
nomic growth accelerated moderately despite 
the tensions in the financial markets at the 
time. Nonetheless, growth of real gross value 
added – India’s preferred indicator of aggre -
gate output – was just 4¾% on the year, a ra -
ther low figure by historical standards. The 
pace of growth does not appear to have 
changed fundamentally in the quarter ended. 
Although harvests are likely to have been boun -
tiful following a high-  precipitation monsoon 
season, this is offset by the fact that, following 
a mild recovery, the industrial sector lost mo -
mentum again. The average inflation rate for 
the fourth quarter rose once again, to 10.4%. 
For this and other reasons, the Reserve Bank of 
India has further tightened its monetary policy 
in recent months.
In the third quarter of 2013, the latest period 
for which GDP data are available, economic 
output in Brazil shrank by a seasonally adjusted 
½% compared with the preceding three- month 
period. However, the weak performance needs 
to be seen in the light of the very strong growth 
in the second quarter (+1¾%). According to 
the relevant indicators, GDP growth in the final 
quarter of the year showed a moderate up -
ward tendency, most likely returning to the 
underlying trend of the second and third quar -
ters. Marked growth in value added in services 
is likely to have been offset by a significant 
drop in industrial value added. Consumer price Industrial coun-
tries’ consumer price inflation stabilised
China maintains 
year- on- year 
growth rateAggregate 
growth in India probably  relatively low throughout  reporting period
The underlying 
pace of eco-nomic growth in Brazil appears to have remained moderateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
13

inflation trended slightly downward since the 
middle of the year but, at 5.9% in December, 
remained above the monetary policy target of 
4.5%. This, in conjunction with the high out -
flows of capital, led the central bank to hike its 
policy rate perceptibly once again in the past 
few months.
According to the available indicators, economic 
activity in Russia seems to have remained list -
less in the final quarter of the year. No official 
GDP figures are available yet, however. None -
theless, the Russian Federal State Statistics Ser -
vice has already released a flash estimate for 
full- year 2013, according to which economic 
output grew by 1¼%, following growth of 
3½% a year earlier. The latest weakness af -
fected a wide range of sectors, with the excep -
tion of financial services, where output rose 
exceptionally strongly (+12%) – as in the previ -
ous year. Consumer price inflation remained 
high in December, at 6.5%.United States
The US economy grew at a fairly rapid clip 
again in autumn 2013, though it was not quite 
able to maintain its fast pace of the summer 
months. According to an initial estimate, sea -
sonally adjusted real GDP was up by ¾% com -
pared to the third quarter, in which it had risen 
by 1%. The weak performance in the fourth 
quarter of 2012 and first quarter of 2013, in 
particular, depressed average growth for 2013 
to 2%, following an increase of 2¾% a year 
earlier. The noteworthy acceleration of growth 
in the second half of last year was attributable 
to a great degree to special factors which do 
not appear to be infinitely repeatable. Aggre -
gate growth was boosted primarily by in -
creased restocking in the third quarter. In the 
fourth quarter, meanwhile, it was propelled by 
strong export growth. As of late, however, 
public demand fell significantly, partly due to 
the temporary government shutdown in Octo -
ber. The return to normalcy of government ac -
tivities will accordingly probably lend a slight 
boost to GDP growth in the current quarter. In 
general, fiscal policy is likely to have less of a 
dampening effect on aggregate growth this 
year than before. In the fourth quarter, the pol -
itical squabbling over the federal government 
budget did not make a dent in private domestic 
final demand, which remained on a moderate 
growth trajectory. Although consumer spend -
ing showed its strongest growth in three years, 
private gross fixed capital formation faltered 
because there was a lull in the recovery in con -
struction activity. Non- farm employment con -
tinued to grow unabated. In December, the 
unemployment rate even slid to 6.7%, its low -
est level since October 2008, and continued to 
trend downwards at the beginning of the new 
year. In the light of the improvements in the 
labour market thus far, the US Federal Reserve 
has begun to taper its asset purchase pro -
gramme. CPI inflation rose to 1.5% in Decem -
ber, whereas core inflation was unchanged at 
1.7%.Russian econ-
omy listless throughout  reporting periodFairly rapid  aggregate growthContributions to quarter-on-quarter growth in US real GDP
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Private  consumption 
and private gross fixed investment. 2 Public demand, inventory 
changes and net exports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013654321012345
––––––+++++In annualised percentage points, seasonally adjusted
GDP (in %)
All other demand 2Private domestic final demand 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
14

Japan
As this report went to press, no official figures 
for Japan’s GDP in the last quarter of 2013 had 
been published yet. However, according to key 
economic indicators, activity is likely to have 
accelerated significantly again, following sea -
sonally adjusted GDP growth in the summer of 
last year of only ¼%. One of the key factors is 
likely to have been a temporary uptick in house -
hold demand in advance of the consumption 
tax hike scheduled to take effect in April of this 
year. Experience shows that this affects, in par -
ticular, easily deferrable expenditure on “big-  
ticket” consumer durables. As a case in point, 
new car registrations skyrocketed in the final 
quarter of the year. Since corporate property 
sales are also subject to sales tax in Japan, pri -
vate residential investment is also likely to have 
benefited from anticipatory demand. A further 
major reason for accelerated economic growth 
is likely to be that foreign trade was less of a 
drag on growth than in the third quarter. Ac -
cording to the monthly indicators, growth in 
real goods exports almost matched that of im -
ports in the fourth quarter. What is astonishing 
is that the volume of exports remains below 
pre- crisis levels despite the depreciation of the 
yen. So far, Japanese exporters seem to have 
adjusted their foreign currency prices to only a 
limited degree, which means that the yen’s de -
preciation has mainly boosted profits (see the 
box on pages 16 to 18). In real terms, it remains 
to be seen whether the improved profitability 
will encourage firms to invest more at home. 
The economic recovery has already made itself 
felt in the labour market, with the number of 
people in jobs rising significantly on average in 
the fourth quarter. At the same time, the un -
employment rate fell to 3.7% in December, 
putting it only marginally above its trough prior 
to the global recession. Consumer price infla -
tion rose to 1.6% by year-end, its highest level 
since October 2008. Core inflation stood at 
0.7%, a level last seen in August 1998.United Kingdom
The UK economic upswing remained buoyant 
in the last quarter of 2013. According to an ini -
tial estimate, GDP grew by ¾% on the quarter 
after adjustment for seasonal factors and price 
changes, matching its spring and summer 
growth levels. It was up by an annual average 
of just under 2% compared to 2012, its strong -
est growth since 2007. In addition, the expan -
sion remained broadly based across sectors in 
the fourth quarter in that real gross value 
added in the production sector (excluding con -
struction) continued to grow at a pace similar 
to that in the services sector. Only construction 
output fell off slightly following the growth 
spurts in the second and third quarters of the 
year. The labour market seems to be deriving 
particular benefit from the economic recovery: 
according to the UK Office for National Statis -
tics, the standardised unemployment rate over 
the September to November period stood at 
7.1%, more than ½ percentage point lower 
than in the preceding three- month period. The 
number of recipients of unemployment bene -
fits continued to trend downwards up until the 
end of the year, although the decline has flat -
tened out. At the same time, in December, in -
flation as measured by the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) was no longer above 
the monetary policy target rate of 2.0% for the 
first time since November 2009; core inflation 
(the basket of consumer goods excluding en -
ergy and unprocessed foods) dropped to 1.9%. 
In the light of the favourable labour market de -
velopments, the Bank of England recently 
modified its forward guidance on interest rate 
policy, which had hitherto been linked to the 
unemployment rate.Economic 
 activity probably picked up in run- up to  consumption tax hikePersistently buoyant  upswingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
15

Japanese goods exports in the aftermath of the strong yen 
depreciation
Recently, representatives of Asian countries, 
in particular, have repeatedly expressed 
concern that Japanese exporters could gain 
a greater share of the world market at the expense of their own industries due to the sharp depreciation of the yen in the period 
spanning the fourth quarter of 2012 and fi  rst quarter of 2013. Concerns have also been voiced by some in the German busi-ness sector, which has a similar degree of  export specialisation.
1 The increase in 
 Japan‘s nominal exports, which has re-
ceived a great deal of public attention, may 
indeed have initially given this impression. 
In price- adjusted terms, however, there are 
few signs so far of a strong upturn in  Japan‘s export sector. Japan‘s real goods 
exports rebounded markedly in the fi  rst half of 2013 from their previous downward slide but failed to return to their original levels.
2 
There seems to have been no major upward 
boost since then. Demand for Japanese 
products on the world markets has thus by 
no means become more dynamic of late than demand for similar products from other countries, although the yen has lost 
just over 25% of its value in effective terms since the third quarter of 2012.
3
One reason for the relatively subdued 
growth of real exports of Japanese goods is 
likely to be that they have not become nearly as cheap on the global markets as 
the nominal exchange rate would suggest. 
According to US statistics, for example, prices for US imports of Japanese goods were only 3¼% lower than in summer 
2012, while the US dollar/yen exchange rate fell by 24%.
4 Furthermore, the sharp rise in 
yen- denominated Japanese export prices 
(+17¼%) suggests that the scope for price 
reductions associated with the yen depreci-ation has only been partially used in other 
markets, too.5
The literature contains different, non- 
mutually- exclusive explanations for the 
 empirically established evidence that, for 
 numerous countries, there tends to be only a loose relationship between exchange rate movements and sales prices in foreign cur-
rencies. On the one hand, this loose rela-
tionship may indicate that prices are funda-mentally geared to specifi  c export markets. 
Varying exchange rates between domestic 
and foreign currencies would therefore only 
1 According to Riad et al (2012), Japan’s product- 
specifi  c export specialisation most closely resembles 
that of Germany. Among its Asian neighbours, only South Korea is competing with Japan in the world market to a similar degree. See: N Riad, L Errico, 
C Henn, C Saborowski, M Saito and J Turunen (2012), 
Changing Patterns of Global Trade, IMF Strategy, Pol-
icy, and Review Department, Departmental Paper 
No 12/ 1.
2 The slump in Japanese goods exports during the 
second and third quarters of 2012 should be con-
sidered in the light of the subdued global industrial ac-
tivity during this period. However, Japanese exporters 
also lost a considerable share of the Chinese market in 
the period up to the end of 2012 due to geopolitical 
tensions between the two countries.3 This can be seen, for example, by comparing Japan 
to South Korea, whose export specialisation is also 
similar to Japan’s in regional terms. Despite the yen’s 
sharp depreciation, both countries’ goods exports ex-panded similarly in real terms by about 5% each in the course of 2013.
4 Since the entire US import price index fell by 1¼% 
during the same period, the moderate fall in prices is 
likely to have made Japanese goods only slightly 
cheaper in comparison to competitor products.
5 The marked difference between the percentage 
change of the nominal effective exchange rate and the percentage change of export prices can be seen as an indicator that the export prices calculated in a foreign 
currency have fallen more sharply in other sales mar-
kets than in the United States. One reason for this het-erogeneity could be the fact that invoicing is predom-
inantly carried out in US dollars for exports to the 
United States. Changes in the exchange rate can then only be passed on to US buyers by specifi  cally adjust-
ing the price in US dollars, whereas if exports are in-
voiced in yen, the prices in a foreign currency are ad-
justed automatically, while yen export prices remain 
unchanged.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
16

lead to disproportionately small price ad-
justments on these markets and would in-
stead be refl  ected predominantly in fl  uctu-
ating profi  t margins, defi  ned as the ratio of 
sales prices to marginal costs. On the other 
hand, the costs of imported intermediate goods, in particular, are not immune to  exchange rate movements. If, as was  recently the case in Japan, depreciation is 
followed by only a slight decrease in foreign currency prices and therefore an increase in 
prices in domestic currency, this could also 
be a refl  ection of a rise in production costs.6 
The relative explanatory power of the dif-
ferent approaches has considerable implica-
tions for the analysis of current develop-
ments in Japan. On balance, the domestic 
consequences will tend to be negative if the higher yen prices of Japanese exports were primarily a refl  ection of higher pro-duction costs, because these also place a 
strain on companies that only produce for 
the  domestic market. By contrast, growing profi  t margins in the export sector could 
boost their investment and support domes-
tic  demand in the medium term, for ex-
ample.7
Although there are certainly exceptions to this rule at the fi  rm level, macroeconomic 
indicators signal that the recent increase in 
the yen prices of Japanese export goods 
predominantly refl  ect higher profi  t margins. 
Whereas the prices of imported intermedi-
6 Overviews of the literature on the relationship be-
tween exchange rates and import and export prices 
can be found in P K Goldberg and M M Knetter (1997), 
Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We 
Learned?, Journal of Economic Literature 35 (3), 
pp 1243-1272; and A Burstein and G Gopinath (2013), International Prices and Exchange Rates, Handbook of International Economics IV, forthcoming.
7 Especially in the short term, the cost effect that 
dampens investment demand appears to dominate 
across all sectors after a change in the exchange rate 
in a panel of OECD countries. See S Landon and 
C E Smith (2009), Investment and the Exchange Rate: 
Short Run and Long Run Aggregate and Sector- Level 
Estimates, Journal of International Money and Finance 28, pp 813-835.Japanese foreign trade indicators 
Sources: Bank of Japan, Ministry of Finance Japan, US Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, BIS and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Against 
the currencies of 56 trading partners.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20137080901001101201301402012 Q3 = 100, log scale
708090100110120130Exports of goods
Seasonally adjusted
Nominal (yen basis)
Real
Exchange ratesPrices of Japanese goods
Export prices (yen basis)
US import prices (US$ basis)
Effective 1
US$ against yenPrices of Japanese intermediate andfinal goods according to the corporate goods price index
Sources: Bank of Japan and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013901001101201301401502012 Q3 = 100, yen basis, log scale
90100110120130140Domestic and export price indices
for final productsPrice indices for intermediate goods
Imported products
All products
DomesticExport
Capital goodsConsumer goodsConsumer goods 
Capital goodsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
17

New EU member states
In the group of new EU member states (EU-81), 
economic output grew quite strongly again in 
the final quarter following a quarter- on- quarter 
rise of ¾% in the third quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. According to initial estimates, GDP 
growth was strongest in Romania (+1¾%), fol -
lowed by the Czech Republic (+1½%) and 
Lithuania (+1¼%). Aggregate output in Poland 
grew by ½%. As the economy has improved, 
many countries’ labour markets have gradually 
recovered. In this group of countries as a 
whole, the unemployment rate stood at 9.5% 
in autumn, compared with 10.1% at the begin -
ning of 2013. Aggregate HICP inflation, which 
had already reached a multi- year low in the 
third quarter, fell further to 0.6% in the final 
quarter of the year. However, from today’s per -
spective this downward trend is not expected 
to continue. At all events, the European Com -
mission’s autumn forecast predicts that infla -tion in most of the region’s countries will pick 
up again in the current year.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The economic recovery in the euro area gained 
some momentum in the last quarter of 2013. 
Aggregate output increased by a seasonally ad -
justed ¼% as compared to the summer quar -
ter, in which it had risen only marginally. At 
+½%, it recorded year- on- year growth for the 
first time since the beginning of 2012. Although 
real GDP contracted once again in 2013 on an 
annual average (-½%), the euro area entered 
the new year with a statistical growth over -Economic 
 recovery  stabilised
Slight uptick in growth at end of yearate goods rose considerably in Japan in the 
wake of the depreciation, overall, at the 
corporate level, the prices of intermediate goods rose considerably less rapidly than export prices. Because unit labour costs 
have also continued to fall throughout the 
reporting period, Japanese enterprises‘ 
costs are likely to have risen moderately on the whole, if at all. As this increase in costs 
places a strain on the profi  tability of both 
domestically oriented and exporting enter-
prises, an increase in the export sector‘s 
relative profi  t margin can be inferred from 
the upward momentum of fi  nal product prices for exported goods and stagnating 
domestic prices.8 This is consistent with the 
fact that, according to Japanese corporate 
balance sheet statistics, profi  ts in the manu-facturing sector, which has a stronger inter-
national focus, recently increased signifi  -
cantly more sharply in relation to costs than those of non- fi  nancial corporations.
9Although the recent depreciation of the yen 
has tended to have only a moderate posi-
tive impact on export volume growth so far, all in all, it is certainly possible that, depend-ing on how they are used, the higher profi  ts generated by export enterprises will help to 
strengthen Japanese economic growth in 
the medium term.
8 See T Klitgaard, Exchange Rates and Profi  t Margins: 
The Case of Japanese Exporters, FRBNY Economic 
 Policy Review, April 1999.
9 Japanese corporate balance sheet statistics do not 
differentiate between exporting enterprises and enter-
prises focused on domestic sales. It is therefore not 
possible to infer any direct conclusions about profi  t 
margins in the export sector from this data.
1 This group comprises the countries that have acceded to 
the EU since 2004 and which, in the fourth quarter of 2013 
(the reporting period), were not yet members of European 
monetary union (thus including Latvia, which did not join 
the euro area until 1 January 2014).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
18

hang of ¼%, thanks to improved economic ac -
tivity over the course of 2013.
The upswing was regionally much more broadly 
based in the fourth quarter than in the two 
preceding periods, in which it had been sup -
ported by just a few countries. Of the 12 euro- 
area member states which have so far pub -
lished initial seasonally adjusted GDP growth 
figures, nine recorded an increase in GDP , and 
only three countries saw a contraction in 
 aggregate output. Even France was able to 
 return to moderate growth (+¼%). The highest 
expansion rate was recorded by the Nether -
lands (+¾%). Germany and Belgium each saw 
real GDP rise by ½%. Among the periphery 
countries, Portugal put in the best perform -
ance, with seasonally adjusted growth of +½%. 
GDP growth in Spain, which overcame the re -
cession in the summer, was ¼%. Italy lifted its 
economic output marginally for the first time 
since the second quarter of 2011. Only in 
 Cyprus did the economic slump continue. In 
Greece, where the statistical authority has 
ceased to publish seasonally adjusted figures 
until further notice, real GDP contracted by 
2½% on the year, following -3% in the summer 
months. However, the fact that annual growth 
rates have become less negative for the fifth 
consecutive period is a sign that the business 
cycle may have bottomed out.
The growth differentials in the euro area, which 
had widened sharply in 2010 and 2011 owing 
to the sovereign debt crisis in the periphery 
countries, on the one hand, and the continued 
vibrancy of the economic recovery in some 
northern countries, on the other, have dimin -
ished markedly since then. The significant slow -
down of growth in those northern countries 
was a major contributory factor. In addition, 
GDP contraction in the southern European cri -
sis countries, with the exception of Cyprus, was 
no longer as pronounced in 2013 as in the pre -
vious year. The unweighted standard deviation 
and the weighted standard deviation (by mem -
ber states’ GDP shares) of real GDP growth 
rates in the euro area, which had reached their Recession 
 overcome in majority of crisis countries
Diminishing 
growth 
 differentialsAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20131021041061082005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
102104106108110112114
949698100102104
100102104106108110100102104106
Italy
SpainFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
19

highest values since the beginning of the third 
stage of monetary union in 2011, at 3.2 and 
1.9 percentage points respectively, dropped 
to 2.0 and 1.5 percentage points respectively 
by 2013. As this report went to press, both 
measures of dispersion were still somewhat 
above the average for the 1999 to 2013 period.2 
The growth gap will continue to diminish mark -
edly in the current year, judging by the growth 
rates projected in November 2013 by the Euro -
pean Commission.
At the beginning of 2014, the leading indicators 
were pointing to a continued revival of euro-  
area economic activity. The purchasing man -
agers’ index for manufacturing, which has been 
back above the expansion threshold since mid-
2013, rose sharply in January, reaching its high -
est level since spring 2011. The industrial confi -
dence indicator eased slightly after improving 
significantly in the preceding months but re -
mained well above its long- term average. Both 
production expectations and firms’ assessment of order books and inventories trended down -
wards slightly. However, according to the 
monthly survey on behalf of the European Com -
mission, household sentiment continued to 
brighten in January; this was also the case in a 
number of periphery countries. December’s im -
provements in consumer confidence were not 
maintained in Greece and Cyprus, though; in 
addition, the indicator for both countries stood 
at a very low level. The sentiment indicator also 
sagged slightly in Ireland, yet it remained well 
above its long- term average.
On the output side, the production sector gave 
a moderate boost to economic growth. After 
getting off to a slow start in the last quarter of 
the year, industrial output then recovered 
markedly; looking at the quarterly average, it 
rose by a seasonally adjusted ¼% on the quar -
ter and by 1¼% on the year. The manufactur -
ers of intermediate goods saw quite strong 
growth compared to the summer quarter 
(+1%), whereas growth in the output of non-  
durable consumer goods and capital goods 
(+½% in each case) was more muted. By con -
trast, energy production (-1¾%) and the pro -
duction of durable consumer goods (-1¼%) 
contracted. Nonetheless, capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing rose quite significantly from 
 October to January and was just slightly below 
its long- run average. Construction was a drag 
on the economy in October- November, with 
seasonally adjusted output down by 1½% from 
the third quarter and by 2% on the year.
On the demand side, foreign demand appears 
to have provided a considerable impetus to 
growth in the reporting period, with nominal 
goods exports to non- euro- area countries up in 
October- November by 3¼% (after seasonal ad -
justment) compared with the third quarter. At 
the same time, imports remained unchanged. 
In real terms, net exports are expected to make 
a perceptible positive contribution to growth, Continued 
 economic revival at beginning of yearProduction sec-tor made mod-erate contribu-tion to growth
Exports higher 
but domestic demand mutedWeighted and unweighted standard deviation of real GDP growth rates in the euro area
*
* Weighted by nominal GDP in the respective year. Data for 
2013 refer, in some cases, only to the first three quarters.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 05 10 1300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Percentage points
Unweighted standard deviation
Weighted standard deviation
Average, 
1999 to 2013
2 When calculating this measure, the average growth rate 
over the first three quarters was used for those countries 
for which no annual figures for 2013 are available yet.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
20

Distinctive features of unit labour cost developments 
in Spain
Taking account of developments in prod-
uctivity, wage cost pressures in Spain de-creased considerably in the wake of the 
global recession and the subsequent sover-
eign debt crisis. The key indicator in this 
context is the index of national unit labour 
costs.1 Compared with its peak in spring 
2009, which was as much as 35½% higher than in early 2000, the index in Spain indi-cated an overall seasonally adjusted decline 
of 7½% in unit labour costs (ULCs) by the 
third quarter of 2013 compared with an in-crease of 3¼% in the euro area.
2 Thus, the 
rise in ULCs in Spain in the period from 2000 to 2013 was no longer any greater than the increase in the euro area as a whole. Although the decline since mid-
2009 was somewhat weaker than in Greece 
(-17¼%) and in Ireland (-11¼%), it was 
stronger than in Portugal (-3%), with ULCs 
in Italy generally continuing to grow in the 
crisis years. The reduction in ULCs in Spain 
played a decisive role in the marked im-
provement in the country‘s price competi-
tiveness as measured by commonly used indicators, which shored up domestic and foreign demand for tradable goods from 
Spain.3
On the surface, this appears consistent with 
the signifi  cant rebound in Spanish exports 
following the cyclical downturn in the last quarter of 2008 and the fi  rst quarter of 2009, with growth in the sales markets largely remaining fairly weak. In summer 2013, Spain‘s exports exceeded the price and seasonally adjusted pre- crisis peak by 
no less than 16¼%, compared with 11% in 
Germany and 6% in the euro area. How-
ever, it is important to note that Spanish ex-
ports performed relatively well in the years 
before the crisis despite indicators showing 
a sharp deterioration in price competitive-ness; this has given rise to the term “the 
1 Unit labour costs are defi  ned as the ratio of compen-
sation per employee to output per employee, with 
output measured as gross domestic product (GDP) at 
the macroeconomic level and as the gross value added 
of each economic sector at the sectoral level.2 Under the current European system of national and 
regional accounts (ESA95, 2005 revision), data are available for Spain from the fi  rst quarter of 2000. 
Therefore, this is taken as the base period for the pre- crisis years and not the launch of the monetary union at the beginning of 1999.
3 Deutsche Bundesbank, “Real economic adjustment 
processes and reform measures”, Monthly Report, 
January 2014, pp 19-38.Unit labour costs, compensation per employee and labour productivity in Spain and the euro area
Source: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 131001051101151201251301352000 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Euro areaSpain
100105110115120125 125130135140145
95100105 105110115
Labour productivityCompensation
per employeeUnit labour costsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
21

Spanish paradox” in public discussion.4 On 
the one hand, this development points to 
robust non- price competitiveness, which, however, is diffi   cult to measure. On the other, enterprises in the industrial sector, 
which produce most of the country‘s export goods, were better able to curb ULCs, even prior to the crisis, than enterprises in other 
sectors geared more toward domestic de-mand. The recent improvement in price competitiveness is starting to bear fruit, it 
seems, as growth in Spanish exports follow-
ing the crisis- induced slump in 2008-2009 
is not only on par with the robust pre- crisis level, but is even exceeding it. Furthermore, 
there are indications that Spain has re-gained its attractiveness as an investment 
location, in particular to foreign car manu-
facturers.5
Growth in productivity – the indicator‘s de-
nominator – has been a much greater fac-
tor in the decline of the national ULCs in 
Spain than in any other euro- area periphery 
country. From the beginning of the reces-sion in the second quarter of 2008 up to 
summer 2013, Spain‘s productivity rose by 
13½%, compared with increases of 6½% in Ireland and 5% in Portugal and declines of 
4½% in Greece and 5% in Italy. This up-
ward trend in Spain was relatively steady – 
unlike in the euro- area as a whole, where 
productivity fell sharply in the wake of the 
recession and, following a short recovery, levelled off somewhat above pre- crisis 
levels. When viewed in isolation, however, 
compensation per employee – the numer-
ator – has further pushed up ULCs in Spain 
since the onset of the global fi  nancial and 
economic crisis. In the third quarter of 2013, compensation per employee was 
7¼% higher than at the beginning of 2008. 
This was attributable to strong growth in 
compensation per employee in 2008 
(+6¾%) followed by a signifi  cantly slower 
rise in the subsequent years, thus allowing the dampening infl  uence of productivity on 
ULCs to progressively increase.
The considerable rise in aggregate product-
ivity in recent years should be considered in light of the fl  at, and, at times, even slightly 
negative growth trend seen prior to the global fi  nancial and economic crisis, with Spain being something of an exception in 
international terms even back then. Taking 
the fi  rst quarter of 2000 as the base period, 
time series show that Spain‘s productivity 
growth signifi  cantly trailed that of the euro 
area until the end of 2008. Subsequently 
and up until the end of 2010, the trend in 
Spain moved in parallel with euro- area de-
velopments. Only after this did productivity 
growth in Spain exceed that of the euro 
area. From 2000 to 2013, aggregate prod-uctivity in Spain rose by 1% on average per 
year, but only ½ percentage point more 
than in the euro area, which is not much of an advantage for a “catching- up” economy.
Some commentators put the sharp fall in Spain‘s ULCs following the crisis into per-spective by suggesting that it was over-whelmingly caused by drastic job cuts, which sped up productivity growth, and 
was less related to wage adjustments. How-
ever, this ignores the fact that the strong 
increase in ULCs before the crisis was in no 
way solely attributable to excessive wage increases but rather to the increase in the recruitment of employees with a relatively 
low level of productivity in the tight labour market at the time, particularly in construc-
4 See G Braunberger, Das spanische Paradoxon: 
 Warum steigen die Exporte, obwohl die Wirtschaft 
(angeblich) nicht wettbewerbsfähig ist?, Fazit – das 
Wirtschaftsblog, Blog from 3 December 2012; http://
blogs.faz.net/fazit/ 2012/ 12/ 03/das- spanische- paradox- warum- steigen- die- exporte- obgleich- die- wirtschaft- 
angeblich- nicht- wettbewerbsfaehig- ist-663/ (only 
available in German).5 See G Oster, Spaniens Automobilsektor im Umbruch, Germany Trade & Invest, 18 February 2013 (only avail-able in German).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
22

tion.6 Given the normal remuneration in 
Spain –  as in other industrial countries  – 
which tends to make little distinction be-tween the different output levels attribut-
able to employees in the same wage group, 
this therefore stalled productivity growth and drove up ULCs. Furthermore, enter-prises tend to be more remiss about cost management in economic upturns, which 
means that ineffi   ciencies spread more eas-
ily. In this respect, the surge in productivity 
and the decline in ULCs in Spain over the 
course of the current crisis are a direct re-
sponse to imbalances during the boom 
period.
The divergence in patterns of aggregate 
productivity growth between Spain and the 
euro area can be seen in the majority of 
sectors, albeit to varying extents. Between 
2000 and 2007, productivity growth in in-
dustry in Spain was considerably less buoy-
ant than in the euro area as a whole, 
whereas from 2008 to 2013, it clearly sur-
passed that of the euro area. Productivity in the construction sector, on the other hand, declined both in Spain and in the euro area 
as a whole in the years before the crisis, 
with the fall in Spain (-5¾%) being signifi  -
cantly greater than the euro- area average (-1½%). From 2008 onwards, however, productivity in the Spanish construction sector grew by 64%,
7 whereas the euro- 
area reported only slight growth (+1%). The 
6 One indication of this is that during the boom years 
a very large volume of immigrants, who were often 
low- skilled workers, were employed in the construc-tion sector. In 2008, approximately one in four per-
sons employed in this sector was a foreigner. Unfortu-
nately, there are no data available for previous years. 
The sharp contraction in employment in the subse-quent years affected this group in particular, with 
numbers falling by more than 453,000 to 152,000 by 2013. Last year, only one in seven workers in the con-struction sector in Spain was a foreigner.7 A clear shift away from building construction, which 
has declined particularly sharply, towards civil engin-
eering, where per capita value added is just over 40% higher, also contributed to the considerable increase in labour productivity in the construction sector.Unit labour costs and their components in Spain by sector
Source: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 131001101201301401502000 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
90100110120130140150160
8090100110120130140150160170180
90100110120130140
100110120130140150160 Non-market servicesMarket servicesConstructionIndustryTotalUnit labour costs
Compensation per employee
Labour productivity Real gross 
value addedReal GDPMemo itemsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
23

structural change in the Spanish construc-
tion sector in recent years has had a rela-
tively strong impact on aggregate product-
ivity, partly because – despite a decline of 
6 percentage points since 2007 – its share 
of the total gross value added, at 7¾% most recently, was still perceptibly higher 
than the euro- area average (5½%).
The opposing development in aggregate 
productivity is also attributable to the sharp 
decline in the market services sector8 in 
Spain before the crisis and the considerable expansion following the onset of the crisis, 
while the euro area as a whole recorded a 
moderate increase which levelled off from 
2008 onwards. This clear turnaround in 
Spain can, in part, be attributed to the real estate bubble in the years prior to 2008 and 
the subsequent adjustment process as this 
category, on the one hand, includes real 
estate- related services such as estate agent 
services, housing administration and the 
leasing of land, and on the other, construc-tion- related services, such as those provided by architects and structural engineers. How-ever, the fact that the decline in productivity in the retail and wholesale trade, transport and storage sub- sectors between 2001 and 
2007 was transformed into substantial growth in the wake of the crisis had an even greater impact. Productivity in non- market services, including public adminis-
tration, education and healthcare, has also 
seen marked growth in the past few years. 
This, however, is diffi   cult to account for 
and, amongst other things, could be related 
to the distinctive procedures for calculating 
productivity in the public sector.
The weak growth in labour productivity in 
Spain before the crisis is consistent with the 
fact that the 26% increase in real GDP from 
2000 to 2007 was accompanied by similar 
growth in employment. By contrast, the 
surge in productivity in recent years was the result of very extensive job cuts (-17%) com-bined with a considerably slower fall in GDP (-6%). For instance, just over 60% of jobs in 
the construction sector were cut, while real 
gross added value fell by 40%. In industry, 
employment fi  gures fell by one quarter, 
while gross value added fell by only 7%. In 
market services, almost one tenth of jobs 
were lost, while output swiftly returned to 
pre- crisis levels following a slight slowdown.
All in all, the excesses during the boom were 
greatest in those sectors which produce 
mainly for the domestic market and which 
are less active at an international level. Cor-
respondingly, this is where the need for ad-
justment was greatest. Against this back-
drop, many Spanish enterprises saw the fall 
in demand from 2008 onwards as being mainly structural, leading them to cut jobs extensively. It was relatively easy and cost 
 effective for enterprises to make these staff 
adjustments due to the distinctive features of 
the Spanish labour market. Long- term aver-
ages show that just under one third of work-
ers in Spain (compared with only 15½% in 
the euro area overall) are employed on tem-porary contracts with relatively weak protec-
tion against dismissal.9 In the past, Spanish 
companies therefore responded to cyclical 
fl  uctuations in demand mainly by recruiting 
and laying off temporary staff.10 Cyclically 
adjusting working hours, by contrast, has never played much of a role up to now, 
8 The market services sector includes the sub- sectors 
wholesale and retail trade, transport and storage; in-
formation and communication services; services of 
credit and insurance institutions; real estate services 
and professional services.
9 Conversely, severance payments for employees on 
permanent contracts are very high by international 
standards. This is still the case  – albeit to a lesser ex-
tent – even after the 2010/ 2012 reforms which led to a  reduction in severance payments.10 Ministry for Employment and Social Security (2013), 
Report evaluating the impact of the labour market re-
form, p  7; und Bentolila et al (2012), Reforming an 
insider- outsider labor market: The Spanish experience, IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 1(4), p 3.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
24

which was most likely due, in part, to the 
rather restrictive regulations on short- term 
work.11 This cyclical behaviour of hiring and 
fi  ring was more pronounced in the construc-
tion sector. At the peak of the construction 
boom, 1.2 million workers – more than half of those employed in the sector – were hired 
on a temporary basis. By 2012, enterprises 
had trimmed back the number of temporary 
employees to one quarter, meaning they then accounted for just over one third of 
workers in the construction sector. The cyc-
lical fl  uctuation in employment before and 
after the crisis was not quite as dramatic in 
the other industrial sectors.
Productivity continued to grow rapidly in Spain in the fi  rst three quarters of 2013. 
However, the European Commission expects 
this to slow down signifi  cantly in 2014 and 
2015. This assessment is probably based on 
the expectation that job losses will soon come to a halt and employment numbers will increase moderately. Consequently, if compensation per employee continues to 
stagnate, as predicted in the Commission‘s 
forecast, ULCs will not fall as strongly as 
they did on average from 2010 to 2013.
In light of the very high unemployment rate 
in Spain, which, to a large extent, has 
 already become structurally embedded, and 
against the backdrop of productivity growth 
returning to normal levels, compensation 
per employee should not increase over the 
medium term, but should at least remain 
stable to ensure that ULCs continue to fall. 
This is necessary to reduce the rate of 
 unemployment through even more 
employment- intensive growth. Moreover, this would help boost Spain‘s price com-
petitiveness.
11 However, the prerequisites for introducing short- 
time work have now been improved such that working 
hours can be reduced by up to 70%, compared with 
30% in the past.Employment by sector in Spain and the euro area
Source: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Data for 2013 only available for Q1 to Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank200204060
–+++%
Euro areaSpain
–60–40–200+20
Non-market
servicesMarket
servicesConstruction Industry TotalChange from 2008 to 20131Change from 2001 to 2007Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
25

albeit partly as a result of lower import prices 
after currency appreciation. In autumn, domes -
tic final demand is, however, likely to have risen 
only marginally, if at all. The decline in con -
struction output, in conjunction with the mod -
est increase in capital goods output, would 
suggest that the moderate increase in gross 
fixed capital formation recorded in the two pre -
vious quarters has flattened again. Moreover, 
household consumption is unlikely to have had 
much of a positive impact on demand. Real re -
tail sales (excluding cars) fell by ¾% on the 
period in the last quarter of 2013, after sea -
sonal adjustment. In contrast, however, new 
car registrations were up significantly, by 5%. 
This was partly because fourth-quarter demand 
for cars rose sharply in Germany and Spain,3 
among other countries, and also swelled no -
ticeably in France. However, on the whole 2013 
was once again a poor year for euro- area car 
manufacturers: the number of new registra -
tions was down by 4½% from the previous 
year’s already depressed level and 27¼% below 
its all- time high of 2006.
There were mounting signs of a stabilisation in 
the euro- area labour market in the second half 
of 2013. As in the second quarter, employment 
no longer decreased in the third quarter. By 
 December, the seasonally adjusted number of 
unemployed had already fallen 241,000 from its last high in September, and the standardised 
unemployment rate was, at 12.0%, somewhat 
lower in the fourth quarter than in the second 
and third quarters. Among the periphery coun -
tries, Spain, Portugal and Ireland saw their 
 unemployment rates fall moderately to 26.1%, 
15.5% and 12.3% respectively, whereas un -
employment rose further in Italy and Cyprus; in 
Greece, it likewise rose further in October, the 
most recent month for which data are avail -
able, to 27.8%. The sharp rise in unemploy -
ment in some periphery countries since the 
onset of the crisis should not, however, detract 
from the, in some cases, very sizeable product -
ivity gains driven by structural change, as well 
as from the pronounced decline in unit labour 
costs (for more information, see the box on 
Spain on pages 21 to 25).
Over the second half of 2013, euro-  area con -
sumer price inflation eased perceptibly. Annual 
HICP inflation consequently fell to 0.8% in the 
final quarter. A year earlier, it had been as high 
as 2.3% despite a weak economy and high un -
employment. The disinflation process affected 
not only the more volatile HICP components 
but also components whose prices are gener -
ally more stable. Whereas energy and unpro -
cessed food account for around two-  thirds of 
the HICP decline, all other factors account for 
the remaining one- third. External factors such 
as the euro’s appreciation and the preceding 
slump in global industrial activity are likely to 
have played a major role in diminishing indus -
trial goods price inflation. The difficult eco -
nomic situation afflicting a number of euro-  
area countries impacts services with a certain 
time- lag. This is particularly evident in the case 
of Greece, where consumer prices fell by 2.2% 
year-  on- year. In Cyprus, prices fell by 0.8%. 
Some other countries reported very low rates 
of inflation. By contrast, countries whose econ -
Signs of stabil-
isation in the  labour marketPerceptible  decline in con-
sumer price  inflationConsumer prices in the euro area
Year-on-year percentage change
Item2012
Q42013Q4
Headline HICP 2.3 0.8
of which
Energy 6.3 – 0.9
HICP excluding energy 1.8 1.0
of which
Unprocessed food 4.3 1.3
Processed food 2.4 2.1
Industrial goods 1.1 0.3
Services 1.7 1.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 Since summer 2012, the Spanish government has offered 
scrappage premiums to promote sales of new cars. To this 
end, it has provided several limited funding programmes 
which were often used up quickly, including the €70 mil -
lion injection provided in October 2013. The scheme was 
expanded by €175 million in January 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
26

omies were faring better saw significantly 
higher inflation rates.
Average annual consumer price inflation in the 
euro area was 1.4% in 2013. The annual HICP 
inflation rates in the first 11 months of the year 
were distorted upwards by an average of 
0.1 percentage point owing to special statistical 
effects in Germany (for more, see the margin 
heading “Special statistical factors in the HICP” 
on page 63). These statistical effects were gone 
with the December rate.The subdued upward price trend continued at 
the beginning of 2014. According to the Euro -
stat flash estimate, annual HICP inflation fell 
slightly from 0.8% in December to 0.7% in 
January, due largely to favourable energy price 
developments. HICP excluding energy, by con -
trast, held steady at 1.0%. In the light of the 
favourable outlook for the euro- area real econ -
omy, deflation risks should be regarded as 
being low.HICP inflation 
rate distorted for 11 months of 2013Subdued  upward price 
trend continued 
at the beginning 
of the yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
After the Governing Council of the ECB had 
once again lowered the interest rates for the 
marginal lending facility and main refinancing 
operations in November, key interest rates were 
not changed at any of the subsequent meet -
ings. Interest rates for the marginal lending 
 facility and main refinancing operations have 
stood at 0.75% and 0.25% respectively since 
mid- November, while the interest rate on the 
deposit facility has been 0.00% since mid-  July 
2012.
The decisions of the ECB Governing Council 
were based on the view that the accommoda -
tive monetary policy stance will continue to 
 assist the gradual economic recovery in the 
euro area. Euro-  area inflation is expected to  remain low over a prolonged period of time 
given low price pressure. However, with an 
economic recovery expected, inflation is likely 
to increase again gradually as the recovery pro -
cess continues.
In addition, as in the preceding monetary pol -
icy meetings, the ECB Governing Council con -
firmed in January and February its forward 
guidance on the future development of the 
ECB key interest rates, which was first commu -
nicated on 4 July. It expressly reaffirmed its in -
tention of leaving key interest rates at present 
or lower levels for an extended period of time 
and underscored its determination to maintain 
an accommodative monetary policy stance for 
as long as necessary. This statement is based 
on the assessment that the subdued outlook 
for inflation extends into the medium term 
against the backdrop of weak growth and 
dampened monetary dynamics, and is there -
fore entirely consistent with the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy strategy.
On 24 January 2014, the Governing Council of 
the ECB announced that it would reduce its of -
fering of US dollar liquidity- providing oper -
ations in view of the lower demand for such 
operations and the considerable improvement 
in US dollar funding conditions. US dollar li -
quidity- providing operations with a maturity of 
three months will initially cease to be con -
ducted from the end of  April 2014; those with 
a maturity of one week will continue to be 
conducted at least until 31 July 2014.
The Eurosystem did not purchase any add -
itional securities as part of monetary policy-  
based purchase programmes in the period 
under review. In particular, it still did not con -
duct any outright monetary transactions. The 
Eurosystem’s holdings of securities acquired 
under the Securities Market Programme (SMP), 
which was discontinued in 2012, and the two 
covered bond purchase programmes, which Key interest 
rates still at  historical low
ECB Governing 
Council reaffirms 
forward guid-
ance on its 
 future monetary 
policy stance
ECB Governing Council’s deci-sion on future US dollar liquidity- providing  operations
Still no bond 
purchases in the form of outright monetary trans-actions (OMT)Money market interest ratesin the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. • Average 1 to 12 February 2014.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
The provision of liquidity to credit institu-
tions in the euro area was still clearly above 
the calculated liquidity needs during the 
three maintenance periods under review, from 9 October 2013 to 14 January 2014. This stemmed from the structure of the 
liquidity- providing open market operations 
which continued to be carried out as fi  xed- rate tenders with full allotment of the sub-
mitted bids (see the table on page  31). Nonetheless, excess liquidity
1 diminished 
distinctly from €215 billion at the beginning 
to €154 billion at the end of the period 
under review amid fairly substantial fl  uctu-
ations. The decline in excess liquidity was 
mainly driven by early repayments of liquid-
ity provided in the three- year tenders amounting to €101.1 billion. By contrast, the December 2013-January 2014 period 
saw demand in the main refi  nancing oper-
ations accelerating by €39 billion on aver-age to €129 billion and demand in the longer- term refi  nancing operations with 
maturities of three months and one main-
tenance period climbing by €17.2 billion to 
€36.1 billion. Seasonal factors drove aver-age short- term money market rates dis-
tinctly higher in the Christmas maintenance 
period amid fl  uctuating liquidity conditions 
with the result that money market rates were again mostly geared more towards 
the main refi  nancing rate than the deposit 
facility.
Overall, liquidity needs stemming from au-
tonomous factors remained virtually un-
changed in the three maintenance periods, 
fl  uctuating in a range of €487 billion and €540 billion. While government deposits 
shrank by €18.9 billion on balance, seasonal factors meant that the volume of bank-notes in circulation in the Eurosystem climbed by a robust €29.6 billion, thereby increasing liquidity needs. The volume of banknotes in circulation in the euro area 
reached a new high of roughly €958 billion 
on 27  December 2013. The aggregate 
change in net foreign assets and other fac-tors, which are observed jointly to eliminate 
liquidity- neutral valuation effects, had a li-
quidity- providing effect, however. This sum increased by €11.7 billion on balance, redu-
cing the liquidity needs arising from au-
tonomous factors by the same measure.
Owing to maturities, the balance sheet 
holdings of securities purchased under the 
Securities Markets Programme (SMP), in-
cluding the quarterly revaluation at the end of the quarter, decreased by €10.8 billion to 
1 Deposit facility plus current account holdings minus 
the minimum reserve requirement.Central bank interest rates, money market rates and excess liquidity
1 Deposit facility plus current account holdings minus the min-
imum reserve requirement.
Deutsche BundesbankOctober November December January February
2013 201400.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.400.450.500.55Daily data
€ bn%
075150225300 Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
Weighted allotment rate
for SMP liquidity-absorbingtenders
Main refinancing rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
29

€177.4 billion in the three maintenance 
periods under review. Furthermore, weekly 
liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning operations 
were conducted to sterilise the liquidity ef-
fect of SMP holdings. Counterparties’ in-
creased preference for liquidity meant that 
underbidding occurred in several SMP li-
quidity- absorbing tenders during the period 
under review. Balance sheet holdings under 
the two Covered Bond Purchase Pro-grammes (CBPP1 and CBPP2) declined by €1.2 billion to €41.6 billion and by just 
under €0.2 billion to €15.4 billion respect-
ively.
The October- November 2013 maintenance 
period saw demand tapering off slightly in 
the main refi  nancing operations and the 
three- month refi  nancing operations (down 
by €3.8 billion and €0.8 billion respectively) as well as repayments of €26.1 billion of the liquidity provided in the three- year tenders. 
This led to an outstanding tender volume 
(excluding liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning operations) of €743 billion on average, 85% 
of which was accounted for by the two 
three- year tenders. Compared with the pre-
vious period, excess liquidity fell by €30 bil-
lion in total to an average of €193 billion. 
While it is true that this maintenance period, 
too, exhibited a kind of frontloading ini-
tially, with current account holdings higher 
at the beginning of the period, balances re-ceded briefl  y before going up again on cer-
tain days towards the end of the period. 
Overnight rates remained low overall, with 
secured overnight rates in Eurex Repo’s GC 
Pooling (ECB basket) and the weighted al-
lotment rate for SMP liquidity- absorbing tenders increasing somewhat prior to the 
end of October.
Over the November- December 2013 main-
tenance period, demand in the main refi  -nancing operations remained unchanged 
against the previous period at €92 billion on average. The volume of the longer- term re-fi  nancing operations receded by an average Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2013/2014
9 Oct to
12 Nov13 Nov to10 Dec11 Dec to14 Jan
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  2.1 –  5.5 – 22.0
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  9.2 –  9.3 + 19.0
3 Net foreign assets
2 + 12.7 –  0.1 – 18.1
4 Other factors 2 – 21.5 +  6.2 + 32.5
Total –  1.7 –  8.7 + 11.4
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  5.4 +  0.8 + 37.7
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 22.2 – 27.1 – 33.2
(c) Other operations –  1.0 +  6.7 + 23.4
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 +  0.0 +  0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  6.8 +  3.8 – 11.8
Total – 21.9 – 15.8 + 16.3
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 23.5 – 24.7 + 27.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.0 +  0.4 +  0.1
1 For longer-term trends and the Deutsche Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
30

of €27 billion to €625.3 billion. Due to 
underbidding, in which, among other 
things, the end of the month and the sharp rise in autonomous factors are likely to have played a part, the weighted average rate in 
the last SMP liquidity- absorbing operation in November grew by a signifi  cant 7 basis points to 0.16%. The lower propensity of 
credit institutions to place liquidity in the li-quidity- absorbing operations sent excess li-quidity to highs of up to €195 billion on the 
fi  rst two days of the new month, before it 
fell back to roughly €155 billion due to the 
full absorption of the SMP volume. Among 
other things, the volatility of excess liquidity had driven EONIA and Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight rates to higher average levels for 
the maintenance period as a whole of 
0.12% (previous period: 0.09%) and 0.11% 
(previous period: 0.09%) respectively.
This somewhat higher level of overnight 
rates was an early feature of the December 
2013-January 2014 maintenance period, 
which was characterised by further upside 
pressure and heightened volatility in 
shorter- term money market rates, notably 
in the Stoxx GC Pooling one- week maturity 
term. The expected tensions towards the end of the year already made themselves Open market operations of the Eurosystem*
 
Value 
dateType of transaction
1Maturity in daysActual 
 allotment 
in € bil-lionDeviation from the 
bench-
mark in € billion
2Marginal rate/fi  xed 
rate
%Allot-ment 
ratio
%Weighted 
rate
%Cover ratio
3Numberof bid-
ders
09.10.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 93.4 49.9 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 68
09.10.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 3.4 – 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 21
09.10.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 188.0 – 0.09 72.99 0.08 1.34 117
16.10.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 91.2 51.2 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 70
16.10.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 188.0 – 0.15 26.01 0.09 1.17 117
23.10.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 90.6 24.6 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 67
23.10.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 188.0 – 0.12 54.07 0.09 1.28 132
30.10.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 89.3 – 27.7 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 66
30.10.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 188.0 – 0.18 78.40 0.12 1.15 119
31.10.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 1.9 –
4 0.29 100.00 – 1.00 43
06.11.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 89.5 – 51.5 0.50 100.00 – 1.00 64
06.11.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 184.0 – 0.13 32.44 0.10 1.40 131
13.11.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 87.7 16.7 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 67
13.11.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 28 3.2 – 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 21
13.11.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 184.0 – 0.10 96.83 0.09 1.38 126
20.11.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 86.9 14.4 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 66
20.11.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 184.0 – 0.11 57.58 0.09 1.19 122
27.11.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 97.2 – 24.8 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 78
27.11.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 157.8 – 0.25 100.00 0.16 1.00 108
28.11.2013 LTRO (FRT) 91 5.9 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 47
04.12.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 94.6 – 41.4 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 78
04.12.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 184.0 – 0.25 100.00 0.14 1.00 130
11.12.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 98.5 38.0 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 80
11.12.2013 S-LTRO (FRT) 35 10.1 – 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 31
11.12.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 184.0 – 0.25 86.43 0.19 1.02 126
18.12.2013 MRO (FRT) 5 118.9 59.9 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 102
18.12.2013 FTO (–) 5 – 152.3 – 0.25 100.00 0.23 1.00 109
19.12.2013 LTRO (FRT) 98 20.9 –4 … 100.00 – 1.00 76
23.12.2013 MRO (FRT) 7 133.6 87.6 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 117
23.12.2013 FTO (–) 7 – 139.9 – 0.25 100.00 0.24 1.00 103
30.12.2013 MRO (FRT) 9 168.7 136.2 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 181
30.12.2013 FTO (–) 9 – 104.8 – 0.25 100.00 0.24 1.00 89
08.01.2014 MRO (FRT) 7 112.5 193.0 0.25 100.00 – 1.00 92
08.01.2014 FTO (–) 7 – 179.0 – 0.25 46.39 0.17 1.04 132
* For more information on the Eurosystem’s operations from 10 July 2013 to 8 October 2013, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Monthly  Report, November 2013, p 26. 1 MRO: main refi  nancing operation, LTRO: longer-term refi  nancing operation, S-LTRO: supplementary longer-term refi  nancing operation, FTO: fi  ne-tuning operation (+: liquidity-  providing operation, –: liquidity-  absorbing operation), FRT: fi  xed-rate tender. 2 Calculation according to publication after MRO allotment. 3 Ratio of total bids 
to the allotment amount. 4 The interest rate corresponds to the average minimum bid rate or main refi  nancing rate of the 
MROs conducted over the life of this operation (may be rounded to two decimal places in the table).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
31

had likewise been discontinued, are diminish -
ing over time owing to maturing paper.
Following the decline in the outstanding refi -
nancing volume in October and November as a 
result, above all, of continued repayments of 
funds provided in the three- year tenders, re -
course to the Eurosystem’s monetary- policy re -
financing operations temporarily increased 
among euro-  area banks until the end of the 
year. In particular the volume of liquidity pro -
vided in the one- week main refinancing oper -
ations rose substantially in the course of De -
cember. Coupled with greater underbidding in 
the weekly liquidity- absorbing tenders,1 this 
caused a strong rise in excess liquidity.
The regularly recurring greater tendency of the 
banking sector to hold liquidity buffers at year- 
end and the lower level of excess liquidity com -
pared with previous years are likely to have 
contributed to the increase in the demand for 
liquidity. In addition, it can be assumed that the institutions are increasingly taking active charge 
of their balance sheet reporting towards the 
end of the reporting period (31 December), for 
example regarding internal and regulatory as -
pects. It is likely that the planned balance sheet 
assessment of banks to be carried out by the 
ECB in 2014 played a significant role here, too.
Demand for liquidity rapidly returned to normal 
at the beginning of January. Main refinancing 
operations saw a significant decline in demand 
and overnight excess liquidity ranged between 
€125 billion and €187 billion amidst height -
ened fluctuations. Short- term money market 
rates reacted with increased fluctuations. Evi -
dently, banks have been increasingly aligning 
their individual bidding behaviour in the Euro -
system’s refinancing and liquidity-  absorbing Substantial rise 
in refinancing volume and  excess liquidity at the turn of the year
Factors poten-
tially affecting the increased demand for  liquidity at  
year- endMoney market conditions marked by fluc-tuations amidst declining excess liquidityfelt at the beginning of the period, with de-
mand rising in the main refi  nancing oper-
ations. In addition, from the second week, 
underbidding occurred on three consecu-
tive occasions in the SMP liquidity- absorbing 
tenders amounting to up to €74 billion (as 
at 30 December 2013). This bidding behav-
iour by credit institutions sent excess liquid-
ity signifi  cantly higher. From around €160 billion at the beginning of the period, it 
peaked in the week around the turn of the 
year, rising to €284 billion. If it had not 
been for the early repayments of liquidity 
provided in the three- year tenders, which 
totalled €50.5 billion in this period, excess 
liquidity would have been higher still. None-
theless, at an average of €205 billion, it far exceeded the prior- period level of €165 bil-lion. Despite the clearly improved supply of liquidity overall, especially before Christmas and the turn of the year, overnight rates re-
mained at an elevated level, rising sharply again at the end of the year, in particular (EONIA +22 basis points, compared with only +5 basis points in the previous year). 
Excess liquidity plummeted by around €122 billion to roughly €157 billion per day in the last week of the maintenance period, ie the week commencing on 8 January 2014, pri-
marily on account of demand in the main 
refi  nancing operations deteriorating by €56 
billion and an SMP liquidity- absorbing ten-
der absorbing all the SMP liquidity again for 
the fi  rst time following three consecutive 
occurrences of underbidding. These consid-erably tighter liquidity conditions sent over-
night rates back to a somewhat elevated 
level.
1 Each week, the Eurosystem offers banks a liquidity-  
absorbing operation in the amount of the outstanding SMP 
portfolio volume. This operation was introduced alongside 
the SMP in May 2010 to stress that it was not the intention 
of this programme to loosen monetary policy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
32

operations with the respective level of money 
market rates. This is basically a positive devel -
opment as it indicates that banks are increas -
ingly reverting to a more normal liquidity man -
agement instead of holding large amounts of 
excess central bank reserves for precautionary 
reasons. However, under these specific circum -
stances, the Eurosystem’s liquidity- absorbing 
operations tend to make money market condi -
tions more volatile.
On the whole, the Bundesbank is therefore 
open to possibly adjusting the current supply of 
liquidity- absorbing operations, if such an ad -
justment is suitable to stabilise money market 
and liquidity conditions, signalling even more 
clearly than before the Eurosystem’s accommo -
dative monetary policy stance.
Since around mid-  November, the short-  term 
money market rates in the euro area have been 
increasing markedly in reaction to the trend de -
cline in excess liquidity. Greater fluctuations in 
the unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA 
and other short- term money market rates could 
be observed both at month- ends and at the 
turn of the year in each case. However, short- 
term money market rates were also exposed to 
greater fluctuations in reaction to liquidity de -
velopments in the course of January. Against 
this backdrop, EONIA temporarily reached val -
ues above the Eurosystem’s main refinancing 
rate. This increase in short- term money market 
rates should not be interpreted as an expres -
sion of tensions in the money market, but 
merely reflects banks’ voluntary repayment of 
surplus liquidity to the Eurosystem. The very 
short- term money market rates ought to be 
somewhat below the main financing rate on 
average in view of the continued full allotment 
for monetary policy refinancing operations. 
Nevertheless, it is possible for them to exceed 
the main refinancing rate for several successive 
days because the monetary policy counterpar -
ties are only able to influence the banking sys -
tem’s aggregate liquidity position vis- à- vis the 
Eurosystem once a week through their bidding 
behaviour in the regular monetary policy oper -ations. It is likely that the short- term money 
market rates will continue to exhibit stronger 
fluctuations in the future while the liquidity 
situation remains unchanged.
After the end of November, money market for -
ward rates2 in the euro area started going up 
again slightly after reaching a local trough fol -
lowing the interest rate cut of 7  November. 
This increase accelerated somewhat after the 
meeting of the ECB Governing Council on 
5 December. One reason for this is probably 
that the previous expectations of some market 
participants about possible further monetary 
policy measures by the Eurosystem were not 
confirmed. On the whole, however, the in -
crease in forward rates was significantly lower 
than the temporary rise in EONIA in the pres -
ence of heightened fluctuations. At the end of 
January, forward rates fell again to the low 
level of November. This may indicate that mar -
ket participants currently do not expect recently 
observed fluctuations in short- term money 
market rates to be reflected in a distinct rise in 
interest rates any time soon.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
In the final quarter, balance sheet cleansing 
processes in the banking sector were a major 
determinant of monetary trends. Besides year- 
end effects, it is likely that the stronger reduc -
tion in balance sheet assets in the autumn 
months was also motivated by the impending 
balance sheet assessment prior to the launch 
of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), 
with 31 December 2013 as the reporting date 
(see box on pages 37 to 39 and the chart on 
page 36). Of the M3 counterparts, the balance 
sheet repairs were reflected above all in an ac -
celerated reduction in securitised lending. The 
decline in lending to the private sector also Short- term 
money market rates rise amidst substantial fluc-tuations as banks voluntar-ily repay excess 
liquidityMoney market 
forward rates up, but forward price curve 
 remains flat
Macroeconomic 
setting
2 Implicit forward rates, derived from swap rates, for the 
unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA and interest 
rates of exchange- traded futures on the three- month 
 Euribor.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
33

Interest rates in the repo market: 
approximation of short- term risk- free interest rates
Since the beginning of the fi  nancial crisis, 
unsecured short- term money market rates for interbank trading (such as EONIA and 
EURIBOR rates) have no longer provided an appropriate approximation of risk- free inter-est rates. An alternative is provided by inter-est rates on secured money market transac-
tions.1 Where high- quality securities are 
used as collateral, the credit risk involved in 
such transactions is low and the repo rate 
can be used as an approximation of the 
risk- free interest rate for the relevant matur-ity. However, repo rates have yet to assume the importance of EONIA and EURIBOR.
Repo rate determinants
Repos differ, among other things, with re-
gard to maturity, motivation of the counter-
parties and the securities used as collateral. 
In terms of maturity, most repos are over-night transactions, but they can also have 
(standard) maturities of up to two years. In 
terms of motivation, repo transactions can 
be “money- driven”, which means that the 
seller needs liquidity and, in return, provides 
securities collateral (in the case of general collateral (GC) repos). If, by contrast, the repos are “securities- driven”, the buyer 
wishes to borrow a specifi  c security and, in 
return, offers liquidity as collateral. In such 
cases, the repo rate is normally lower than for money- driven transactions with qualita-
tively comparable collateral and therefore provides a less appropriate approximation of the short- term risk- free interest rate.
2 
The higher the quality of collateral, the 
lower the repo rate tends to be – and the 
more likely it is to provide an accurate indi-cation of the risk- free interest rate. Another 
determinant of the repo rate can be the borrower’s creditworthiness, whereby the 
lower his credit rating, the higher the repo rate.
Calculating representative rates
Outside exchanges or electronic trading 
venues, the conditions for individual trans-actions are generally only known to the 
contracting parties. On electronic trading 
platforms or in market information systems, 
by contrast, the conditions offered, and sometimes also the transactions them-selves, can be observed by third parties. 
There are two basic techniques for calculat-ing representative market interest rates.
In the case of the transaction- based ap-proach, the repo rates for actual transac-tions concluded are used as the basis for 
calculations. Examples of this include Eurex 
Repo’s STOXX GC Pooling Overnight rates, 
which are regularly commented on in the 
Bundesbank’s Monthly Report (see the box 
on pages 29 to 32). These are based on a 
range of eligible collateral, which is pooled and can therefore be used for various trans-
actions. Another option is the RepoFunds 
Rate, which is calculated jointly by the trad-ing platforms BrokerTec and MTS and pub-
lished in three variations for transactions with a maturity of one day which are 
backed by German, French and Italian gov-
ernment bonds. These include transactions 
backed by GC as well as specifi  c collateral, whereby the percentages are not disclosed.
3 
The transaction- based approach becomes 
untenable, however, if an adequate number 
of transactions is not carried out regularly, 
which is particularly relevant in the case of longer- term maturities.
In the case of the survey- based approach, a 
panel of market participants is asked to pro-vide the rates for hypothetical transactions. 
Examples of this include the EUREPO rates 
1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The fi  nancial system 
in transition: the new importance of repo markets, 
Monthly Report, December 2013, pages 57-71.
2 This is because the collateral provider is required to pay the repo rate although he does not need liquidity 
and the initiative for the transaction usually lies with 
the party receiving the collateral. In turn, the seller can relend the liquidity received from such a repo transac-tion at a higher repo by means of a GC repo, thereby generating a profi  t.3 These repo rates are freely available online at http://www.repofundsrate.com.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
34

calculated by the European Banking Feder-
ation.4 The panel banks provide their esti-
mation of the interest rate on an interbank 
loan backed by the best collateral. The ex-
pectation in doing so is that the panel 
banks will normally be willing to enter into 
transactions at these rates.
The survey- based approach facilitates the continuous provision of repo rates for a 
whole range of different maturities of up to twelve months – irrespective of whether or 
not any transactions have actually taken place. Compared with the transaction- 
based approach, this procedure has the dis-
advantage that the quality of the reported 
bids is indeterminate. One variation on transaction- based rates is provided by the 
repo rates recently made available by Eurex Repo GC Pooling for transactions of various standard maturities, ranging from one week to twelve months, which are based on both transactions and binding quotes. These en-
sure that rates are calculated continuously, 
even if an insuffi   cient number of transac-
tions are carried out on one particular day 
of trading. The interest rate spreads be-
tween the GC Pooling and EUREPO interest rates are likely to be caused primarily by dif-ferences in the quality of underlying collat-eral.
EONIA swap rates as an alternative
EONIA swaps are hedging transactions in 
which a fi  xed interest rate (the swap rate) is 
“exchanged” for the EONIA rate for the 
term of the contract. Because no loan prin-
cipal changes hands (instead, the difference 
between the variable EONIA rate and the fi  xed rate on a notional amount is paid), 
there is virtually no credit risk. However, the – unsecured – EONIA, which is used as the reference rate, can include a (relatively small 
amount of) compensation for credit risk. Much like the EUREPO yield curve, the 
EONIA swap curve can therefore be seen as a virtually risk- free yield curve.
Conclusion
There is no generally accepted measure of 
short- term risk- free interest rates. The exist-ing approaches each have their own spe-
cifi  c characteristics, which must be taken into account in their evaluation and inter-
pretation. The underlying reason for the, in 
some cases, pronounced interest rate 
spreads is that the different risks associated with the relevant transactions have increas-ingly been priced differently since the crisis. This, in itself, does not constitute a malfunc-tion or overreaction on the part of the mar-
kets. The fact that fi  nancial market partici-
pants are now better able to make distinc-tions is to be welcomed.
4 See http://www.euribor- ebf.eu/eurepo- org/eurepo- 
rates.html.Secured overnight rates
Sources:  Euribor-EBF,  Eurex  Repo  and  ICAP  Information  Ser-
vices.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 20140.200.20.40.60.81.01.2
–++++++%, monthly averages
EUREPO TN
GC Pooling Overnight
RepoFunds Rate DE
Interest rate structure in the secured 
money market in January 2014
Sources: Euribor-EBF and Eurex Repo.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.140.160.180.200.220.240.26
1
year9
months6
months3
months1
month1
weekEONIA swapGC Pooling
EUREPO%, monthly averagesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
35

continued,  although it slowed perceptibly given 
economic improvement. Money growth was 
again supported by inflows of funds from 
abroad, which were again significantly larger 
than in the preceding quarters as a result of 
ongoing current account surpluses and higher 
demand for euro- area securities.
Given that there were no noteworthy contribu -
tions to growth from other counterparts, the 
monetary aggregate M3 recorded a slight de -
cline on balance in the fourth quarter. With the 
opportunity cost of holding liquid funds declin -
ing further, sight deposits again increased con -
siderably in the fourth quarter of 2013. How -
ever, at the same time, low interest rates and 
the decline in risk aversion contributed to in -
vestors further reducing the remaining deposits 
included in M3, in particular short- term time 
deposits and money market fund shares, in the 
search for yield.
Against this backdrop, the downward trend in 
money growth seen since the beginning of 
2013 continued in the reporting quarter. The 
annual rate of M3, which had stood at 3.5% at 
the end of 2012, fell to 1% at the end of 2013. 
Simultaneously, the annual rate for lending to 
the private sector (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) continued its downward trend, 
which has persisted since mid-2011. Underlying monetary dynamics therefore remained very 
subdued.
The decline in loans to the private sector in the 
final quarter again focussed on lending to fi -
nancial and non- financial corporations. A con -
siderable portion was attributable to a damp -
ening special effect in the context of securitisa -
tion transactions involving loans to other finan -
cial corporations.
Loans to non- financial corporations also de -
clined further. However, the reduction in lend -
ing to this sector slowed down perceptibly to -
wards the end of the year, which meant that 
no direct negative impact could be observed 
from balance sheet cleansing. Improvement 
trends were most evident in the long- term ma -
turity segment. For the first time since April 
2012, loans with a maturity of over five years 
recorded inflows in the fourth quarter of 2013. 
An increase in long- term loans is usually indica -
tive of greater economic optimism among en -
terprises.
At country level, the heterogeneity in the devel -
opment of lending remained high. The weak 
economic environment and the persistently 
great need for deleveraging resulted in a fur -
ther decline in loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, especially in Spain and Italy. According Low interest 
rates put brake on growth of M3 components
Downward 
trend in money and credit growth  continuesDecline in loans to non- financial corporations slower
Improvement 
trend in loans with long- term maturities, …
… but hetero-geneity in the euro area  remains highBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
* Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20133,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++12-month changes1 at the end of the quarter, in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
36

On the decline in assets in the bank balance sheets 
of the four large euro-area countries
Banks’ restructuring endeavours were re-
fl  ected in a sharp decline in total assets that 
began in mid-2012 and affected, through-
out the euro area, mainly claims on other 
commercial banks and the Eurosystem as well as derivative fi  nancial instruments. 
Claims on the domestic private sector were also scaled back, however. Of the four large 
euro- area countries (see the chart on 
page 38), whose credit institutions account for almost three- quarters of the total assets 
of the entire euro area’s banking sector, Germany was most strongly affected, fol-
lowed by Spain and France.
To a large extent, the decline in balance sheets was fuelled by claims on monetary fi  nancial institutions, growth in which stemmed, until mid-2013, from claims on the Eurosystem.
1 The main factor behind 
the shortening of the balance sheets were 
substantial fl  ows of deposits from Germany 
in particular – though also from France – 
back to foreign banks as confi  dence in the 
single currency area rose again. In keeping 
with market conditions, which have im-proved only slightly since then, the reduc-
tion in claims on the Eurosystem stabilised 
during the course of 2013. The decline in 
claims on other commercial banks gained in 
importance in the second half of 2013. 
 German and French banks in particular may 
have used this item to enable them to 
 report lower total assets at the end of the 
year.
The second important item that led to the 
trimming of balance sheet assets were fi  -nancial derivatives purchased for trading 
purposes, which had a signifi  cant effect on 
the item “Other assets” in the chart on page  38. In various euro- area countries 
(and in Germany since 2010) these deriva-
tives are subject to reporting in the balance 
sheet, and at institutions that engage in trading on a large scale they account for a 
relatively considerable share on both the 
assets side and the liabilities side of the bal-ance sheet. Two developments in particular 
are probably responsible for the pro-nounced reduction of these items in Ger-
many and France, and to a lesser extent in 
Italy and Spain. First, due to the consider-
ably heightened uncertainty, particularly in 
the third quarter of 2011, banks had in-
creasingly concluded derivative contracts to 
hedge against interest rate and currency 
risks; these hedges were terminated again 
as uncertainty diminished from mid-2012. Second, current regulatory endeavours – notably the Basel III framework with its 
more stringent capital requirements and the leverage ratio as well as restrictions on trad-ing business over and above those require-
ments are probably already exerting pres-
sure on banks which are active in trading to 
scale back their, in some cases, signifi  cant 
derivatives holdings.
Nor was balance sheet shrinkage in the 
euro area restricted to just these two items. 
In Spain and Italy, the reduction of claims on the euro- area private sector played a 
major part in this respect.2 In Spain, more-
over, the orderly restructuring of the bank-ing sector at the end of 2012/beginning of 
2013 led to a large- scale spin- off of credit 
to a resolution agency (which, for statistical 
purposes, is classifi  ed as belonging to the 
non- banking sector).
With regard to loans to the private sector, 
many indications in those countries suggest 
1 These result from Eurosystem liquidity- absorbing 
 operations, the deposit facility as well as the excess 
reserves, which are held on current accounts with the 
national central banks.
2 The chart on p 38 is based on transaction- related 
flows; unlike absolute changes in outstanding 
amounts, valuation adjustments for claims and secur-
ities holdings are therefore eliminated.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
37

that their decline, as has already been ex-
plained elsewhere,3 was mainly demand- 
driven. Available indicators for supply- side constraints suggest that, when viewed in isolation, bank- related factors –  which in 
2011 in particular and to some extent also 
in 2012 clearly contributed to a tightening 
of credit conditions – are not exercising a 
restrictive infl  uence at the current end. This 
is corroborated by the fact that the cut-backs in loans to the non- fi  nancial private 
sector in Italy and Spain have not as yet ac-
celerated despite the impending balance sheet assessment as part of the banking 
union. Nonetheless, it is too early to sound 
the all- clear. A glance at the high level of non- performing loans on Spanish and Ital-
ian banks’ books illustrates that the process of cleaning up bank balance sheets has not yet been concluded.
The balance sheet assessment to be carried 
out as at the balance sheet date of 
31  Decem ber 2013 has probably had a 
greater impact on other asset items. In the 
3 For an in- depth discussion of this issue, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Differences in money and credit growth 
in the euro area and in individual euro- area countries, 
Monthly Report, July 2013, pp 47-64, and Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Private debt – status quo, need for ad-justment and policy implications, Monthly Report, 
January 2014, pp 53-65.Balance sheet assets of selected euro-area banks*
* Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20131,0008006004002000200400600800
–––––++++Other assets, including financial derivatives from the trading portfolio
4002000200400600
––+++
–400–2000+200+400+6002006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Claims on the non-monetary private sector in the euro area
Claims on general government in the euro area
Claims on MFIs in the euro area
Claims on the rest of the world
–1,000–800–600–400–2000+200+400+600+800+1,000+1,200+1,400
SpainGermanyTotal assets
ItalyFrance12-month changes¹ at the end of the quarter, in € billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
38

to the banks participating in the Bank Lending 
Survey (BLS), this was not attributable to tighter 
credit supply factors in the euro area as a 
whole. The survey states that the participating 
institutions largely kept standards for loans to 
enterprises at the level of the previous quarter 
on balance. By contrast, the surveyed banks 
again reported a moderate decline in the de -
mand for bank loans by non-  financial corpor -
ations in the euro area.
Lending to households, too, continued to ex -
hibit heterogeneity at country level. On aggre -
gate, unsecured loans to households showed 
no increase at year- end. Consumer credit and 
other lending recorded net outflows, which 
were just about offset by the comparatively 
moderate inflows to loans for house purchase. 
On balance, lending to households stagnated 
in the fourth quarter, leaving the annual growth 
rate to fall marginally to 0.3%. This develop -
ment is consistent with what the institutions 
surveyed as part of the BLS reported. They stated that they had also left standards for 
loans to households almost unchanged, while 
at the same time reporting largely stagnant 
borrowing requirements among households.
Unlike loans to the non- financial private sector, 
the reduction of which slowed down on bal -
ance, the decline in securitised lending was 
particularly pronounced in the last quarter of 
the year. Both securities of general government 
and the private sector recorded substantial out -
flows, which were probably linked to the im -
pending balance sheet assessment of systemic -
ally important euro- area banks. This is consist -
ent with the institutions questioned as part of 
the BLS reporting that given the new regulatory 
and supervisory activities they reduced their 
risk- weighted assets and strengthened their 
capital position in the second half of 2013.
The outflows from securitised lending to gen -
eral government – which stemmed mainly from 
the periphery countries but also partially from Stagnation in 
lending to householdsClearly pro-nounced decline in securitised lendingfourth quarter of 2013, French and Spanish 
banks strongly reduced their holdings of 
bonds from the non- monetary private sec-
tor. French, Spanish and Italian banks also 
sharply scaled back their holdings of do-mestic sovereign bonds, which had risen continuously in the previous quarters,
4 in 
the second half of 2013. It would be wel-come if these were not just short- term  accounting- policy measures, so that the level of interdependency between banks 
and governments in the euro area may be 
reduced on a lasting basis.
To conclude, the experience of recent years 
has shown three things. First, for the bank-
ing sector of a country considered to be a 
safe haven, a rise in general uncertainty can result in a considerable build- up and subse-
quent reduction of balance sheet assets. 
Second, the weakness of economic activity 
was refl  ected in the Spanish and Italian banking sectors, as was, in the case of Spain, the ongoing reduction of debt over-hangs in the private sector. Third, the fi  nan-cial crisis gave rise to a tightening of regula-
tory requirements throughout the euro area; the balance sheet assessment at the 
launch of the banking union probably amp-
lifi  ed this effect briefl  y. Thus, the broad- 
based process underway in the euro area of 
reducing the balance sheet is based on as 
yet unfi  nished corrections of previous un-
desirable developments – corrections which 
are necessary in order to strengthen the 
 resilience of the fi  nancial systems and  restore confi  dence in the single currency 
area on a long- term basis.
4 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Changes in bank 
holdings of domestic government bonds in the euro 
area, Monthly Report, November 2013, pp 31-32.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
39

France – were higher than in the previous quar -
ter, but were far exceeded by the outflows 
from securitised lending to the private sector. 
Here again, Italian, Spanish, and French institu -
tions contributed a great deal to net outflows; 
however, the largest contribution was made by 
institutions in the Netherlands. The decline in 
private sector assets was negligible by compari -
son.
The contractionary effects of lending were 
counterbalanced by a strong expansion in the 
MFI sector’s net external asset position. As in 
the preceding quarters, the inflows of funds re -
flected continued current account surpluses in 
the euro area, for one. In addition, securities 
transactions with non- residents in the final 
quarter again contributed to the expansion of 
the monetary aggregate on account of the de -
mand from non- resident investors for domes -
tically issued shares persisting and demand for 
debt securities issued by domestic non- MFIs in -
creasing again towards the end of the year.
On balance, monetary capital had no signifi -
cant impact on the monetary aggregate. How -
ever, at the same time, holdings of bank bonds 
with a maturity of over two years were built up 
again in the fourth quarter for the first time 
since mid-2011. This is consistent with the insti -
tutions questioned as part of the BLS reporting that there had been noteworthy improvements 
regarding the issuance of longer- term bank 
bonds for the euro area as a whole. According 
to the surveyed institutions, the sovereign debt 
crisis had virtually no impact on banks’ funding 
conditions or their lending policies in the final 
quarter.
For the first time since the onset of the crisis, 
developments in France, Spain and the Nether -
lands caused a decline in capital and reserves, 
which is likely to be associated with revalu -
ations and balance sheet adjustments. On bal -
ance, this resulted in a slight decline in monet -
ary capital which was negligible compared with 
the developments in lending and external 
claims.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
Banks in Germany also recorded positive de -
posit business in the fourth quarter of 2013, al -
though the momentum in this segment weak -
ened distinctly on the whole towards year- end. 
As in the preceding quarters, the grown was 
supported by inflows to sight deposits, which 
reflected the money- holding sector’s continued 
preference for liquidity. By contrast, the decline Strong expan-
sion in net  external asset position
Monetary 
 capital without major impact on monetary  aggregateFurther increase in deposit  business …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2013 Q4 2013 Q3
Central government deposits – 25.1 – 18.5
Monetary aggregate M3 –  7.9 38.2
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 54.6 87.1
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 40.9 – 20.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 21.6 – 28.5
Monetary capital – 16.9 – 36.3
of which
Capital and reserves – 16.7 19.1
Other longer-term fi  nancial  liabilities –  0.2 – 55.3Assets 2013 Q4 2013 Q3
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 155.8 – 70.1
Loans
1 –  60.8 – 62.6
Securities –  90.5 –  0.6
Credit to general government in the euro area –  49.5 – 21.1
Loans –  14.9 –  9.4
Securities –  34.5 – 11.7
Net external assets 154.5 61.1
Other counterparts of M3 –   3.8 6.6
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
40

in risk aversion caused the money- holding mar -
ket participants to shift their funds from longer- 
term types of deposit to assets outside M3 in 
search of a higher yield.
A substantial part of the inflow to short- term 
deposits continued to stem from households, 
which accumulated sight deposits again per -
ceptibly, albeit to a somewhat more moderate 
extent compared with previous quarters. By 
contrast, non- financial corporations slightly re -
duced their sight deposits on balance in the re -
porting quarter, while at the same time mark -
edly increasing their stocks of short- term time 
deposits again for the first time since summer 
2011. This development is likely to be attribut -
able, among other things, to the slight rise in 
the return on shorter-  term time deposits seen 
at the end of the year, by means of which these 
deposits became more attractive, increasing 
again slightly on aggregate for the first time in 
five quarters.
Moreover, domestic banks’ deposit business 
was characterised in the reporting quarter by a 
renewed distinct reduction in long-  term time 
deposits from financial corporations, in particu -
lar insurance companies and pension funds. As 
in the previous quarters, financial corporations 
are likely to have shifted the freed- up funds to -
wards less liquid and riskier assets outside M3 
in search of higher yield.
In contrast to the reduction in lending in the 
euro area as a whole, credit business in Ger -
many remained on the positive path begun in 
the previous quarter. This was mainly due to 
marked growth in securitised lending to gen -
eral government and a noticeable increase in 
loans to the private sector. The latter still con -
sisted primarily of loans to households, which, 
for several quarters, have largely been fuelled 
by housing loans due, inter alia , to the fact 
that financing conditions remain favourable. 
However, the expansion in loans for house pur -
chase was somewhat weaker in the final quar -
ter of the year compared with the previous 
quarters, which is probably related, above all, … driven by 
sight deposits and short- term time deposits
Long- term de-
posits reduced once again in favour of assets outside M3
Distinct rise in 
banks’ lending to domestic non- banks; loans for house purchase remain driving forceMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year change in per cent. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 De-
noted with a negative sign because, taken in isolation, an in-
crease curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
41

to weaker demand. This is corroborated by the 
current BLS results, which indicate that, accord -
ing to the banks participating in the BLS, the 
trend of rising demand for private housing 
loans observed since spring 2010 came to a 
halt in the fourth quarter of 2013. According to 
the surveyed bank managers, the outlook on 
the housing market remains positive and con -
sumer confidence continues to be high; how -
ever, compared with the previous years, the 
positive climate has weakened somewhat.
With regard to consumer credit, the banks sur -
veyed as part of the BLS also experienced 
largely stagnant demand in the final quarter. 
However, the still favourable conditions for pri -
vate consumption – in the form of improved 
income prospects and a better economic out -
look – and the associated increase in the pro -
pensity to purchase contributed to a further 
rise in lending for consumption purposes in the 
reporting quarter as well. On the whole, the 
momentum of loans to domestic households in 
Germany continues to be very moderate, how -
ever: the 12-month rate for loans to house -
holds fell slightly to 1.2% from 1.3% in the pre -
vious quarter.
Loans to domestic non- financial corporations 
developed increasingly positively in the report -
ing quarter after contracting during the previ -
ous quarters, in some cases significantly. The 
distinct increase in lending in December marked 
the end of the downward tendency evident in 
this credit segment since autumn 2012. Given 
that the development of loans to non- financial 
corporations typically reacts to macroeconomic 
developments and investment with a lag of 
around three quarters, the increasingly positive 
development in loans to the corporate sector in 
the reporting quarter is probably attributable, 
above all, to the fact that German enterprises 
have slowly stepped up their investment activ -
ities since summer 2013. It can therefore be ex -
pected for the forthcoming quarters that lend -
ing will experience something of a revival 
owing to the basically positive economic and 
investment outlook. However, it should be Growth in loans 
for consumption purposes still positive
Only marginal 
decline in loans to non- financial corporationsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2013
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 36.2 12.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 11.6 1.2
of over 2 years –  9.9 – 7.3
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 1.7 – 0.5
of over 3 months –  2.3 – 1.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  3.1 – 0.8
Securitised lending 6.0 5.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 –  0.8 1.9
of which to households 3 5.7 3.1
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 –  5.3 – 0.3
Securitised lending 0.7 – 2.6
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Loans of German banks to
selected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2  Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201321012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 as %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
42

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey, difference between the 
number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased 
somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2014 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20142.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3Bank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
Riskier loans... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprises
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to households
Change in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
Change in margins 2 for loans for ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
43

borne in mind that the importance of MFI loans 
as a source of finance for non- financial corpor -
ations has been experiencing a trend decline 
for years. It must therefore be assumed that a 
considerable part of corporate investment will 
continue to be financed from internal funds 
and other external forms of financing as well as 
through alternative lenders (especially intra-  
group loans, capital- market- based inflows of 
funds and trade credit) in the coming quarters.3 
The BLS results underpin this assessment. For 
example, the participating German banks have 
been indicating for some quarters now that pri -
marily recourse to other sources of funding, in -
ternal funds in particular, had the effect of 
dampening enterprises’ demand for bank 
loans.
On the supply side, the, on the whole, slight 
recovery in domestic lending to the private sec -
tor was matched by largely unchanged lending 
policies. The German results of the BLS indicate 
that the surveyed institutions only marginally 
tightened their standards for loans to enter -
prises on balance in the fourth quarter of 2013. 
This applies in a similar way to loans to all firm 
sizes and of all maturities. Thus, the period of 
little overall change in lending policies, which 
commenced in mid-2009, continued. None of 
the factors surveyed in the BLS that are relevant 
for credit standards on loans to enterprises dis -
played any noteworthy expansionary or re -
strictive trends. At the same time, the surveyed 
institutions on balance widened their margins 
for loans to enterprises. This applied, first and 
foremost, to lending to small and medium-  
sized enterprises.
Credit standards vis- à- vis households, too, re -
mained virtually unchanged. None of the sur -
veyed factors on the standards for housing 
loans and consumer credit had a noteworthy 
impact on lending policies in the fourth quar -
ter. With the exception of a moderate narrow -
ing of margins in the case of average- risk loans 
for house purchase, there were likewise only 
minimal adjustments to margins.In the fourth quarter, the survey contained a 
number of ad hoc  questions on banks’ funding 
conditions, the impact of the sovereign debt 
crisis and on how the institutions’ credit stand -
ards were affected by the new regulatory and 
supervisory activities, which include the forth -
coming balance sheet assessment by the ECB. 
In general, the institutions reported a slight 
overall improvement in their funding environ -
ment in the final quarter of 2013. Furthermore, 
they stated – as in the previous quarters – that 
the sovereign debt crisis had provoked changes 
neither in funding conditions nor in credit 
standards. In the light of the new regulatory 
and prudential activities, banks reduced their 
risk- weighted assets in the second half of 2013 
and strengthened their capital position by re -
taining profits and issuing capital instruments. 
In lending business, the changed regulatory 
and supervisory setting made itself felt in the 
form of slightly tighter credit standards for en -
terprises as well as somewhat narrower mar -
gins for consumer credit. It is likely that these 
relatively slight adjustments were attributable 
in part to the fact that the new regulations, 
taken in isolation, had a positive impact on the 
surveyed institutions’ funding conditions.
Owing to their still very low level, the develop -
ment of bank lending rates in new business 
probably tended to support domestic lending 
to the private sector. In the fourth quarter, 
bank lending rates across all business areas, 
maturities and volumes largely followed the 
moderate decline in interest rates in the capital 
market. The only exception was the slight in -
crease in interest rates for short- term loans to 
enterprises. By contrast, medium and long-  
term loans to enterprises in the final quarter 
were consistent with the general trend, ie 
somewhat more favourable than before. On 
average, the reporting institutions were char -
ging interest for short- term funds of 3.0% for 
small- scale and 1.9% for large- scale loans at German banks’ 
credit standards vis- à- vis enter-prises marginally tighter
Almost no 
changes to credit standards vis- à- vis  householdsRisk- weighted assets reduced and capital  position strengthened
Bank lending rates follow interest rate  decline in the 
capital market
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The structure of corporate 
financing amid weak loan growth in Germany and the euro 
area, Monthly Report, August 2013, pp 42-43.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
44

Change in households’ assets and portfolio behaviour 
in Germany
According to the fi  nancial accounts statis-
tics, German households’ fi  nancial assets 
have increased signifi  cantly since the launch 
of monetary union. Starting from €3,257 billion at the beginning of 1999, they reached around €5,070 billion in the third 
quarter of 2013. In the years 2001-02 and 
2008-09 – at the end of the New Economy boom and at the height of the fi  nancial and 
economic crisis  – the largely constant in-
crease was interrupted by periods in which 
fi  nancial assets contracted in net terms. 
These declines were mainly attributable to 
valuation losses through a fall in equity 
prices. After the annual growth in fi  nancial 
assets dropped to -3.9% at the end of 2008, it recovered within a year and has since recorded positive momentum similar 
to that before the crisis.
The breakdown in households’ fi  nancial assets in Germany has changed only mar-ginally since the turn of the millennium. 
Monetary assets have always been domin-
ant, accounting for a share of just under 
30% of fi  nancial assets until the escalation 
of the fi  nancial crisis and subsequently re-maining steady at around 34%. Of these, sight deposits (including cash holdings) 
gained the most ground, whilst, in particu-
lar in periods of falling interest rates, the share of other, longer- term deposits in fi  -nancial assets decreased. Amongst the longer- term investment forms, insurance and pension claims followed very similar 
patterns to monetary investments in terms 
of their importance and development. At 
the same time, the share of other securities (ie long- term bonds and equity) in fi  nancial 
assets declined from 35% in 1999 to only 
22.3% in the third quarter of 2013. Equity, 
in particular, assumed major signifi  cance in the periods of upturn related to the New Economy and before the intensifi  cation of the fi  nancial crisis, but it swiftly declined 
again thereafter. Its share has consequently since moved at a constant but low level.
As with fi  nancial assets, non- fi  nancial assets 
recorded a marked rise in Germany from 
1999 up to the current end. Besides real in-
vestment, this also refl  ected valuation gains which followed a slight upward trend from 2006. These effects are likely to be attribut-
able mainly to residential property, which comprises the lion’s share of households’ 
non- fi  nancial assets in Germany and which has increased in value in past years.
The change in German households’ port-folio structure suggests that, in particular during the fi  nancial crisis and recently in connection with the sovereign debt crisis, 
fi  nancial assets have been transferred from 
more profi  table investment forms, such as long- term securities, into more liquid and 
less risky investments. Thus long- term 
bonds saw the main outfl  ows of funds at 
the current end. Although in past years sig-
nifi  cant price gains were often posted in 
households’ portfolios as a result of a rise in 
equity prices, direct investment in equities 
also declined, so that the positive valuation effects lost signifi  cance in the portfolio as a whole.
1
In the period under review, the withdrawal of funds from securities coincided with the 
growing signifi  cance of monetary assets, 
particularly sight deposits, in the acquisition 
1 However, the net outfl  ows from equities have 
 recently been largely compensated by infl  ows into 
 mutual fund shares, which is partly due to the con-
tinued popularity of mixed securities- based funds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
45

of fi  nancial assets. These mainly entail low 
or even negative real returns and thus partly 
a loss of real purchasing power. However, 
in the current low- interest- rate environment 
the return disadvantage of these invest-
ment forms is small compared with longer- 
term deposits. Whilst the latter have some-times played a signifi  cant role in the acqui-
sition of new fi  nancial assets in times of 
high interest rates, they again lost import-
ance at the current end and were ultimately 
reduced. Although insurance and pension 
claims are also not very liquid instruments, 
they have received large infl  ows of funds in 
Germany not least at the current end, as they are perceived to be largely risk- free and sometimes promise a higher return 
than other investment forms.
With regard to non- fi  nancial assets, since 2010 housing loans and housing invest-
ment in particular have grown in Germany 
with appreciably more momentum than in 
previous years. Possible reasons for this are the low lending rates on the one hand and 
on the other the low returns on fi  nancial assets, which enhances the attractiveness 
of investments in non- fi  nancial assets in the 
current low- interest- rate environment.All in all, the portfolio investment behaviour 
of households in Germany has been in-
fl  uenced in the period under review by fac-
tors on the fi  nancial and capital markets, 
including the low- interest- rate environ-
ment. First, it is evident that the attractive-ness of non- fi  nancial assets (real estate) has 
increased to some extent with the fall in interest rates. Second, investment behav-
iour has clearly not been focused on more 
risky and thus usually higher- return assets, 
but rather there was an expansion in liquid assets. In combination with the importance 
of insurance and pension claims, this be-
haviour  indicates both a signifi  cant risk 
aversion and a certain preference for liquid-
ity amongst households, which in turn is 
likely to be  attributable to a general uncer-tainty in connection with the debt crisis. In 
an environment of low nominal interest 
rates, in particular for relatively secure and 
shorter- term investments, this kind of vol-
untary portfolio selection often implies 
negative real returns.Financial assets and portfolio behaviour of households in Germany
1 Monetary assets are defined as cash and sight deposits, short-term time and savings deposits, money market paper and money mar-
ket certificates.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013963036912
–––++++Contributions to annual growth rate of financial assets in percentage points
Long-term bondsValuation effect
Equity and mutual fund sharesLong-term deposits
Monetary assets1
Insurance claims, pension claims and other claims
TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
46

the end of December. Interest rates on long-  
term loans to domestic non- financial corpor -
ations stood at 2.7% and 2.8% respectively at 
the end of the reporting period.
Interest rates on loans for house purchase re -
mained essentially unchanged in the fourth 
quarter of 2013. At the end of December, inter -est rates on long- term loans stood at 3.0%. 
Whereas deposits from households again 
earned, almost consistently, somewhat less 
interest compared with the previous quarter, 
interest rates on time deposits from non-  
financial corporations continued to rise signifi -
cantly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
47

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the international 
financial markets were propelled by brighter 
prospects for the US economy, prospects which 
at the end of December prompted the US Fed -
eral Reserve (Fed) to decide to progressively 
downsize its programme of quantitative easing. 
Economic recovery in the euro area also 
gathered a little more pace. Against this back -
drop, bond yields in the largest economies 
picked up significantly towards the end of the 
year, and there were further price gains on the 
equity markets. Bank stocks recorded above-  
average increases, benefiting, in Europe in par -
ticular, from an easing of tensions on the gov -
ernment bond markets in the periphery coun -
tries.
At the beginning of this year, there was 
 renewed uncertainty at times on the global 
 financial markets. This was triggered by devel -
opments in a number of emerging market 
economies, where share prices and exchange 
rates came under pressure –  considerable in 
some instances  – as international investors 
withdrew funds. In the industrial countries, the 
growing risk aversion caused a decline in equity 
prices and a flight into safe haven liquid gov -
ernment bonds. On the foreign exchange mar -
kets, the yen in particular appreciated in the 
new year. Compared with the beginning of the 
fourth quarter of 2013, the value of the euro as 
a weighted average against the currencies of 
20 large trading partners was slightly higher on 
balance.
Exchange rates
In the autumn of last year, the foreign ex -
change markets were focused less on emerging 
economy currencies than on how the euro was 
performing against the US dollar. At the begin -
ning of November, the single currency fell to a rate of just under US$1.34 after the ECB Gov -
erning Council decided to make a key interest 
rate cut, a move which had already been the 
subject of speculation in the period leading up 
to it after a surprisingly low inflation figure for 
the euro area. Statements by several members 
of the US central bank’s Federal Open Market 
Committee suggesting an imminent start to the 
scaling back of ongoing asset purchases put 
additional pressure on the euro. The effect 
these statements had on the foreign exchange 
markets was further augmented by the an -
nouncement of unexpectedly strong third-  
quarter economic growth in the United States 
and very favourable US labour market data.
In subsequent weeks, however, the euro grad -
ually recovered, thanks to new doubts on the 
market regarding forthcoming monetary policy 
measures in the United States. This was partly 
in response to below- forecast inflation in the 
United States and higher- than- anticipated in -
flation in the euro area. Moreover, the ECB 
Governing Council decided not to loosen mon -
etary policy further, against the expectations of 
some market participants. In mid- December, 
however, the euro’s rise came to a halt when 
the government and opposition in the United 
States were able to agree on a budget act and 
the US central bank finally announced its first 
step in tapering its asset purchases.
In the period of thin trading just before the end 
of 2013, the euro rose to an all- year high of 
over US$1.38 for a short time. However, in 
January 2014 it declined in the face of firmer 
market expectations of ongoing tapering in the 
Fed’s asset purchases. The direction of move -
ment was nonetheless temporarily interrupted 
on several occasions, when weak US labour 
market figures were announced, a US purchas -
ing managers’ index produced a disappointing 
number, and the ECB Governing Council left 
policy unchanged at the beginning of February. 
Most recently, the single currency was 1½% Financial 
 markets affected by continued low interest ratesEuro depreci-
ated against the 
US dollar in con-
nection with the 
ECB Governing 
Council’s interest 
rate cut at the 
beginning of 
November
Subsequent 
 recovery in the 
euro came to a halt after the US central bank’s decision to taper its asset pur-chases
The euro has 
appreciated against the US dollar on balanceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
48

stronger than at the beginning of the final 
quarter of 2013, at US$1.37.
The euro gained in value considerably against 
the yen from mid- November onwards. This was 
when it became known that the growth of the 
Japanese economy in the third quarter was 
much lower than it had previously been. The 
Japanese finance minister also mooted the pos -
sibility of intervening in the currency markets to 
weaken the yen. The value of the yen fell fur -
ther in December as a result of: a political con -
flict between China and Japan; a growing Jap -
anese trade deficit which then also drove the 
current account into negative territory; expect -
ations that the Japanese central bank might 
in the medium term further loosen what was 
already a very expansionary monetary policy; 
and a marked downward revision in the above- 
mentioned gross domestic product (GDP) 
growth figure. As a consequence, the euro 
reached a year high of ¥145 in the final days of 
December. However, in January 2014 investors 
increasingly withdrew funds from a number of 
emerging market economies. The associated 
portfolio shifts were of obvious benefit to the 
Japanese currency in particular, which meant 
that the euro surrendered some of its gains 
against the yen. Nonetheless, at the end of the 
period under review the euro stood at ¥139, 
which was 6% higher than at the beginning of 
the fourth quarter of 2013.
Since the beginning of November, the euro has 
progressively lost value against the pound ster -
ling. The main factor in this has been the sur -
prisingly robust economic recovery in the 
United Kingdom in recent months. As the Brit -
ish labour market has also benefited noticeably 
from this recovery, market participants have 
been speculating on the possibility of the Bank 
of England tightening monetary policy in the 
near future. The central bank previously prom -
ised not to raise its key interest rates until the 
British unemployment rate fell to 7%, but has 
now distanced itself from this approach. Most 
recently, the euro stood at £0.82, which was 1½% weaker than at the end of the third quar -
ter of 2013.
Because Latvia joined the euro area at the be -
ginning of 2014, the effective euro exchange 
rate is now calculated as a weighted average 
against 20 countries. From the beginning of 
the fourth quarter of 2013 until the end of the 
period under review, the effective euro rate 
strengthened 1% against this basket of curren -
cies. In the new year, as a consequence of the 
turbulence on financial markets in the emer -
ging economies, the euro also appreciated, 
sometimes markedly, against a number of cur -
rencies which are mostly not included in the Euro appreciates 
considerably against the yen …
… but depreci-
ates against the pound sterling
A moderate rise in the effective euro rateExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A S OND J FM
2012 2013 20141.201.301.40
100110120130140150
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110115Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.13 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
49

basket, such as the forint, the rouble, the rand 
and the Turkish lira.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
At the beginning of the period under review, 
initially mixed indicators for the global econ -
omy and the United States made for uncer -
tainty on the international bond markets, with 
yields on government bonds trending down -
wards until the end of October. Rates only rose 
slightly for a time in response to the govern -
ment shutdown in the United States at the be -
ginning of October. However, firmer indicators 
for US economic prospects published in the 
course of November – increasingly deemed to 
betoken a forthcoming reduction in Fed asset 
purchases  – prompted significant upward 
movement overall in US Treasury yields at the 
end of the year. In January, pursuant to its 
decision- making, the Fed reduced its purchases of long- term government bonds and of agency 
mortgage- backed securities by US$5 billion 
each, so that total asset purchases were cut to 
US$75 billion. At the end of January, the US 
central bank decided to reduce its purchases in 
February by a further US$5 billion per asset 
class. At the same time, it also vouchsafed not 
to raise its key interest rate from its current 
level even if the unemployment rate were to 
fall below the previously communicated thresh -
old of 6.5%.
As a result of improved economic prospects 
and with the expectation of reduced support 
measures, the yields on ten- year US Treasuries 
climbed to over 3.1% up to the end of last year, 
before turning downwards again at the begin -
ning of this year, a trajectory which held until 
the end of January. Against the backdrop of 
turbulence on the financial markets in some 
emerging economies, investors were increas -
ingly looking to bonds they deemed safe. As a 
net result, yields on US government bonds 
were most recently somewhat higher than at 
the end of September, at 2.8%.
Japanese government bonds moved up and 
down in similar fashion; in the fourth quarter 
they were less clearly detached from yield 
movements in other countries than had previ -
ously been the case. Compared to the end of 
September, yields on ten- year Japanese gov -
ernment bonds were nine basis points lower; 
latterly they reached a level of 0.6%. In the re -
cent period, domestic economic stimulus has 
given support to yields, whilst capital inflows 
from abroad have tended to push yields down.
As yields are closely connected with those in 
the United States, the movement in yields on 
long- term US government bonds was to a large 
extent transmitted to government bond yields 
in Germany and the other core euro- area coun -
tries. The yield on ten- year Bunds rose to 1.9% 
in the fourth quarter of 2013. The reduction in 
yields at the beginning of this year pushed the 
Bund yield down to 1.6% most recently; this 
constitutes a drop of 13 basis points compared Sharp price fluc-
tuations on the international bond marketsBeginning of asset purchase tapering in the United States
Turbulence 
in emerging 
markets puts 
pressure on 
yields for a time
Yields in Japan 
continue to 
 decline
Yields in core 
euro- area coun-tries falling since the new yearBond yields in Germany, Japanand the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FM
2013 20140.50.81.01.21.51.82.02.22.52.83.0Daily data% Yield on ten-year 
government bondsoutstanding
USA1
Germany
Japan1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
50

to the end of September. On balance, US yields 
are now 116 basis points above German yields, 
a differential which has widened by 25 basis 
points and is comparable to the level it was at 
in mid-2013.
Despite the fall in yields at the longer end, 
which, in comparison to the end of September, 
has slightly flattened the German yield curve 
covering Federal bonds with maturities of two 
to ten years, the curve remains very steep. This 
means that market participants expect higher 
short- term interest rates within this period. 
Thus, when regarded in this light, the cut in key 
interest rates in the euro area at the beginning 
of November, though it affected the money 
market, had little impact on longer- term inter -
est rate expectations (see chart opposite). Since 
the end of September, implied inflation expect -
ations (ie the break- even inflation rates) for 
paper with a ten- year maturity, which are de -
rived from the spread between nominal and 
real yields on Federal bonds, have fallen by 28 
basis points to a level of 1.2%. The correspond -
ing five- year forward break- even inflation rate 
five years ahead has dropped 16 basis points 
and is now at 1.3%.
Since the end of September, the GDP- weighted 
yield on long- term bonds issued by euro- area 
countries (not including Germany) has experi -
enced a much sharper fall (of 51 basis points 
to 3.0%) than the yield on German Federal 
bonds. This is primarily the result of yield move -
ments in the periphery countries, where macro -
economic trends gained further solidity in the 
fourth quarter of 2013. In the context of the 
ongoing search for yield in a low-  interest-  rate 
environment, economic stabilisation was ac -
companied by some significantly narrower risk 
premiums, which is reflected inter alia  in smaller 
yield spreads against Germany. The fall in asso -
ciated credit default swap spreads provides fur -
ther corroboration (see chart on page 52). The 
first periphery countries – Ireland and Spain – 
have also now exited their financial assistance 
programmes. Furthermore, with the market en -
vironment more stable, Ireland, Portugal and German yield 
curve remains steep
Positive market 
sentiment for the euro- area peripheryYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 000.51.01.52.0
Residual maturity in years13 February 201430 September 2013 %
Financing conditions for selected euro-area countries
1 Government  bonds  with  a  residual  maturity  of  ten  years. 
Source: Thomson Reuters. 2 Spreads on ten-year credit default 
swap (CDS) contracts on the basis of government bonds with 
matching maturities. Source: Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014246810121416
02004006008001,0001,2001,400Weekly averages
% pa
Basis pointsCredit default swap spreads 2Yields1Ireland
PortugalSpain
ItalyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
51

Spain issued bonds on the capital market in 
January which met with solid demand. Ireland 
benefited in this respect from regaining invest -
ment grade status as a result of an upgrade 
from a major credit rating agency. Yields on 
ten- year Irish and Spanish government bonds 
have been at their lowest level since 2006 for 
periods, trading at 3.3% and 3.7% respectively. 
Yields on Greek, Italian and Portuguese bonds 
with the same maturity have been more or less 
at their mid-2010 levels at times. As a result, 
the yield dispersion amongst long- term govern -
ment bonds in the euro area has fallen to its 
lowest level since mid-2010. Clearly, the mar -
kets are very much rewarding the progress indi -
vidual countries have made in their adjustment 
programmes, progress which is also reflected in 
improved overall economic prospects, and the 
markets expect this progress to continue.1 
Against this background, lower financing costs 
are not a reason to relax reform efforts. Market 
participants, for their part, will have to take care that yields on the bond markets move in 
line with the specific risks.
Financial enterprises in Europe have also bene -
fited from the favourable market environment, 
with a slight improvement in financing condi -
tions on the corporate bond market. The yields 
on their bonds with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years and a BBB rating fell 77 basis 
points over the period under review to 4.1% 
most recently.2 These yields have now fallen to 
a level lower than before the outbreak of the 
financial crisis. Yields on bonds with the same 
maturities and ratings issued by European non- 
financial enterprises have also declined in com -
parison to the end of September 2013. As a 
result, these bonds were most recently trading 
at 2.9%, as against 3.2% at the beginning of 
the period under review, putting them well 
below the yields they were paying before the 
onset of the financial crisis in mid-2008. Conse -
quently, yield spreads against German Federal 
bonds with the same maturity have narrowed 
by 64 basis points to 252 basis points in the 
case of financial corporations, and by 20 basis 
points to 130 basis points in the case of non-  
 financial corporations. This change is in keep -
ing with falling credit default swap spreads (iT -
raxx) and liquidity premiums, and may be seen 
against the backdrop of a pronounced search 
for yield in a global low- interest- rate environ -
ment.
Gross issuance on the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2013 was well down on 
the previous quarter. Overall, German borrow -
ers issued paper worth €366 billion, compared 
with €380½ billion in the previous three 
months. Taking account of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, domestic issuers once again reduced 
their capital market borrowing, following net 
redemptions in the previous quarter (-€30 bil -Further improve-
ment in finan-cing conditions for enterprises
Bond market 
 issuanceInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents – 26.2 – 11.6 5.8
Credit institutions – 17.3 –  7.7 –  0.6
of which
Foreign debt securities 0.3 –  0.1 2.3
Deutsche Bundesbank –  2.4 –  2.7 –  2.1
Other sectors –  6.5 –  1.1 8.5
of which
Domestic debt securities – 27.6 – 20.8 –  9.1
Non-residents 11.9 – 11.5 – 18.8
Shares
Residents 20.2 6.1 –  7.0
Credit institutions 8.2 6.9 –  2.2
of which
Domestic shares 0.4 3.2 –  1.9
Non-banks 11.9 –  0.7 –  4.8
of which
Domestic shares 0.6 –  6.5 –  1.4
Non-residents –  0.3 3.8 4.7
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 29.4 15.6 29.1
Investment in retail funds 3.0 3.2 –  0.5
of which
Equity funds 0.7 0.6 1.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Adjustment processes in 
the member states of economic and monetary union, 
Monthly Report, January 2014, pp 13-78.
2 Based on corporate bond yields included in the various 
iBoxx bond indices for different rating grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
52

lion). In the fourth quarter, foreign debt instru -
ments totalling €17 billion were sold on the 
German bond market. On balance, the total 
outstanding volume of bonds in Germany thus 
shrank by €13 billion in the quarter under re -
view.
The public sector issued debt instruments total -
ling €9 billion net in the quarter under review. 
The Federal government mainly issued 10-year 
and 30-year bonds (for €12 billion and €1½ bil -
lion respectively). This contrasted with net re -
demptions of Treasury discount paper in the 
amount of €4½ billion and five- year Federal 
notes worth €2 billion. The Federal states bor -
rowed €2 billion net from the bond market.
At the same time, non- financial corporations, 
which typically have a high level of internal fi -
nancing, increased their capital market debt by 
€1 billion in net terms. On balance, paper with 
maturities of less than one year was redeemed, 
while more longer- dated securities were is -
sued. Financial firms, on the other hand, cut 
back their outstanding bonds by €1½ billion 
net.
In their end- of- year treasury operations, Ger -
man credit institutions on the whole took fur -
ther steps to slim their total assets. In this con -
text, they also reduced their capital market 
debt, cutting €38½ billion off the total in the 
final quarter of 2013. “Other bank debt secur -
ities”, which can be structured flexibly, as well 
as debt securities issued by specialised credit 
institutions, were the main focus of redemp -
tions (€20 billion and €11 billion respectively), 
whilst public Pfandbriefe (€6½ billion) and 
mortgage Pfandbriefe (€1 billion) were also re -
deemed to a lesser extent.
In the fourth quarter of 2013, debt securities 
were bought exclusively by German non- banks, 
which added €8½ billion worth of bonds to 
their portfolios in net terms. In contrast, fixed- 
income securities were divested by foreign in -
vestors in particular (€19 billion), as well as by the Bundesbank (€2 billion) and German credit 
institutions (€½ billion).
In the fourth quarter of 2013, share prices in 
the major international financial centres con -
tinued on the upward trend they had pursued 
in previous months. As well as the ongoing 
low- interest- rate environment, the main driver 
of this trend was the brighter economic out -
look on both sides of the Atlantic. Subse -
quently, however, the market turbulence ob -
served in some emerging markets in the second 
half of January caused shares in the key finan -
cial centres to slide temporarily, too, which was 
coupled with heightened equity market volatil -
ity.3 As measured by the broad Euro Stoxx and 
S&P 500 indices, European and US shares were 
nonetheless most recently 8.3% and 8.8% 
higher respectively than at the end of Septem -Net public 
 sector issuance
Net issuance 
of bonds by  
non- financial corporations
Reduction in 
credit institu-tions’ capital market debt
Debt securities 
bought only by German non- banksEquity markets driven by brighter eco-nomic pictureShare valuations of European and US enterprises and long-term real interest rates for Germany and the United States
Sources:  IBES  Global  Aggregates  (Thomson  Reuters),  Con-
sensus  Economics  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Yields  on 
ten-year government bonds minus ten-year inflation expecta-tions from surveys (Consensus Forecast).
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 1468101214161820Monthly data
–10+1+2+3+4 Ten-year real interest rates1
Germany
United StatesPrice/earnings ratio based on 12-month 
earnings expectations
%Euro StoxxStandard & Poor's 500
3 Despite the temporary rise, uncertainty about future 
prices on both sides of the Atlantic was recently still below 
its five- year average values.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
53

ber. The CDAX share price index has gained 
11.4%. Banks have recorded a particularly steep 
rise in their share prices, with European and US 
bank stocks gaining 21.1% and 11.2% respect -
ively since the end of September. Equities in the 
euro-  area periphery countries have also bene -
fited from the end of recessionary conditions. 
In the period under review, they recorded 
above- average price gains.
Despite the recent price setback, equity valu -
ations remain comparatively high on both 
sides of the Atlantic. For instance, the price/
earnings ratio, based on 12-month earnings 
growth expectations, was most recently above 
its level at the end of September, at 13.0 for 
the Euro Stoxx and 14.5 for the S&P 500. At 
the same time, and in keeping with the 
brighter economic picture, dividend payments 
made by Euro Stoxx companies as well as me -
dium- term expectations of earnings growth 
have increased since the end of September. 
Applying dividend discount models to the data 
produces a relatively high implied risk premium 
(8.0% at present for the Euro Stoxx index). This 
reflects a degree of caution in investors’ atti -
tude to equity exposures. However, it needs to 
be borne in mind that the long- term real inter -
est rates used in the calculations, derived from 
ten- year Federal bonds and inflation expect -
ations from surveys (Consensus Forecast), have 
declined overall, and are currently slightly 
negative. A comparison with the mid-2007 
pre- crisis level also shows that it is mainly the 
pronounced drop in real interest rates which 
has driven the estimated risk premium up -
wards.
The share price setbacks in the emerging mar -
kets were significantly more marked than in in -
dustrial countries; the impact on the stock mar -
kets of capital outflows prompted by Fed 
tapering was compounded in a number of 
countries by internal macroeconomic weak -
nesses, such as current account and budget 
deficits, stability issues or relatively weak eco -
nomic growth, as well as political tension in 
some nations. Measured by the MSCI Emerging Particularly 
sharp share price increases for European banks
Share price 
 setbacks in 
emerging 
 market  economiesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2012 2013
Q4 Q3 Q4
I Current account 1, 2 + 53.8 + 44.4 + 65.6
Foreign trade 1, 3 + 44.8 + 49.8 + 51.2
Services 1 +  2.0 –  6.0 +  5.7
Income 1 + 20.1 + 18.4 + 22.1
Current transfers 1 –  5.9 – 10.3 –  5.3
II Capital transfers 1, 4 –  0.6 +  0.1 +  1.0
III Financial account 1
(Net capital exports: –) – 79.8 – 66.7 – 72.7
1 Direct investment –  1.4 –  3.4 + 10.7
German investment 
abroad –  4.5 –  7.9 –  8.9
Foreign investment
in Germany +  3.1 +  4.4 + 19.6
2 Portfolio investment – 33.5 – 39.4 – 31.3
German investment abroad – 45.8 – 33.0 – 22.0
Shares – 13.3 –  8.8 +  3.2
Mutual fund shares – 12.6 –  7.7 –  8.2
Debt securities – 20.0 – 16.5 – 16.9
Bonds and notes
5 – 23.8 – 16.4 – 16.5
of which
Euro-denominated 
bonds and notes – 16.6 –  7.5 – 11.1
Money market  instruments +  3.7 –  0.1 –  0.5
Foreign investmentin Germany + 12.4 –  6.5 –  9.3
Shares –  0.2 +  3.9 +  3.9
Mutual fund shares +  0.6 +  1.2 +  5.6
Debt securities + 11.9 – 11.5 – 18.8
Bonds and notes
5 + 11.0 –  5.1 + 11.8
of which
Public bonds and 
notes + 14.2 +  4.3 + 16.1
Money market  instruments +  1.0 –  6.5 – 30.6
3 Financial derivatives
6 –  4.2 –  2.1 –  6.3
4 Other investment 7 – 41.2 – 22.6 – 44.3
Monetary fi  nancial
institutions 8 – 70.0 – 15.5 – 64.0
of which short-term – 79.5 – 25.9 – 74.7
Enterprises and
households + 11.3 +  3.0 – 22.2
of which short-term + 12.1 +  8.9 – 13.3
General government – 32.7 – 12.1 –  9.6
of which short-term – 15.1 – 10.4 –  6.3
Bundesbank + 50.2 +  2.0 + 51.4
5 Change in reserve assets 
at transaction values ( increase: –)
9 +  0.5 +  0.8 –  1.5
IV Errors and omissions + 26.6 + 22.3 +  6.1
1  Balance. 2  Including supplementary trade items. 3  Special 
trade according to the offi   cial foreign trade statistics (source: 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce). 4 Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-fi  nancial assets. 5 Original maturity of more 
than one year. 6 Securitised and non-securitised options as well 
as fi  nancial futures contracts. 7  Includes fi  nancial and trade credits, bank deposits and other assets. 8 Excluding the Bundes-bank. 9 Excluding allocation of SDRs and excluding changes due 
to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
54

Markets Index, the markets have fallen by 4.2% 
since the end of September.
Notwithstanding the positive overall movement 
in share prices, issuance on the German stock 
market remained comparatively modest in the 
fourth quarter of 2013. Fundraising by German 
enterprises totalled €1½ billion in net terms in 
the quarter under review. The volume of for -
eign shares on the German market shrank by 
€3½ billion in the same period. On balance, 
shares were bought only by foreign investors, 
who purchased a net €4½ billion. German 
non- banks and domestic credit institutions re -
duced their equity exposure by €5 billion and 
€2 billion respectively.
In the final quarter of 2013, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of 
€28½ billion, compared with €19 billion in 
the previous quarter. On balance, the inflows 
were channelled exclusively to specialised 
funds reserved for institutional investors (€29 
billion). Of the various asset classes, bond 
funds, in particular, registered net inflows of 
capital (€10 billion), as did, albeit to a lesser 
extent, mixed security- based funds and mixed 
funds (€5½ billion each) as well as equity 
funds and open- end real estate funds (€3 bil -
lion each). The outstanding volume of foreign 
mutual fund shares in Germany rose by €8 
billion in the period under review. Mutual 
fund shares were bought almost exclusively 
by domestic non- banks, which added €31 bil -
lion worth of fund shares to their portfolios. 
For the most part, this related to domestic 
mutual funds. Non- resident investors and do -
mestic credit institutions acquired mutual fund shares worth €5½ billion and €½ billion 
respectively.
Direct investment
Unlike in cross- border portfolio transactions, 
which recorded a net outflow of funds totalling 
€31½ billion, net capital imports amounting 
to  €10½ billion were registered in the form 
of  direct investment in the fourth quarter of 
2013.
The main contributor was the comparatively 
large volume of funds furnished by foreign in -
vestors to their subsidiaries in Germany. These 
totalled €19½ billion in the final quarter, and 
predominantly took the form of intra- group fi -
nancial loans (€14 billion). In addition, non-  
resident proprietors provided equity capital 
amounting to €5 billion. The main countries of 
origin were Luxembourg (€7 billion), Spain (€3 
billion) and the United Kingdom (€2½ billion).
German enterprises also increased their direct 
investment abroad in the fourth quarter (by €9 
billion). Although direct equity stakes were re -
duced by €2½ billion on balance, investment 
abroad expanded through the reinvestment of 
earnings at direct investment enterprises and 
through intra- group credit transactions (€6 bil -
lion in each case). Credit transactions between 
affiliated enterprises in the period under review 
mainly consisted of loan repayments made by 
German proprietors to foreign affiliates. Trans -
actions with financing subsidiaries in Luxem -
bourg and the Netherlands featured promin -
ently in this.Low level of 
stock market funding
Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund sharesCapital imports 
in direct invest -
ment
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany
German direct 
investment abroadDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
55

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, German economic output con -
tinued to grow in the final quarter of 2013. 
Real GDP was up 0.4% on the preceding three- 
month period after adjustment for seasonal 
and calendar factors. In year- on- year terms, 
calendar-  adjusted GDP went up by 1.4%. At 
year- end, aggregate output showed somewhat 
stronger growth than potential output, and 
capacity utilisation was at a high level. There 
was further growth in employment subject to 
social security contributions. The overall very 
satisfactory state of the German economy is 
also reflected in the data provided by enter -
prises. According to the survey of the Associ -
ation of German Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (DIHK) at the beginning of 2014, more than nine out of ten firms rate their business 
situation as good or at least satisfactory.
The growth in aggregate output continued to 
be driven by domestic demand. Private con -
sumption is benefiting from an extremely posi -
tive consumer climate and is still showing an 
underlying upward trend. The upturn in hous -
ing investment levelled off, although this can 
be seen more as a normalisation than a trend 
deceleration given the annual profile so far, 
which has been shaped by weather- related and 
catch- up effects. Export demand provided a 
distinct boost for the first time in over a year, 
which benefited industry in particular. Com -
mercial investment picked up somewhat as a 
result. In the wake of the pick- up in foreign 
trade and the ongoing adjustment processes, 
there was a further marked increase in imports, 
particularly from the euro area.
German firms’ export business picked up again 
in the fourth quarter of 2013 in the wake of the 
economic upturn in the industrial countries. 
Seasonally adjusted exports of goods grew 
1½% on the quarter in real terms. Although ex -
ports to euro- area countries increased only 
slightly owing to the hitherto very subdued im -
provement in their economies, exports to non- 
euro- area countries expanded considerably. 
There was very strong growth in exports to the 
USA and the United Kingdom after sluggish ex -
port activity in the third quarter. Trade with the 
OPEC countries also grew substantially, where 
there had been a sizeable decline earlier. Ex -
ports to central and east European EU coun -
tries expanded significantly. By contrast, only 
moderate impulses came from China and the 
other Asian industrialised economies. Exports 
to Japan stagnated after rising considerably in 
the second and third quarters of 2013. There 
was a continuation of the marked downward 
trend in exports to south and east Asian emer -
ging market economies. There was also a fur -
ther clear deceleration in exports to Russia.Quite strong 
economic growth in 2013 Q4
Marked rise in goods exports, 
especially to 
non-euro-area countries ... Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013102104106108110112114
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62005 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
56

During the reporting period, there was a surge 
mainly in exports of intermediate goods. Sales 
of chemical and pharmaceutical products grew 
particularly sharply. Foreign trade in consumer 
goods also flourished. By contrast, capital 
goods exports posted only moderate growth. 
Exports of other transport equipment showed 
a marked rise, whereas sales of computers, 
electronic and optical products as well as elec -
trical equipment and machinery failed to en -
tirely match the previous quarter’s figure. 
Motor vehicles showed a moderate decline; 
given the exceptionally strong growth in this 
segment in both the second and third quarters 
of 2013, however, the export volume in the 
first quarter of 2014 was still up considerably 
on the year.
Imports are also likely to have picked up in the 
final quarter of 2013, although less so than ex -
ports. Imports of goods rose slightly by ¼% in 
price and seasonally adjusted terms. However, 
a significant rise in imports from the euro area 
in the first two months of the quarter con -
trasted with a slight decline in imports from 
other regions. It is striking that Portugal and 
Spain, two of the euro- area countries strongly 
affected by the crisis, have significantly in -
creased their exports to Germany again. 
Growth in imports of capital goods was par -
ticularly robust. This was due primarily to a rise 
in imports of motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
parts. Close international production links 
mean that the ongoing expansion in foreign 
demand for German- manufactured motor ve -
hicles is also likely to have played a part in this. 
In addition, there was a marked rise in imports 
of other transport equipment, which is to be 
seen in connection with the growth in demand 
for products of the European aviation industry. 
By contrast, there was a slight decrease in im -
ports of machinery, which is consistent with 
continuing subdued domestic investment activ -
ity, and a marked decline in information and 
communication technology (ICT) products, as 
well as electrical equipment. Purchases of for -
eign- manufactured intermediate goods also 
picked up distinctly. Metal and metal products showed exceptionally strong growth. There 
was a slight decrease in imports of energy and 
consumer goods, however.
Despite the improving situation in export activ -
ity and a higher level of capacity utilisation, 
firms still seem to be exercising restraint with 
regard to investment in new machinery and 
equipment. At all events, domestic sales by 
capital goods producers (excluding motor ve -
hicles) were down on the quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms. The same applies to imports of 
capital goods (excluding motor vehicles and 
the manufacture of other transport equip -
ment). Nevertheless, the marked rise in the ... and also in 
intermediate goods
Significant rise in 
imports of inter-mediate goods 
and motor 
 vehicles
Commercial  investment still subdued90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed for the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Oct-
Nov 8090100110120
Oct-
Nov
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
57

number of commercial motor vehicle registra -
tions suggests that firms have been buying 
more vehicles for their car pools. Furthermore, 
there was a perceptible expansion in commer -
cial construction investment following the 
strong surge in demand for commercial prop -
erty in the second and third quarters of 2013.
Housing investment is unlikely to have ex -
panded further in the final quarter of 2013 
after growing strongly owing not least to back -
log and catch- up effects, particularly during the 
second quarter. At the same time, equipment 
utilisation in the construction industry also 
reached a new peak. This might be an indica -
tion that capacity constraints are sometimes 
standing in the way of more rapid growth. At 
all events, construction demand grew very 
sharply in the first three quarters of 2013 – as 
can be seen in the number of new housing 
construction permits  – and property prices, 
too, are continuing to rise. Public sector con -
struction orders appear to have been some -
what weaker in the fourth quarter than in pre -
ceding periods.
Private consumption is still on an upward trend 
path. This is suggested by rising real incomes 
and the continuing improvement in the con -
sumer climate from an already high level. Ac -
cording to Federal Statistical Office data, sea -
sonally adjusted retail sales in the fourth quar -
ter did not quite match their third- quarter level. 
It should be noted in this context, however, 
that the index figures are to be regarded as 
provisional and that mail order trade, which is 
becoming increasingly important, is not fully 
captured. By contrast, the number of new car 
registrations by households has increased ap -
preciably in line with the high propensity to 
purchase recorded by the market research insti -
tution Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung  (GfK).
Sectoral trends
Industrial output in the final quarter of 2013 
rose by a seasonally adjusted ¾% on the quar -ter. There was, however, an exceptional num -
ber of bridge days in the later part of the year, 
the impact of which on output is not taken into 
account in the standard adjustment for calen -
dar variations. This is why the cyclical trend is 
understated by the seasonally and calendar-  
adjusted quarterly rate. Furthermore, short-  
time working arrangements in a number of 
automotive manufacturing plants depressed 
output in October. This meant that the produc -
tion of capital goods was slightly down on the 
third quarter (-½%). By contrast, manufacturers 
of intermediate goods substantially stepped up 
their output in seasonally adjusted terms (+2%), 
with the chemicals industry as well as the metal 
working and processing industry standing out 
in a positive way. Consumer goods producers 
also stepped up their output considerably 
(+1%).
The expansion of industrial output was accom -
panied by higher levels of capacity utilisation. 
According to the Ifo Institute, the level of cap -
acity utilisation of tangible fixed assets in indus -
try went up again slightly in January in season -
ally adjusted terms. The multi- year average was 
matched at 84% of full operational capacity 
utilisation. This is an indication that industrial 
output is once again back within the range of 
normal capacity utilisation. This growth in out -
put was largely attributable to the higher level 
of capacity utilisation in the manufacture of 
intermediate goods. The difference from the 
long- term sectoral average increased slightly 
to 1¼ percentage points. By contrast, the 
shortfall in the case of producers of capital 
widened goods to 1¾ percentage points.
Output in the main construction industry dur -
ing the reporting period held up at the high 
level of the third quarter (+¼). This applies 
equally to general construction and civil engin -
eering. At the same time, Ifo Institute data 
show that capacity utilisation in construction 
machinery reached a new peak in seasonally 
adjusted terms. According to initial – albeit still 
very provisional – reports, output in the finish -
ing trades underwent a decline (-2%). Output Housing con-
struction and public sector construction somewhat weaker
Private con-
sumption still trending  upwards
Moderate rise in 
industrial outputNear- normal  industrial cap-acity utilisation overall at  
year- end
Contraction in 
construction  activity and  energy  productionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
58

in the energy sector fell by a seasonally ad -
justed 3% in the final quarter of 2013.
The services sector is likely to have expanded 
perceptibly in the fourth quarter of 2013. This is 
suggested in any event by the favourable as -
sessments of the business situation in major 
sectors of the economy, which are reported to 
the Ifo Institute. Industry- related services bene -
fited from the expansion in export activity and 
the pick- up in industry in a large number of 
areas. This has also had a positive impact on 
the transport sector. One indication of this is 
the significant increase in the mileage of do -
mestic heavy goods vehicles on toll roads. 
Wholesale turnover was still down on the ele -
vated level of the third quarter, however. Motor 
vehicle traders posted clear growth in sales. 
Not only did passenger car sales pick up per -
ceptibly, sales to commercial customers, in par -
ticular, also saw strong growth. Consumption- 
related service providers benefited from the fa -
vourable consumer climate. Hotels and restaur -
ants saw an increase in their turnover and, 
according to figures which are to be regarded 
as provisional, retail sales were down only 
slightly on their level in the third quarter.
Employment and labour 
 market
The slight upward trend in the labour market 
continued in the fourth quarter of 2013. The 
German labour market situation is still charac -
terised by continuous employment growth and 
persistently high levels of immigration. Over 
the course of the fourth quarter, unemploy -
ment initially rose before falling a little, owing 
mainly to the weather.
The seasonally adjusted number of people in 
work in the final quarter of 2013 went up by 
74,000, or 0.2%, on the average of the third 
quarter. This increase was due primarily to the 
positive development in employment subject to 
social security contributions, which, taking the 
average of the months of October and Novem -ber, was up by 64,000 persons on the summer 
level. The trend of the previous quarters there -
fore continued. The sectoral base of the em -
ployment growth became broader, however. 
Whereas in the previous quarters nearly half of 
the new jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions were in business- related services (exclud -
ing third- party hiring), the figure had fallen to 
one- fifth by the end of the year. Fairly sharp 
growth in employment was recorded in various 
services sectors of late, including healthcare 
and education, as well as in the logistics and 
hotel and restaurant sectors. There was also 
perceptible growth in employment in the 
manufacturing sector, as well as in temporary 
work, which is often used in industry.
Regular full and part- time work subject to so -
cial security contributions (excluding temporary 
employment) also grew much more strongly in 
2013 than employment overall. Based on data 
provided by the Federal Employment Agency 
up to and including November, growth for the Further growth 
in services sector
Rise in employ-
ment, little change in  unemployment
Growth in em-
ployment with a broader sectoral baseOther forms  
of employment on the declineOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
59

year as a whole can be put at over 350,000 
positions, whereas the current figures from the 
Federal Statistical Office show an increase in 
overall employment of only 233,000. Since as 
far back as 2006, growth in employment has 
been accounted for solely by regular employ -
ment contracts subject to social security contri -
butions, whereas other forms of employment, 
such as self- employment, (exclusively) low- paid 
part- time employment, temporary employment 
and one- euro workfare jobs have been stag -
nating. Between 2002 and 2006, when the 
German labour market was still under consider -
able adjustment pressure, these other forms of 
employment gained considerably in import -
ance for a time, albeit to the detriment of regu -
lar employment.
Unemployment in the period under review rose 
by a seasonally adjusted 13,000 persons to 2.97 
million compared with the third quarter of 
2013; the unemployment rate went up to 6.9%. 
This slight increase in the level of unemploy -
ment follows a trend that has been persisting 
for the past one- and- a- half years. The un -
employment figures stabilised during the past 
quarter, however, and fell to 2.93 million in 
both December 2013 and January 2014, prob -
ably owing, above all, to the predominantly 
mild winter weather. The unemployment rate 
eased again to 6.8%. The figures for more 
short- term unemployment covered by the 
statutory insurance scheme have been tending 
to decline since May 2013, albeit at a very slow 
pace. By contrast, the number of unemployed 
persons receiving the basic welfare allowance 
hit the two million mark again for the first time 
since the second quarter of 2012.
The leading indicators for the labour market 
suggest that the upward trend in employment 
could strengthen. The Ifo employment barom -
eter, which provides information on the em -
ployment plans of trade and industry and 
business- related services over the coming three 
months, showed an increase on the quarter. 
The Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job 
index is also indicating a significantly positive Slight rise in 
registered  unemployment,  although stable over the course of the quarter
Pick- up in the 
hitherto sub-
dued labour market develop-ments on the horizonLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Jan40.040.541.041.542.0
27.027.528.028.529.029.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–1,000–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Oct-
NovMillion
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
60

trend again. This is due primarily to a greater 
number of reported vacancies for unsubsidised 
positions subject to social security contribu -
tions in areas which are particularly sensitive to 
the business cycle, such as industry, construc -
tion, logistics and trade. However, the DIHK 
survey from the beginning of 2014, while giv -
ing a generally positive assessment of the out -
look for employment, also points out the risks 
stemming from the shortage of skilled workers 
and the planned introduction of a minimum 
wage. According to the IAB labour market bar -
ometer, unemployment – which had been 
showing a slight upward trend in 2013 despite 
the favourable developments in employment – 
could decline somewhat in the coming months.
Wages and prices
In 2013, collective wage bargaining was typi -
fied by extended employment contracts with a 
phased increase in basic rates of pay. Negoti -
ations proved difficult in some sectors, which 
led to delays in the introduction of pay in -
creases. In the retail sector, the backpayments 
for the 3% rise in basic pay from July 2013, 
agreed in December, did not come into force 
until January 2014 in most cases. According to 
the Bundesbank’s calculations, collectively 
agreed rates of pay therefore rose by only 2.4% 
on average in 2013,1 although this was still 
slightly more strongly than actual earnings at 
2.3% (at least according to the initial calcula -
tion by the Federal Statistical Office). One key 
reason for the slightly negative wage drift is the 
somewhat lower bonus payments, which had 
been extremely high in some sectors earlier. In 
the final quarter of 2013, compensation under 
collective wage agreements was 2.4% up on 
the previous year’s level. In the first quarter of 
2014, a distinctly stronger rise in negotiated 
rates of pay is expected owing in part to back -
payments in the retail sector.
At 5½% on average, the trade unions’ wage 
demands announced so far for the 2014 pay 
round are only slightly less than those in 2013. With a base amount of €100 and an additional 
linear increase of 3.5%, the demands in the 
central and local government public sector go 
somewhat beyond them in fact. This implies 
similarly sizeable pay rises to those agreed in 
2013. The first major pay agreement of 2014 in 
the chemicals industry with a 3.7% increase in 
pay running for a period of 14 months is also 
consistent with this picture. With regard to the 
planned introduction of a statutory minimum 
wage of €8.50 per hour from January 2015, 
special agreements for the lowest wage groups 
might be a factor in some industries so as to 
make use of the transitional arrangements up 
to 2017 announced in the coalition agreement. 
In January 2014, for instance, a nationwide 
agreement was reached for an industry- specific 
minimum wage for the roughly 100,000 em -
ployees in the meat industry. At €8 per hour 
until the end of September 2015, this is below 
the level of the announced statutory minimum 
wage, but it will go up to that level afterwards 
and reach €8.75 from December 2016. The 
wage bargainers are aiming to declare this 
pay agreement generally binding on the basis 2013 saw mod-
erate increase in negotiated pay and negative wage drift2014 pay round: wage demands 
similar to 2013, 
special agree-
ments for low- paid groupsNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
1 By contrast, the Federal Statistical Office reports an an -
nual increase of 2.3% as a provisional figure for the agreed 
pay rates including one- off payments and ancillary agree -
ments. Differences compared with the Bundesbank’s pay 
index are due primarily to varying industry- specific em -
ployee weightings in the respective pay index.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
61

of the German legislation governing the 
 secondment of workers (Arbeitnehmer-  
Entsende gesetz).  The industry- specific min -
imum wage would then also be binding for the 
20,000 to 30,000 persons working under 
 service contracts.2 In the retail sector, a new 
wage category has been created for shelf-  
stackers whose wages are below the existing 
sector rates but above the planned minimum 
wage. This is designed to allow this category of 
workers to be reintegrated into the core work -
forces.
The fall in prices at the upstream stages of the 
economy observed during the course of 2013 
largely came to a halt in the final quarter. On a 
quarterly average, seasonally adjusted import 
prices were only slightly down on the quarter. 
Industrial producer prices in foreign sales re -
mained unchanged; producer prices in domes -
tic sales were trending slightly upwards. As a 
result, the terms of trade showed a further im -
provement, reaching their highest level for 
three years. The further decline in import prices 
by a seasonally adjusted 0.3% compared with 
the second quarter is essentially due to the 
 declining energy component in the wake of the 
euro’s appreciation against the US dollar. 
Whereas the prices of capital goods continued 
to decline, the prices of intermediate goods 
 accelerated again for the first time in two years 
as a result of improved global industrial activity. 
Consumer goods prices remained stable. As 
producer prices for energy in Germany are 
 dependent on crude oil prices only to a small 
extent, the decline here was not as strong as it 
was for imports. The other components of the 
producer price index showed a similar pattern 
to that on the import side with mostly some -
what higher rates. A slight seasonally adjusted 
rise of 0.1% overall on the quarter was there -
fore recorded. Due to the pronounced falls in 
prices in previous quarters, the year- on- year 
figure for imports was still clearly negative at 
-2.7%. The figure was -0.7% at the domestic 
producer level. On an average of 2013, imports 
became 2.5% cheaper, while German indus -
try’s domestic sales prices fell slightly by 0.1% in Germany and somewhat more sharply by 0.6% 
for exports.
Despite the extremely high utilisation of equip -
ment in the main construction sector, upward 
pressure on prices for construction work re -
mained within fairly narrow bounds. Prices for 
residential construction work rose in the fourth 
quarter of 2013, as they did in the third quarter, 
by 2.0% on the year. The increase also aver -
aged 2.0% for 2013 and in fact remained 
0.5 percentage points below the 2012 rate. 
This was probably due chiefly to the decline in 
the cost of materials. The increase in prices for 
structural work, at 1.7%, was somewhat 
weaker than that in the finishing trades at 
2.3%. According to the calculations of the 
 Association of the German Pfandbrief Banks 
(Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken),  prices 
for owner- occupied housing rose at an annual 
rate of 2.4% in the final quarter of 2013. More 
detailed comments on developments in the 
property markets and, in particular, on house 
prices in 2013 as a whole may be found on 
pages 64 to 66.
Consumer price inflation weakened signifi -
cantly in the final quarter of 2013 on the back 
of the euro’s appreciation. After seasonal ad -
justment, prices were up by only 0.1% on the 
quarter compared with 0.5% earlier. The clearly 
flatter price trend was very largely due to en -
ergy prices, which declined substantially. Fur -
thermore, there was a marked deceleration of 
the extremely sharp rise in food prices in the 
third quarter, caused by inclement weather 
conditions. Industrial goods became somewhat 
more expensive in spite of the appreciation of 
the euro and seasonal sales in clothing and 
shoes having been brought forward. By con -
trast, price increases in the case of services 
were somewhat weaker than in earlier quar -
ters. The continuing rise in rents for new 
 lettings is still exerting only a very dampened Slower decline 
in import prices, producer prices move sidewaysConstruction 
and property 
prices still rising
Weaker con-
sumer price  inflation in final 
quarter of 2013
2 Information provided in German by the wage bargainers 
(Gewerkschaft Nahrung- Genuss- Gaststätten und Arbeitge -
bervereinigung Nahrung und Genuss e.V .).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
62

impact on the rent component of the Con -
sumer Price Index. Annual inflation fell slightly 
to 1.3% in both the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
and the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP).
In 2013 as a whole, consumer price inflation 
was essentially characterised by sharply rising 
food prices, falling fuel and heating oil prices 
and by a number of special factors. The mainly 
weather- related increase in food prices at a 
rate of 4.4% was clearly sharper than the long- 
term average. By contrast, consumer prices of 
refined petroleum products declined by 4.1%, 
following an increase of 6.4% in 2012, as a re -
sult of lower crude oil prices and the appreci -
ation of the euro. The 1.4% rise in energy 
prices for consumers was due to the 11.9% in -
crease in electricity prices stemming from the 
rise in the renewable energy (EEG) levy. In spite 
of the euro’s appreciation and the associated 
price reductions at the upstream stages of the 
economy, inflation in the case of industrial 
goods decelerated only slightly to 1.0%. Gov -
ernment measures, such as the abolition of the 
surgery visit charge at the beginning of 2013 
(with a contribution to the CPI inflation rate of 
somewhat more than -0.2 percentage point) 
and the increase in the scale of charges for 
state lotteries the following May (with a contri -
bution of +0.2 percentage point) influenced 
the sub- index for services.3 Overall, prices of 
services increased just as strongly as in the 
 previous year. According to the national Con -
sumer Price Index (CPI), consumer prices rose 
by 1.5% on average in 2013 and by 1.6% ac -
cording to the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP). The same rates are also produced 
even without the inclusion of the energy com -
ponent.
It should be noted that, owing to special statis -
tical factors, the German HICP rate was biased 
upwards by 0.3 percentage point in 2013. 
Changes in the price collection procedure for Consumer prices 
in 2013: sharp rise in food prices, marked decrease in prices of refined petroleum prod-ucts
Special statis-
tical factors in the HICPExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20149095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
95100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, monthly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import priceslog scale
%
Jan95100105
Jan
3 The HICP basket of goods does not contain gambling. 
Thus, the lottery effect does not apply in this instance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
63

House prices in 2013 in Germany
House prices in Germany continued their 
strong upward trend at a virtually un-
changed pace in 2013. This was caused by 
demand on the German housing market 
being at a persistently high level for a num-ber of years. A perceptible expansion of the 
housing supply and regional shifts in de-
mand meant that there was no acceleration 
in prices on the overstretched urban prop-
erty markets, however. Furthermore, the in-
crease in new lettings in this segment slowed down somewhat. This contrasted 
with growing price pressure felt in the case 
of single- family housing and apartments in 
smaller urban areas. Looking at Germany as a whole, it is still the case that housing mar-
ket prices are not generating any major 
macroeconomic risks.
According to calculations based on data 
from bulwiengesa AG, house prices in 125 
German towns and cities in 2013 went up 
by 6¼% compared with 2012. This means 
that residential property has become almost 
one- fi  fth more expensive overall since the 
beginning of the identifi  able acceleration in prices in 2010. This corresponds to an aver-
age annual rate of just under 5¼%.1 The 
price index of the Association of German 
Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher Pfand-
briefbanken, vdp) for owner- occupied 
housing, which covers Germany as a whole, 
showed an average increase of 3¼% in 2013 compared with 3% in 2012.
2 The 
composite index published by Hypoport AG shows that house prices rose by roughly 5% in 2013, like in the year before. These differ-ences are explained by the statistical uncer-
tainties surrounding the measured values.3 
This does not affect the basic fi  nding of what may be described as a strong price 
trend for the German housing market.
As before, the rise in prices in 2013 was 
clearly stronger in towns and cities than in 
the rural areas. Once again, the largest in-
creases were recorded in owner- occupied 
apartments in the seven largest German cit-ies (+9%). As was the case in 2012, the gap between urban and rural areas in terms of 
price dynamics is likely to have fl  attened 
somewhat.4 The price trend in the case of 
pre- owned housing, which accounts for a larger percentage of the housing stock in smaller towns and cities than it does in larger ones, has risen to +4¾%. The in-
crease was therefore no longer lagging so 
far behind price infl  ation in owner- occupied 
apartments (7¼%) as in previous years. In the reporting period, the composite index showed resale prices going up somewhat more sharply than prices for new proper-
ties.
There appears to have been no further in-
crease in demand pressure on the urban 
rental housing markets. In both larger and 
smaller towns and cities, rents for new let-
tings in the case of re- rentals and new 
housing were increased less sharply in 2013 
than in the year before. According to the 
vdp index for new lettings of apartments in multiple- family dwellings, which also covers 
1 According to current data of bulwiengesa AG, the 
increase in house prices in 2012 is shown as being 
roughly 1 percentage point higher than previously esti-
mated. The revision is due, fi  rst, to the inclusion of 
price data from the last few months of 2012 and a broader sample. Second, the comparison of prices is now based on a typical property with a somewhat 
larger living area. The amended defi  nition of a typical 
property applies to data from 2012 onwards, which makes a year- on- year comparison of prices in 2012 
more diffi   cult. This is unlikely to affect the year- on- year comparison in 2013, however.
2 The composite index of bulwiengesa AG for all the 
402 administrative and urban districts, which is not available until a later date, shows a 4% increase in 2012. According to the broadly based house price 
index of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, in which the an-nual fi  gures likewise do not go beyond 2012, the rate of increase in 2012 for Germany as a whole amounted to 3½%.
3 The indicators differ from one another mainly in 
terms of their regional coverage and type of dwelling. 
They also display differences in the way in which the 
data are compiled. See the information on house 
prices in the Bundesbank’s Monthly Reports of Febru-ary 2009 (pp 52-53) and February 2010 (pp 58-59).
4 For a detailed analysis of the spatial interactions of 
house price increases in the past few years, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The determinants and regional 
dependencies of house price increases since 2010, 
Monthly Report, October 2013, pp 13-30.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
64

rural regions to some extent, the cost of 
rental housing in the case of new lettings 
was 4¼% higher overall than in 2012, when 
housing rents increased by 2¾%. In line 
with the regional shift in demand towards 
housing in areas surrounding towns and  cities, interest in rented property in these 
areas is likely to have increased. According 
to the calculations of vdp, the prices of 
multi- family houses overall, at a rate of in-
crease of 4¾% in 2013, did not show any 
further acceleration.
The relative scarcity of housing, which is re-
fl  ected in the high rise in prices, is bringing 
about signifi  cant expansions of supply. In 
2012, almost 177,000 new dwellings were 
completed. Given the ongoing upward 
trend in the number of building permits for several years, the number of completions is 
likely to be higher in 2013. It is estimated that permits for somewhat more than 235,000 new dwellings were granted last 
year,5 compared with 200,000 in 2011 and 
210,000 in 2012. Nevertheless, in view of 
the unchanged strong demand for housing 
and the already much smaller number of 
vacant properties in attractive areas, the re-
sulting expansion of supply will not be 
enough to ease the situation on the hous-
ing markets signifi  cantly. Considering add-itionally the losses due to demolition and 
alternative use, around 260,000 new dwell-ings a year would have to be completed to 
cover the additional demand.6 What is 
needed in order to eliminate the existing 
tensions on the residential property markets in line with the market are reliable signals in the form of prices and rents for worthwhile 
investment in housing. By contrast, regula-
tory intervention in new rental agreements 
is counterproductive.7
5 In the past two years, the rise in the number of new 
construction permits was due mainly to permits for 
apartments, whereas there was virtually no further ex-
pansion of supply in the case of houses.6 This is the result produced by a mathematical model based on a population projection broken down by age group and based on current migration assumptions as 
well as demographic and socio-economic factors of 
housing demand.
7 The regulation of existing rents on a limited scale, 
however, has the purpose of not overriding regulations for the protection of tenants.Selected house price indices
1 Bundesbank  calculations  for  houses  and  owner-occupied 
apartments based on data provided by bulwiengesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 20132010 = 100, annual values, log scale
9296100104108112116120124128
96100104108112
96100104108112116120
96100104108112
Federal Statistical Office (Destatis)
house price indexHypoport composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
quarterly7 major citiestowns and citiestotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
65

accommodation services and package holidays 
resulted in shifts in the seasonal pattern. Owing 
to the usual HICP chain- linking through the 
month of December (and not through the an -
nual average as in the national accounts) these 
shifts biased the annual average of the rates of 
change upwards.4 Thus, the subindex for ac -
commodation services rose by 16.5% on an an -
nual average in the HICP compared with only 
2.3% in the CPI, which was not affected by this 
disruption owing to the customary back-  
calculation in this instance. Package holidays 
stood at 5.3% in the HICP compared with 2.5% 
in the CPI. The months of January to November 
were affected to varying degrees by the bias. 
This effect has no longer applied since Decem -
ber 2013.
Consumer prices in Germany began to increase 
more sharply again in January, going up by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.2% on the month. In sea -
sonally adjusted terms, this was due to marked 
increases in industrial goods and services. Housing rents also showed a distinct rise. En -
ergy prices declined due to steep falls in the 
prices of refined petroleum products. Despite a 
further perceptible increase in the renewable 
energy (EEG) levy, electricity prices were raised 
only slightly at the beginning of the year owing 
to declining procurement costs. Food prices 
showed no change in seasonally adjusted 
terms. As in December, there was a 1.2% an -
nual rise in the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP), while the annual rate of the Con -
sumer Price Index CPI went down slightly from 
1.4% to 1.3%.
Orders received and outlook
The underlying growth dynamics of the Ger -
man economy are likely to have strengthened Consumer prices 
rise in January 2014The demand for property is receiving add-
itional impetus from the decidedly favour-
able fi  nancing conditions for the acquisition 
of residential property. The average effect-
ive interest rate for new loans for house 
purchase fell further to 2¾% in 2013. The 
price- to- income ratio for residential prop-
erty based on the vdp price index for 
owner- occupied housing remained virtually 
unchanged. Taking into account the fi  nan-
cing costs, however, the affordability of housing is likely to have improved some-
what.
Despite the expansion in supply that is under way, existing overvaluations in the urban centres have tended to become re-inforced, since residential property prices have risen more sharply than is suggested 
by the economic and demographic funda-
mentals.8 This is particularly true of urban 
property markets, for which overvaluations 
of between 10% and 20% are currently 
being measured. In the major cities, house 
prices are probably deviating upwards by 25% on average. Looking at the German 
housing market as a whole, prices are 
nevertheless still unlikely to have deviated perceptibly from their longer- term funda-mentals. Moreover, at the aggregate level there are currently no indications of a de-
stabilising interaction between higher prop-
erty prices and lending.9 Banks’ loans to 
households for house purchase rose com-paratively moderately again last year, at 2¼%, compared with just under 2% in 2012. Furthermore, banks have tightened 
their lending standards again slightly.
8 The modelling and the estimation technique are ex-
plained in Deutsche Bundesbank, The determinants 
and regional dependencies of house price increases 
since 2010, Monthly Report, October 2013, pp 13-30, 
and in F Kajuth, T A Knetsch and N Pinkwart (2013), 
Assessing house prices in Germany: Evidence from an estimated stock- fl  ow model using regional data. Bun-desbank Discussion Paper, No 46/ 2013.9 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial Stability Review, November 2013.
4 See Deutsche  Bundesbank, The contribution of the ac -
commodation services sub- index to explaining the current 
deviations between CPI and HICP inflation rates, Monthly 
Report, April 2013, p 7.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
66

distinctly in the final quarter of 2013 and the 
first quarter of 2014. One indication of this is 
the virtually continuous improvement in firms’ 
and households’ assessments of the current 
situation and outlook. However, this will not be 
fully reflected in the GDP growth rates until 
after the turn of the year when the higher in -
flow of orders starts to have an impact on out -
put. The key factors behind stronger economic 
growth, given unchanged robust domestic 
 activity, will be greater stimuli from export 
 demand. Although the debt crisis continues to 
impose some strains within the euro area, there 
are nonetheless increasing signs of a gradual 
economic recovery, and other advanced econ -
omies should see growth pick up pace. The dif -
ficulties facing a number of emerging market 
economies are likely to be of smaller import -
ance by comparison. With levels of industrial 
capacity utilisation now largely at a normal 
level and supported by favourable underlying 
conditions on the financial side, the steady im -
provement in the economic outlook means 
that the key conditions are now in place for 
overcoming the corporate sector’s reluctance 
to invest and for domestic demand to gain fur -
ther impetus from increasing purchases of 
 machinery, equipment and commercial prop -
erty. The DIHK survey at the beginning of 2014 
suggests, however, that growth could face 
 impediments from economic policy factors 
 relating to energy and the labour market along -
side a growing shortage of skilled workers.
In autumn 2013, the inflow of industrial orders 
was up again on the quarter, this time by a sea -
sonally adjusted 1¼%. The somewhat smaller 
rise compared with the third quarter was due 
to the irregular inflow of large orders. There -
fore, the growth in the volume of capital 
goods, at ¾%, was also clearly weaker than in 
the previous quarter. By contrast, there was a 
substantial increase of 1¾% in the intermedi -
ate goods sector. Orders of consumer goods 
grew by 1½%.
Demand stimuli for industry came solely from 
abroad (+2¾%) in the final quarter of the year. Good prospects 
for stronger eco-nomic growth
Further increase 
in orders  received
More foreign 
orders …Demand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scalelog scale
Main industrial orders
Main construction ordersLin scale
Year-on-year
change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
67

The increase in euro- area orders (+6¼%) was 
much stronger than that in non- euro- area 
countries (+¾%). A key part in this was played 
by orders from the aircraft and aerospace in -
dustry, which originate from non- euro- area 
countries, but are passed on within the Euro -
pean production network. There was also an 
increase in the case of computers, electronic 
and optical equipment, as well as electrical 
equipment. In addition, the automotive indus -
try booked more export orders from non- euro- 
area countries. It is notable that demand for 
intermediate goods has increased sharply both 
inside and outside the euro area, which sug -
gests that the global economy is picking up. 
Moreover, customers in the euro area ordered 
significantly more consumer goods, although 
there was admittedly a steep decline in the pre -
vious quarter.
By contrast, the underlying trend in domestic 
orders is continuing to show a muted upward 
trend. During the reporting period, domestic 
orders were in fact somewhat down on the 
fairly high level of the previous quarter (-¾%). 
This was due mainly to a considerably smaller 
volume of orders in the other transport equip -
ment sector, which shows strong fluctuations 
from quarter to quarter. Excluding this eco -
nomic sector from the calculation, the order 
inflow was unchanged on the level of the 
third quarter. German enterprises’ reluctance 
to invest was still evident in the case of some 
items of machinery and equipment. Following 
an increase in the previous quarter, there was 
a clear decline for manufacturers of ma-
chinery.  Domestic orders for computers, elec -
tronic and optical products more than 
matched their level in the previous quarter. By 
contrast, domestic orders of motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts even exceeded their 
strongly elevated level of the preceding 
period. Both the intermediate and consumer 
goods industries recorded a small increase in 
orders.The business outlook for trade and industry has 
continued to improve since the final quarter of 
2013. In manufacturing, this is in line with op -
timistic export and production expectations. 
The outlook for industrial firms has now been 
stable at a high level for several months. This 
also has a knock- on effect on other major sec -
tors. Positive expectations have become much 
more widespread in the wholesale trade and in 
the case of the service providers since the 
 autumn. Retailers are also making an increas -
ingly favourable assessment of their future 
business activities. Moreover, the already 
above- average expectations of the main con -
struction sector have been clearly revised 
 upwards again.
The underlying trend in demand for housing 
construction is likely to continue on an upward 
path in view of immigration- related demand, 
households’ positive income prospects and fa -
vourable financing conditions. Following the 
wave of permits granted in the first three quar -
ters, the autumn provided a breathing space. 
By contrast, commercial properties recorded a 
sharp surge in orders.
Domestic economic activity continues to be 
sustained by private consumption. According 
to surveys by the consumer research institution, 
Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK), con -
sumer confidence, which was already excep -
tionally buoyant, has improved still further 
since the fourth quarter, chiefly on the back of 
more positive economic and income expect -
ations. The clear increase in the existing very 
pronounced propensity to purchase is consist -
ent with this. Against this backdrop, wage 
growth in the coming quarters can be expected 
to bolster the domestic component of growth. 
This is likely to give a distinct impetus to im -
ports and open up additional sales opportun -
ities for enterprises from European partner 
countries, which in turn will ease the adjust -
ment processes in the euro area.… but fewer 
domestic ordersBusiness expect -
ations improve again
Temporary lull 
in demand for housing  construction, but surge in commercial  construction
Private con-
sumption still pointing  upwardsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
68

Public finances*
General government budget
The general government budget was again 
broadly balanced in 2013. According to initial 
preliminary figures, the slight surplus of +0.1% 
of gross domestic product (GDP) from 2012 
 reverted to a minor deficit of -0.1% of GDP . 
While cyclical and specific temporary effects 
still had an overall positive impact on the 
budget balance in 2012, these factors no 
longer played a role in 2013. In a favourable 
environment with low interest rates and low 
structural unemployment, the structural fiscal 
result was also close to balance and thus some -
what better in year- on- year terms. The revenue 
and expenditure ratios were largely unchanged 
and stood at 44¾% (for more detailed infor -
mation, see the box on pages 70 and 71).
Developments at the various levels of govern -
ment and the social security funds were mixed. 
The high surplus run up previously by the social 
security funds fell considerably by 0.5 percent -
age point to +0.2% of GDP in 2013. This was 
due inter alia  to the cut in the pension contri -
bution rate, a renewed faster rise in healthcare 
expenditure as well as a shift (which, as plans 
currently stand, is only temporary in some 
cases) in burdens away from central govern -
ment. By contrast, central, state and local gov -
ernment saw their existing deficit (which, at 
-0.6% of GDP , was still clearly negative overall 
in 2012) diminish noticeably in 2013 to -0.3% 
of GDP . This reflects, in particular, the above-  
mentioned shift in burdens from central gov -
ernment to the social security funds and more 
favourable funding costs, which are significant 
given the high level of debt.
The drop in the debt ratio to 78.4% at the end 
of the third quarter of 2013 (end-2012: 81.0%) 
was attributable to nominal GDP growth in the 
ratio’s denominator but portfolio reductions at 
government- owned bad banks also played a 
role. These factors clearly outweighed the in -creases in debt brought about by further pay -
ments related to the euro- area assistance 
mechanisms.
From the current perspective, the fiscal balance 
is expected to barely change in 2014. Cyclical 
factors and an easing of the debt servicing bur -
den, in particular, could improve public finances 
slightly, but otherwise the structural position 
seems likely to remain largely static. Benefit in -
creases in the statutory pension insurance 
scheme are likely to have only a relatively small 
impact in 2014 because the changes are not 
scheduled to become effective until mid- year. 
The government is also planning additional un -
funded expenditure inter alia  on public infra -
structure investment. However, this expend -
iture is expected to be rather low initially due, 
not least, to the time lag inherent in major con -
struction projects and the fact that budgetary 
authorisation is likely to be outstanding for 
some time.
The debt ratio thus looks set to diminish further 
this year. With a broadly balanced general gov -
ernment budget, nominal GDP growth in the 
denominator pushes the ratio down. As things 
currently stand, portfolio reduction among the 
bad banks is expected to continue and the 
debt- increasing impact of the measures already 
concluded as part of the euro-  area assistance 
mechanisms is lower than in previous years. 
However, at around 75%, the debt ratio is still 
well in excess of the ceiling laid down in the 
Maastricht Treaty.
At the end of 2013, the Federal Ministry of 
 Finance submitted an updated forecast of short 
and medium- term budgetary developments to General govern-
ment budget again broadly balanced in 2013
Social security 
funds’ surpluses contracting; government- level deficits 
 diminishing
Debt ratio 
 decliningCurrent perspec-tive: balance  expected to barely change 
in 2014 and …
… debt ratio set 
to diminish
Fiscal policy 
stance eased somewhat
* The analysis in the “General government budget” section 
is based on data contained in the national accounts and on 
the Maastricht ratios. The subsequent reporting on the 
budgets of the various levels of government and the social 
security funds is based on the figures as defined in the gov -
ernment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line 
with the budget accounts).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
69

The structural development of public fi  nances in Germany – 
results of the disaggregated framework for 2013
According to the provisional national ac-
counts data from the Federal Statistical  Offi   ce, Germany’s general government 
budget recorded a small defi  cit of 0.1% of 
gross  domestic product (GDP) in 2013, 
compared with a slight surplus of 0.1% of 
GDP in 2012. Using the “disaggregated 
framework” for analysing public fi  nances,1 
fi  rst, the role played by cyclical infl  uences 
and specifi  c temporary effects is estimated. 
Second, other changes, referred to here as 
structural, in the revenue and expenditure ratios and their major determinants are 
identifi  ed. The main results of this analysis 
for 2013 are presented below.2
Whereas cyclical factors still had a positive 
impact on the fi  scal balance in 2012, they 
waned in the wake of the economic slow-
down in the fourth quarter of 2012 and the 
fi  rst quarter of 2013, and had a neutral  impact on average in 2013. The fi  scal bal-
ance thus declined by 0.4 percentage point 
due to cyclical reasons. By contrast, clearly 
identifi  able specifi  c temporary effects had a 
slightly positive effect (+0.1 percentage 
point). This is attributable to the absence of 
the one- off burden in 2012 resulting from the capital transfers as part of the reso-
lution of the public regional bank WestLB. 
After adjustment for these cyclical infl  u-ences and specifi  c temporary effects, the 
structural fi  scal balance in relation to nom-inal trend GDP improved slightly in 2013 by 
0.2 percentage point. The structural fi  scal 
balance was thus close to balance.
The unadjusted revenue ratio dropped by 0.1 percentage point, whereas the struc-tural ratio fell somewhat more sharply, by 0.2 percentage point. The decline in the 
structural ratio was primarily due to legisla-tive changes (-0.2 percentage point), not 
least the further cut in the pension contri-
bution rate. The other factors identifi  ed in 
the disaggregated framework did not play 
an important role in 2013. The slight decline 
in non- tax revenue refl  ects in particular the 
fact that the interest income (as well as the 
interest expenditure) of government- owned bad banks fell in the wake of their portfolio reductions. As usual, fi  scal drag pushed the ratio up somewhat (+0.1 percentage point), 
whereas structural shifts in the distribution 
and use of GDP , affecting its “revenue  richness”, or other factors (residual), such as time lags in the assessment, did not 
play a role overall in the change in the bal-ance.
The unadjusted expenditure ratio rose slightly by 0.1 percentage point, whereas 
the structural ratio fell perceptibly (-0.4 per-
centage point) above all due to the more 
stable trend GDP in the denominator (com-
pared with that for unadjusted GDP). The 
interest expenditure ratio decreased further 
(-0.2 percentage point) owing to the fa-vourable fi  nancing conditions and partly also to the above- mentioned portfolio re-
ductions at bad banks.3 The structural ratio 
of primary expenditure likewise fell by 
0.2 percentage point. This was due to a sig-
nifi  cant extent to the ongoing muted 
1 For a more detailed description of the framework, 
including the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical component used in the Eurosystem, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for 
analysing public fi  nances: Germany’s fi  scal track record 
between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 
2006, pp 61-76.
2 These results are subject to amendments arising 
from revisions to the national accounts fi  gures or to 
 estimates of the macroeconomic outlook.
3 The determinants of the change in the interest 
 expenditure ratio are not shown because the debt 
ratio for 2013 is not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
70

growth in pension expenditure. Further-
more, the structural relief for labour market 
spending continued. However, healthcare 
expenditure pushed up the ratio, as did Germany’s increased payments to the EU budget ( recorded under “Other expend-
iture” in the table above).
In conclusion, Germany’s public fi  nances re-
corded a close- to- balance result both in un-
adjusted and structural terms, as they had 
done the previous year. The tailing off of 
the positive cyclical impact from 2012 over-
shadowed the slight structural improve-
ment. The latter was due to the fact that 
above all the ongoing muted growth in 
pension  expenditure and a further decline in interest expenditure outweighed cuts in 
taxes and social contributions, particularly 
in pension insurance contributions.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in percentage points
Item 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 1.9 – 0.3 – 3.0 – 1.1 3.3 0.9 – 0.2
Cyclical component 1 0.5 0.3 – 1.6 0.2 0.8 0.1 – 0.4
Temporary effects 1 0.0 – 0.3 0.2 – 1.0 1.2 – 0.1 0.1
Fiscal balance 1.4 – 0.3 – 1.5 – 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.2
Interest payable 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2
Owing to change in average interest rate 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2
Owing to change in debt level 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.0
Primary balance 1.5 – 0.4 – 1.8 – 0.4 1.3 0.8 – 0.1
Revenue 0.8 0.3 – 0.7 – 0.4 1.0 0.1 – 0.2
Taxes and social contributions 0.7 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.5 0.8 0.2 – 0.1
Fiscal drag 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1
Decoupling of base from GDP – 0.2 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.1
Legislative changes 0.7 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.7 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Residual 0.2 0.6 – 0.6 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.1
of which: profi  t-related taxes 2 0.2 0.5 – 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1
Non-tax revenue 3 – 0.1 0.0 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
Primary expenditure – 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.8 – 0.2
Social payments 4 – 0.4 0.2 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2
Subsidies – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0
Compensation of employees – 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1
Intermediate consumption 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0
Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.0
Other expenditure 5 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.2 0.1
Memo item
Pension expenditure 6 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3
Healthcare expenditure 7 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1
Labour market expenditure 8 – 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1
* The structural fi  scal balance is defi  ned as an unadjusted balance that is adjusted for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary 
effects and set in relation to trend GDP . This table shows the year- on- year change in this ratio. The Maastricht defi  nition is used, ie swaps and forward rate agreements are included in interest expenditure and the fi  scal balance. 1 Year- on- year change 
in the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment income tax. 3 Other current 
transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 4 Including other current transfers to households. 5 Other current trans-fers payable to corporations and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers 
payable. 6 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, on civil servants’ pensions as well as payments by the Post 
Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 7 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assistance to-
wards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 8 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the compensatory amount (2007)/reintegration payment (from 2008 to 2012) paid to central government) and central government expenditure on un-
employment welfare benefi  t (II) and on labour market reintegration measures.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
71

the Stability Council. Although the new Ger -
man government’s plans will, on balance, place 
additional strains on public finances, the fore -
cast envisages that the general government 
budget will continue to be balanced in 2014 
and 2015, and that in the years thereafter up 
to 2017 it will record a surplus of ½% of GDP .1 
Overall, a general government budget that is at 
least balanced seems to be compatible with 
the government’s plans as long as all levels pur -
sue a restrained expenditure policy and no fur -
ther burdens arise.
As part of the European Stability and Growth 
Pact, Germany has set a medium- term object -ive of a structural general government deficit 
ratio of no more than 0.5%. In order to imple -
ment the Fiscal Compact with its European 
partner countries, Germany once again en -
shrined this ceiling explicitly in national legisla -
tion.2 The Stability Council was given the task 
of monitoring compliance with this ceiling and, 
in the future, will be aided by an independent 
committee.3 As part of its new mandate, every 
May and December the Stability Council exam -
ines adherence to the ceiling for the current 
and the following four years. Where necessary, 
it also proposes appropriate measures to help 
avoid breaching this ceiling. It carried out this 
mandate for the first time in December 2013 
and – based on estimates by the Federal Minis -
try of Finance – certified that Germany’s struc -
tural general government deficit complies with 
this ceiling. This assessment is currently still 
valid. However, clearer communication of the 
policy changes that are included in this examin -
ation would be welcome.
Given Germany’s high debt ratio and the bur -
dens associated with demographic change, it is Stability Council 
monitors com-pliance with ceiling for struc-tural general government  deficitGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties and the EU share in VAT rev-
enue.
Deutsche Bundesbank3940414243444546474849
–10+1+2+3+4As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
Taxes and social contributions
ratio 1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013Deficit ratio
1 A structural surplus of ½% of GDP is estimated for each 
year in the planning period. The cyclical adjustment pro -
cedure applied is based on the method used in the EU 
budgetary surveillance procedure. At the current end, using 
this procedure results in a distinctly negative cyclical impact 
on the fiscal balance whereas the Bundesbank’s estimation 
procedure, using a disaggregated framework, (see also the 
box on pages 70-71) produces a fairly neutral cyclical im -
pact in particular due to the comparatively stable develop -
ment of key macroeconomic budget variables. Conse -
quently, even under equal conditions, the current structural 
budgetary situation is estimated to be more favourable 
using the German government/EU procedure than in the 
disaggregated framework applied by the Bundesbank.
2 The fundamental commitment to the EU budgetary tar -
gets already stipulated in the German constitution was out -
lined in greater detail in the Budget Principles Act ( Haus -
haltsgrundsätzegesetz ) without transitional periods.
3 See Act concerning the implementation of the Fiscal 
Compact within Germany ( Gesetz zur innerstaatlichen Um -
setzung des Fiskalvertrags ), 15 July 2013, and for funda -
mental considerations on the details thereof: Deutsche 
Bundesbank , Statement on the draft Act concerning the 
implementation of the Fiscal Compact within Germany 
(Stellungnahme zum Entwurf eines Gesetzes zur innerstaat -
lichen Umsetzung des Fiskalvertrags), Bundestags-  
Drucksache  17/ 10976, including the accompanying 
amendment requests from the Budget Committee of 
16  November 2012. The committee will comprise nine 
members, one of whom will be seconded from the Bun -
desbank. The first statement of the committee is an -
nounced for May.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
72

advisable to not exploit the regular ceiling of 
0.5% for the structural deficit ratio but instead 
to continue to target a budgetary surplus in the 
budget and medium- term plans. In view of the 
national budget rules, it would be sensible to 
make the most of the current exceptionally fa -
vourable conditions and swiftly reduce the 
structural deficits still remaining at the central, 
state and local government levels, and to build 
up safety margins below the long- term na -
tional upper limits. By factoring in safety mar -
gins under normal circumstances, short- term 
corrections can be kept to a minimum, which 
may otherwise be necessary if the budgetary 
situation has to be re- evaluated in less favour -
able times.
In this setting, it would be appropriate for new 
fiscal policy measures to be largely neutral in 
budgetary terms and for the focus to be placed 
on structural improvements within the budgets. 
Increasing public infrastructure investment as a 
basis for sustainable economic growth, as cen -
tral government is planning to do, is an import -
ant task. In addition to maintaining the neces -
sary level of infrastructure, the key objective 
here is not so much to increase expenditure 
across the board but to focus on eliminating 
bottlenecks. This could be financed by improv -
ing efficiency within the investment budget, 
shifting budget items or by means of fees. In 
this context, it should be noted that a marked 
increase in investment expenditure when pro -
duction capacity is restricted can lead to price 
hikes and the real effects may then be corres -
pondingly lower. Investment in education is also 
to be increased. In this area, too, it is important 
for any weaknesses to be eliminated in a tar -
geted manner and scope arising from the falling 
number of school pupils as a result of demo -
graphic changes could be used for this purpose. 
A key future challenge with regard to the social 
security funds is to maintain their sustainability 
in the face of demographic change. Close atten -tion needs to be paid, too, to the substantial 
burden that is already weighing on younger 
generations. With demographic factors foresee -
ably diminishing the labour force, extending 
working life will play an important role in this 
regard. By contrast, shortening working life only 
tends to aggravate the problem still further.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
At just under 3½%, tax revenue4 continued to 
record solid growth in 2013 (see the chart 
below and table on page  74) and was thus 
broadly in line with the November forecast 
made by the Working Party on Tax Revenue 
Forecasting. Receipts from income- related 
taxes climbed by an above- average 6%. Al -
though the strong increase in wage tax receipts 
was bolstered by stagnating deductions (for 
child benefit and subsidies for supplementary 
private pension plans), it was mainly attribut -
able to ongoing stable wage developments 
and the growing number of employed persons. 
Despite the basic income tax allowance being 
raised, the increase was still boosted by the 
progressive taxation schedule. Revenue from Recommenda-
tion to anchor surpluses in medium- term plans still valid
Focus on struc-
tural improve-ments would be welcomeAbove- average growth in in-come- related taxes
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013024681012
++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the last quarter recorded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
73

profit- related taxes continued to rise at an 
above- average pace (+6½%). While sharp 
growth in assessed income tax is partly attrib -
utable to a fall in deduction amounts (due pri -
marily to the phasing- out of the homebuyers’ 
grant and a much weaker rise in income tax 
refunds to employees), it also reflects con -
tinued dynamic growth in gross revenue. How -
ever, the rise in corporation tax revenue, which 
was just as sharp, was chiefly due to special 
factors that were also responsible for the fall in 
income from non- assessed taxes on earnings.5 
Receipts from withholding tax on interest in -
come and capital gains increased significantly. 
By contrast, revenue from consumption- related 
taxes recorded only weak growth overall 
(+½%). Despite the next increase in tax rates at 
the beginning of 2013, revenue from tobacco 
tax continued to decline. Receipts from turn -
over tax, which are sometimes affected by pay -
ment deferrals even at the turn of the year, 
grew at a somewhat weaker pace than ex -
pected in the November forecast.According to the latest official tax estimate, at 
just over 3%, growth in tax revenue (including 
local government taxes) is expected to be of a 
similar magnitude in 2014. Although the 
macroeconomic reference variables for tax rev -
enue are expected to grow at a significantly 
faster pace, the volume of receipts will be 
dented, in particular, by tax refunds envisaged 
in the wake of court rulings. Furthermore, 
shortfalls as a result of changes in tax legisla -
tion are likely to be somewhat larger on bal -
ance than in 2013.6
Only weak rise 
in consumption- related taxesRevenue growth expected to continue on stable path in 
2014Tax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2013 
as a whole
1,2,3Q4
2012 2013 2012 2013
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 551.8 570.2 + 18.4 +  3.3 +  3.4 148.4 153.8 + 5.4 +  3.6
of which
Wage tax 149.1 158.2 +  9.1 +  6.1 +  5.9 42.2 44.9 + 2.7 +  6.3
Profi  t-related taxes 4 82.5 87.7 +  5.2 +  6.3 +  5.9 18.1 19.9 + 1.9 + 10.3
Assessed income tax 37.3 42.3 +  5.0 + 13.5 + 12.0 9.9 10.6 + 0.7 +  7.2
Corporation tax 16.9 19.5 +  2.6 + 15.2 + 17.2 3.9 4.8 + 0.8 + 20.8
Investment income 
tax5 28.3 25.9 –  2.4 –  8.4 –  9.0 4.2 4.6 + 0.3 +  7.6
Turnover taxes 6 194.6 196.8 +  2.2 +  1.1 +  1.4 49.9 50.5 + 0.6 +  1.2
Energy tax 39.3 39.4 +  0.1 +  0.2 +  0.2 15.2 15.1 – 0.1 –  0.4
Tobacco tax 14.1 13.8 –  0.3 –  2.3 –  1.4 4.7 4.3 – 0.4 –  7.7
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2013. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Tax revenue including (still estimated) local govern-ment taxes was €2.5 billion above the November 2012 estimate, which formed the basis for the 2013 central government budget plan 
at the end of 2012. Excluding the effect of legislative changes made since the estimate, tax revenue would have been revised upwards 
by €2.1 billion. 4 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 5 Withholding tax on interest 
 income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 In 2012, tax payments on dividends within groups of 
companies sharply drove up income from non-  assessed 
taxes on earnings, while the refunds offsetting these pay -
ments pushed down corporation tax revenue by a similar 
amount.
6 This estimate assumes that growth in real GDP will accel -
erate markedly from 0.5% in 2013 to 1.7% in 2014. By 
contrast, growth in nominal GDP – which is of greater rele -
vance for the tax forecast – is expected to accelerate some -
what less (from 2.6% in 2013 to 3.3% in 2014).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
74

Central government budget
According to the preliminary outturn, central 
government recorded a deficit of €22½ billion 
in 2013, which amounts to a slight reduction of 
€½ billion compared with the actual figure for 
2012. Tax receipts went up by only 1% (+€3 
billion) as a result inter alia  of higher transfers 
to the EU budget (+€5 billion), and other in -
come actually fell by €2 billion chiefly due to 
the abolition of the Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s reintegration payment. On the expenditure 
side, payments to the Federal Employment 
Agency and the health insurance fund were cut 
significantly (by a total of €10 billion). The one- 
off burden from advance payments made to 
the flood assistance fund in the amount of €8 
billion had a particularly negative (expenditure- 
increasing) impact. Overall, spending thus rose 
slightly.
The deficit was €3 billion lower overall than 
in  the summer 2013 supplementary budget. 
 Although tax receipts were down by €1 billion, 
total income was higher than forecast. In the 
case of non- tax revenue, the Bundesbank’s 
lower-  than-  expected profit distribution was 
more than offset above all by higher payments 
received from the EU.7 Despite various burdens 
that were not envisaged in the budget – such 
as the extraordinary transfer of €½ billion to 
Greece – expenditure was still €2 billion below 
the authorised level. The largest single contri -
bution to this development came from defence 
expenditure, although procurement payments 
–  which played a decisive role  – are not ex -
pected to continue to be so low. Calls on guar -
antees and interest expenses inter alia  also 
undershot the budget appropriations.
Structural new borrowing in the core budget, 
as calculated in accordance with the simplified 
procedure envisaged in the debt brake provi -
sions, was only marginally below the figure es -
timated in the supplementary budget.8 A more 
comprehensive evaluation would of course 
consider the structural balances of the relevant 
off- budget entities, in particular the flood as -sistance fund, which ran a high surplus owing 
to the advance payments received. Overall, the 
Federal Ministry of Finance put structural new 
borrowing at 0.23% of GDP , which was thus 
(as in 2012) compliant with the permanent 
upper limit of 0.35%, which will apply from Slight fall in 
 deficit for 2013 
overall despite strain from  financing flood assistance fund
Results more 
 favourable than 
in summer 
 supplementary budget …
… but structural 
deficit still roughly at esti-mated levelCentral government fiscal balance
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–30–25–20–15–1020132011Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122013
20112012€ billion
7 Central government receives EU funds in conjunction 
with various measures. If higher- than- expected EU revenue 
triggers additional expenditure in the same year, this of 
course does not account for any changes in the fiscal bal -
ance vis- à- vis the budget plans.
8 In the simplified procedure, potential output is not re-  
estimated. The figure from the autumn 2012 forecast 
(when the budget was approved) is taken and the cyclical 
component used at that time is merely revised to account 
for any deviations in actual growth in nominal GDP com -
pared with the estimate at that time. According to this cal -
culation, the cyclical burden amounted to €4 billion. After 
deduction of the net burdens from financial transactions of 
€4½ billion (in particular due to payments to the ESM of 
€8½ billion), the structural core budget balance amounted 
to -€13½ billion (or -0.5% of GDP).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
75

2016.9 However, the Bundesbank’s cyclical ad -
justment procedure results in a distinctly lower 
cyclical burden. The structural balance is thus 
less favourable and close to the future ceiling.
As the new German government was only 
formed in December 2013 and key changes 
have been made vis- à- vis the areas of responsi -
bility for the budget, a new draft central gov -
ernment budget for 2014 is not yet available. 
The coalition agreement maps out a target of 
achieving a structurally balanced budget this 
year. However, at the same time, the govern -
ment has also announced unfunded measures 
for the central government budget with a total 
additional burden of €23 billion for the entire 
legislative period. These measures include, in 
particular, transfers for research, education and 
childcare (€9 billion in total), investment in 
transport infrastructure (€5 billion), relief for 
local government for integration assistance (€3 
billion) and payments to the statutory pension 
insurance scheme (€2 billion), whereby the lat -
ter is not likely to be attributable to burdens 
from waiving the cut in the pension contribu -
tion rate in 2014.10 However, it is still not clear 
how the burdens envisaged for the entire legis -
lative period will be divided among the individ -
ual years.
It is fair to assume that the additional costs will 
be incurred only gradually. For the 2014 budget 
where, despite slightly more favourable results 
at the end of 2013, there has probably been no 
improvement in the starting situation, planned 
new borrowing may nevertheless only margin -
ally exceed the hitherto budgeted amount of 
€6 billion if the structurally balanced budget 
agreed by the coalition parties is to be achieved. 
According to the Annual Economic Report pub -
lished recently, the cyclical burden to be de -
ducted from the structural deficit amounts to 
€5½ billion.11 The outgoing government calcu -
lated burdens of €3½ billion on balance from 
financial transactions.12 Given the considerable 
outflows of funds from the flood assistance 
fund that are expected in 2014, achieving a 
structurally balanced central government budget overall as defined in the debt brake 
provisions ultimately means that the core 
budget will have to run a commensurate sur -
plus. In light of all this, there appears to be very 
limited scope for unfunded expenditure com -
pared with the summer 2013 plans.
As things stand, the same overall picture ap -
plies to 2015; the coalition agreement envis -
ages no net new borrowing in the 2015 budget, 
as was specified in the financial plan of sum -
mer 2013. There are risks stemming from the 
assumption in the summer 2013 financial plan 
that a financial transaction tax would be in 
place in 2015 and would bring in revenue of €2 
billion, and from factored out wage adjust -
ments. The euro- area debt crisis, which has not 
yet been overcome, is another source of uncer -
tainty for the central government budget, not 
least regarding guarantees on assistance loans 
and possible repercussions on macroeconomic 
developments. Further delays in reducing the 
high government debt levels would be coun -
terproductive to the aim of limiting budget bur -
dens, which are already on the rise because of 
demographic change. Central government New govern-
ment announces notable budget strains but draft budget for 2014 still outstanding
Target of struc-
turally balanced budget in 2014 leaves little scope for add-itional unfunded expenditureRisks and demo-graphic burdens give grounds for a cautious fiscal 
policy
9 According to the initial national accounts data, another 
large credit balance of over €27 billion would provisionally 
be booked to the control account at the beginning of 
March, thus pushing up the total balance accrued since the 
2011 budget year to way over the +€80 billion mark. How -
ever, when the Act concerning the implementation of the 
Fiscal Compact within Germany was approved in summer 
2013, it was resolved that the extensive credit balance ac -
cumulated during the transitional period will be cancelled 
in 2016, meaning that this will no longer be available to 
justify higher borrowing by central government.
10 Taken in isolation, a higher pension contribution rate 
results in a higher central government grant to the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme. As the outgoing govern -
ment’s budget planning was based on a constant pension 
contribution rate, the decision that has been taken in the 
meantime not to cut the rate in 2014 has not resulted in 
any additional burdens compared with the earlier budget.
11 By contrast, if the standardised ESCB procedure is used, 
which in particular also considers the growth structure, the 
cyclical impact on the fiscal balance is broadly neutral. 
Overall, given the symmetry requirement stipulated in the 
German constitution, it will have to be examined going for -
ward whether the positive and negative cyclical effects bal -
ance each other out over time or whether there might be 
a tendency to calculate negative cyclical effects.
12 These transactions comprise a €4½ billion contribution 
to the ESM and €½ billion in loans granted chiefly for de -
velopment aid on one side, and loan repayments of €1 bil -
lion and privatisation proceeds of now only €¼ billion on 
the other side.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
76

should therefore use the surpluses aimed for 
previously to reduce its debt. It would then 
have to fund any benefit increases by increas -
ing its revenue or lowering its expenditure.
After recording a slight deficit a year earlier, 
central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks and the loss compensation 
payments they receive) posted a surplus of €8 
billion in the final quarter of 2013 thanks to the 
advance payments made to the flood assis -
tance fund. They thus recorded a surplus of 
 almost €11 billion for 2013 as a whole, com -
pared with €4½ billion one year previously. On 
balance, this rise was mainly due to the ad -
vance payments made to the flood assistance 
fund, whose outflows, at €½ billion, remained 
fairly limited. Despite the prices for CO₂ emis -
sion permits being far lower than expected in 
the budget plans, the Energy and Climate Fund 
still almost balanced its budget as outflows 
were much smaller than planned and the KfW 
banking group (Kreditanstalt für Wiederauf -
bau) issued a €¼ billion cost assumption com -
mitment. The balance recorded by the Financial 
Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) was boosted 
by the final repayment of €1½ billion from 
Commerzbank to pay off the fund’s silent par -
ticipation. By contrast, one factor driving up 
the off- budget entities’ aggregate outlays was 
the first redemption of an inflation- linked cen -
tral government security which, in order to off -
set the amount by which the redemption ex -
ceeded the issue price, led to outflows of €1½ 
billion from the precautionary special fund set 
up for that purpose. There are currently no 
signs that SoFFin, which will remain in exist -
ence up to the end of this year, will need to 
disburse funds for new financial market stabil -
isation measures in 2014. Outflows from the 
flood assistance fund, which are likely to be 
high, will probably cause notable burdens, al -
though these could be offset by surpluses of at 
least a similar size, not least at the precaution -
ary special funds for civil servant pensions and 
for redemptions of inflation- linked central gov -
ernment securities.State government budgets13
The aggregate deficit in the core state govern -
ment budgets came to only €½ billion in 2013, 
compared with €5½ billion in 2012. Growth in 
revenue amounted to just over 4½% (€14 bil -
lion) and was largely driven by robust tax 
growth (+4½%, or just over €9 billion). At the 
same time, transfers received by state govern -
ment also rose sharply (+5½%, or €3½ billion), 
not least because of the increase in funds pro -
vided by central government for the basic al -
lowance for the elderly, which are transferred 
via state government to the municipalities. By 
contrast, proceeds from asset realisations de -
clined (-€1 billion). Expenditure grew at a 
somewhat slower pace, but still rose by 3% (or 
just under €9 billion). This increase was largely 
due to higher transfers (+7%, or just over €5 
billion) and staff costs (+3%, or €3 billion), al -
though in many cases the negotiated pay rise 
was extended to civil servants and retired civil 
servants only in part or with a delay. Other op -
erating expenditure likewise increased sharply 
(+4%, or €1 billion), while the steep decline in 
interest expenses (-5½%, or -€1 billion) con -
tinued and investment outlays decreased 
slightly, even after deducting the one- off cap -
ital repayment from North Rhine-  Westphalia to 
SoFFin in 2012.
Despite the significant fall in their aggregate 
budget deficit, the budget balances of the indi -
vidual federal states still differ widely. Budget 
surpluses were recorded in Bavaria, in all of the 
non- city states in eastern Germany and in two 
of the federal states undergoing a restructuring 
programme (Berlin and, for the first time in 
more than 50 years, Schleswig- Holstein), some 
higher than in the previous period. In spite of 
the favourable underlying conditions for tax 
revenue and interest expenses, however, some 
states – most notably North Rhine-  Westphalia, 
Hamburg, Rhineland- Palatinate, Hesse, Bremen Off- budget 
 entities record large surplus in 2013 Q4 and thus also for year as a wholeOnly very small 
deficit in 2013 
thanks to robust 
tax revenue
Budget balances 
of individual federal states still differ widely
13 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2013 was analysed in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s January 2014 Monthly Report. These are 
the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
77

and Saarland – still recorded deficits, some of 
them very large.
A further slight improvement in the federal 
states’ aggregate balance is expected for this 
year. Growth in tax revenue is likely to be 
 similarly robust to last year, while the expend -
iture pressures caused by higher payments to 
the municipalities and by further adjustments 
to wages and pension payouts will continue. 
Over the entire legislative period, the coalition 
agreement has earmarked funds of at least 
€6 billion to ease the financial burden on fed -
eral states, including their municipalities, in the 
areas of day care for small children, schools 
and higher education. While at least some of 
these central government funds are likely to go 
towards further improving state government 
fiscal balances, some states still need to sub -
stantially consolidate their finances. Ultimately, 
it is doubtful whether the consolidation path 
initiated by the federal states will be sufficient 
to ensure that each and every one of them 
meets the strict debt brake requirements 
 applicable from 2020 onwards.
At its meeting in December, the Stability Coun -
cil took a positive view of the consolidation ef -
forts made in Berlin and Schleswig- Holstein, 
which are both undergoing a restructuring pro -
gramme. As in May 2013, however, it expressed 
reservations about the budget plans in Bremen 
and Saarland, which both have especially high 
debt levels. The Stability Council concluded 
that Bremen had further eroded its safety mar -
gins below the agreed borrowing limit, a devel -
opment which was attributed to additional 
planned expenditure. As the measures taken so 
far might not suffice for Bremen to successfully 
complete its restructuring programme, the Sta -
bility Council has, in accordance with section 5 
(3) of the Stability Council Act (Stabilitätsrats -
gesetz),  called on Bremen for the first time to 
intensify its budget consolidation and to 
present measures to that effect in April. For the 
state of Saarland, the council even identified 
additional consolidation needs for 2015 and 
2016 which were not covered in the restructur -ing report but only in a supplementary docu -
ment submitted by Saarland at a later date. 
However, Saarland is merely required to pro -
vide more details on the measures described in 
this supplementary document and on the add -
itional plans intended to widen its narrow 
safety margin. As the Stability Council does not 
have any real power to impose sanctions if 
 restructuring measures are found to be inad -
equate, it currently appears uncertain whether 
the stricter consolidation path the council has 
called for will actually be implemented.14
The agreed general budget surveillance pro -
cedure does not usually take account of off-  
budget entities and does not record any (non- 
specific) global items or balances from financial 
transactions.15 The data are not fully harmon -
ised in terms of the stage of budget planning 
reached in each of the federal states. Overall, 
there are major limitations to the transparency 
and comparability of the states’ final budget 
figures and budget plans. As well as a more 
sensitive warning system, it would be desirable 
to establish modified, harmonised reporting in 
order to inform the general public in a targeted 
manner. It would appear advisable to make 
budget surveillance more stringent so as to en -
sure that undesirable developments are flagged 
at an early stage.Favourable 
 developments expected to continue, but ongoing need for consolida-tion in states posting deficits
Stability Council 
critical of devel-opments in Bremen in par-ticular, but also in SaarlandAdvisable to 
fundamentally 
improve budget 
surveillance
14 One year after calling on a federal state to intensify its 
restructuring efforts, the Stability Council must check 
whether the necessary measures have been taken. If not, it 
merely repeats its call for greater efforts. Only if a federal 
state breaches the borrowing limits at budget outturn up 
to 2019, which were agreed separately in connection with 
consolidation assistance, can the Stability Council cut these 
funds for the year in question.
15 For states receiving consolidation assistance or under -
going restructuring programmes, financial transactions are 
taken into account, off- budget entities are included in the 
evaluation of whether annual borrowing limits have been 
adhered to and global items are identified as warranting 
action. Despite a broad base of data being available in the 
context of general budget surveillance, the off- budget 
 entities of the other federal states are still only monitored 
on a case- by- case basis in instances where the threshold 
for the fiscal ratios has been breached. In cases where 
states’ off- budget entities have fairly substantial deficits, 
there is therefore a danger of the budgetary situation being 
misjudged.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
78

Social security funds16
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme posted 
a surplus of around €2 billion in 2013, whereas 
a deficit of roughly the same size had been ex -
pected in the budget plan. One of the main 
reasons for this surprisingly positive outcome 
was that, despite the contribution rate having 
been lowered from 19.6% to 18.9%, contribu -
tion receipts still rose by almost ½%, mainly as 
a result of the unexpectedly strong growth in 
employment. Had the contribution rate re -
mained unchanged, contribution receipts 
would have increased by 4%. Another reason 
for the unexpectedly favourable budget bal -
ance was that the mid- year pension increase of 
0.25% in western Germany was significantly 
lower than originally estimated. A final factor 
was that the number of pensions paid out on 
average across the year did not increase any 
further in 2013. This was due to the statutory 
retirement age being raised by another month, 
the abolition of the lower statutory retirement 
age for women in 2012 and the relatively small 
number of people in the age groups currently 
entering retirement. The latter phenomenon 
will change in the second half of this decade, 
when the post- war baby boomers start to 
reach the statutory retirement age. Overall, the 
statutory pension insurance scheme’s revenue 
rose by just under ½% and its expenditure by 
1½% in 2013. The scheme’s surplus for 2013 
was thus less than half the size of that posted 
a year earlier, but its financial reserves, amount -
ing to 1.8 times its monthly expenditure (€32 
billion), reached a new high following their last 
peak in 1993.
Under the legal requirements, the contribution 
rate should have been lowered to 18.3% at the 
start of 2014 in order to bring the reserves back 
down to their upper limit of 1.5 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure by the end of 
the year. Central government chose not to put 
forward the statutory ordinance needed to im -plement this reduction, however. Instead, the 
contribution rate for this year is to be fixed by 
law at its current level. Although the Contribu -
tion Rate Act for 2014 (Beitragssatzgesetz 
2014)  has not yet been passed, central govern -
ment announced its intention to leave the con -
tribution rate unchanged in the Federal Law 
Gazette (Bundesgesetzblatt),  referring to the 
first reading of the draft act in the Bundestag in 
December 2013. The decision not to lower the 
contribution rate will lead to additional revenue 
totalling €7½ billion (€6 billion more in contri -
bution receipts and just over €1½ billion more 
in central government grants, which are largely 
adjusted according to the contribution rate). 
However, the scheme faces substantial 
 additional expenditure, which, according to 
the  draft Act on Improvements in Pension Unexpectedly 
large surplus in 2013 due to higher contribu-tion receipts and lower expend-iture
Decision not to 
lower contribu-tion rate leading to high  additional  revenue …… but scheme faces substantial additional  expenditureFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
16 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the third quar -
ter of 2013 was analysed in detail in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s December 2013 Monthly Report. These 
are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
79

 Insurance Benefits (Rentenversicherungs-  
Leistungsverbesserungsgesetz)  adopted by the 
Federal Cabinet, is expected to total €4.4 bil -
lion this year, rise to double that amount in 
2015 and reach around €11 billion per year by 
2030. An additional year per child is to be 
counted towards pension entitlements for 
periods spent rearing children born before 
1992, and 63-year- olds17 who have accumu -
lated 45 contribution years (including some 
periods where they were unemployed and re -
ceived social benefits) are initially to be allowed 
to retire on a full pension without actuarial de -
ductions. For those receiving a disability pen -
sion, the reckonable time is to be extended by 
two years, among other measures. Yet there is 
great estimation uncertainty, above all con -
cerning the fiscal impact of expanding the pos -
sibilities for early retirement. Should more 
beneficiaries than assumed in the draft legisla -
tion opt for early retirement because of the 
new incentives, this would very quickly place 
higher additional burdens on the pension insur -
ance scheme, as it would immediately lead to 
additional pensions being paid out and reduce 
contribution receipts.
The latest projections foresee a reduction of 
the reserves over the second half of this decade 
to 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expend -
iture. The contribution rate must then be in -
creased far enough that the current revenue it 
generates covers the scheme’s current expend -
iture, which will be higher than it is now. How -
ever, the stabilisers in the pension adjustment 
formula will lower the annual pension increase 
and thus also the general pension level, thereby 
reducing the amount by which the contribution 
rate will need to be raised. Unlike general 
benefit increases, which were last implemented 
on a substantial scale in 1998 (albeit accom -
panied by further measures aimed at ensuring 
that the finances of the statutory pension insur -
ance scheme remained sustainable), the planned 
changes are not intended to raise the general 
level of benefits in the scheme but to channel 
more funds to specific groups of insured per -
sons. Consequently, the level of benefits for those who do not fall into these categories will 
be lower in both relative and absolute terms.18 
In effect, the planned measures will lead to a 
redistribution of funds at the expense of both 
contribution payers and of pensioners outside 
the categories benefiting from the changes. 
The draft legislation already recognises that, in 
view of these benefit increases, the cap of 22% 
on the contribution rate up to 2030 cannot be 
maintained without additional funds being 
channelled from the central government 
budget to the statutory pension insurance 
scheme. Whether the increases to the central 
government grant which are factored in for this 
reason from 2019 onwards will ultimately be 
sufficient will depend, notably, on actual retire -
ment behaviour. All in all, the adopted meas -
ures will place a burden on younger gener -
ations and on pensioners who do not fall into 
the categories benefiting from the changes and 
will exacerbate the existing problem of a shrink -
ing potential labour force and a growing social 
contributions burden.
Federal Employment Agency
Last year, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
revenue fell by almost 13% and its expenditure 
decreased by 6½%. This reflects the financial 
loss the agency incurred as a result of the abo -
lition of the rules- based payment flows be -
tween itself and the central government budget 
(central government grant and reintegration Cap of 22% on 
contribution rate up to 2030  cannot be main-
tained without additional cen-tral government fundsBalance worsened in net terms by aboli-tion of rules- based central government grant and of  reintegration payment
17 Access to a full pension without actuarial deductions 
once the claimant has turned 63 will only be possible up to 
the end of 2015. From 2016 onwards, the age at which 
claimants can draw a full pension will increase by 2 months 
each year. Those born in 1964 will not be able to draw a 
full pension until they are 65, although some periods of 
unemployment will also still be counted towards pension 
entitlements.
18 The contribution rate increase, viewed in isolation, will 
need to be larger as a result of the additional expenditure. 
In addition, the calculated pensioner ratio will increase be -
cause the number of “equivalent pensioners”, which is part 
of the equation used to obtain this ratio, is calculated by 
dividing the total (higher) pension expenditure by the 
standard pension of the average earner who has accumu -
lated 45 contribution years (which is not directly affected), 
and because early retirement reduces the number of con -
tribution payers. Both of these factors will lead to smaller 
general pension increases in future.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
80

payment). After adjustment for these effects, 
revenue increased by 7½% and expenditure by 
5%. While the Federal Employment Agency’s 
budget balance was only slightly positive in 
2013 following a surplus of €2½ billion in 2012, 
its finances would have improved by just over 
€½ billion if the payment flows between the 
agency and central government had been left 
unchanged.
Contribution receipts grew by almost 4% in 
2013, particularly as a result of the favourable 
developments in employment and wages. Fur -
thermore, the Federal Employment Agency re -
ceived substantial additional revenue from in -
solvency benefit contributions, for which the 
contribution rate was raised from 0.04% 
to 0.15% at the start of the year. Spending on 
unemployment insurance benefit (I) grew by 
11½%, reflecting, in particular, the rise in un -
employment in 2013. However, the year- on- 
year rates became progressively smaller over 
the course of the year. By contrast, there was 
another substantial decline (of almost 10%) in 
spending on active labour market policy. Yet 
this expenditure item appears to have reached 
or even passed its lowest point; it was 5% up 
on the year in the final quarter of 2013.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
shows a slight surplus for 2014. It estimates 
that revenue will rise by 2½% and expenditure 
by just over 2%, and assumes that income sub -
ject to compulsory contributions will increase 
by just under 3%. A reduction of 4½% in 
spending on unemployment benefits is 
planned, while expenditure on active labour 
market policy is to increase substantially (by 
12%). As things stand, more favourable devel -
opments in contribution receipts are not an un -
realistic prospect. In addition, the expenditure 
appropriations for vocational training may well 
prove to be generous, as they were in the pre -
ceding years. Consequently, the possibility of a 
better- than- planned budget balance cannot be ruled out, although it is important to note, as a 
general point, that this is especially dependent 
on economic developments. In the medium 
term, the Act on Improvements in Pension In -
surance Benefits poses additional risks to the 
Federal Employment Agency’s finances. If, as in 
the past, the expanded possibilities for drawing 
a full pension without actuarial deductions are 
used to combine up to two years of unemploy -
ment insurance benefit (I) with early retirement, 
this will likewise increase the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s outlays.Impact of 
 expenditure growth ab-sorbed by  favourable  contribution  receipts
Slight surplus in 
2014 budget plan, but better outcome pos-sible as things standFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the  civil  servants'  pension  fund.  2 Excluding  central  govern-
ment liquidity assistance.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 201368101214
1.21.52.03.04.05.06.0–20+2+4€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Total expenditure 1
Revenue 2
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits
    and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
81

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2014  
82

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  55•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  56•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  56•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  57•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  58•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  58•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  59•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  59•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  60•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  60•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  61•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  61•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  61•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  62•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  63•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  64•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  65•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  66•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  66•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  67•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  68•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  69•
 9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  69•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  70•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  71•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  72•
 4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ............................................  73•
 5 C urrent transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  73•
 6 C apital transfers  ..........................................................................................................  73•
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  74•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  75•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  75•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  76•
 1 1 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies  ...........................................  77•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  77•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  78•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2014
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2012          Apr 2.0 2.5 2.4 2.7 1.4 − 0.1 0.8 0.35 0.74 3.9
         May 3.3 2.8 2.9 2.8 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.34 0.68 4.0         June 3.5 2.9 3.0 3.1 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.33 0.66 4.0
         July 4.6 3.4 3.5 3.1 1.3 − 0.6 − 1.1 0.18 0.50 3.8
         Aug 4.9 3.1 2.8 3.0 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 0.11 0.33 3.7
         Sep 5.2 3.1 2.8 3.1 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.3 0.10 0.25 3.5
         Oct 6.4 4.3 3.9 3.5 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.3
         Nov 6.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.2
         Dec 6.4 4.5 3.5 3.6 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.07 0.19 3.0
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 2.9
         Feb 7.0 4.2 3.1 3.0 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.0
         Mar 7.1 4.1 2.5 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 2.9
         Apr 8.6 4.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.6 2.8 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6
         June 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.4 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 2.9
         July 7.0 4.0 2.1 2.3 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.3 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0
         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 3.0
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8
         Dec 5.8 2.5 1.0 ... − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.20 0.29 2.8
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2012          Apr 
+ 5,569 + 4,244 − 504 + 9,945 − 3,908 − 3,596 − 2,946 1.3162 99.5 97.1
         May − 1,912 + 6,743 + 3,701 + 15,372 + 12,736 − 22,952 − 1,456 1.2789 98.1 95.6
         June + 22,512 + 13,747 − 18,822 − 50,075 + 72,340 − 36,583 − 4,504 1.2526 97.2 94.8
         July + 21,529 + 14,356 − 12,546 + 15,659 − 9,596 − 19,106 + 496 1.2288 95.4 93.1
         Aug + 9,708 + 5,520 − 7,570 + 22,197 − 12,242 − 15,962 − 1,564 1.2400 95.2 93.0
         Sep + 12,254 + 9,945 − 19,623 − 6,910 − 3,794 − 9,895 + 976 1.2856 97.2 94.9
         Oct + 13,665 + 10,500 − 27,114 − 50,518 + 69,534 − 43,485 − 2,644 1.2974 97.8 95.4
         Nov + 20,899 + 13,415 − 34,527 + 19,156 + 23,613 − 76,312 − 985 1.2828 97.2 94.8
         Dec + 27,328 + 11,064 − 38,519 + 3,799 + 5,186 − 48,284 + 779 1.3119 98.7 96.2
2013          Jan − 6,820 − 2,695 + 4,699 − 10,901 + 31,457 − 11,058 − 4,799 1.3288 100.4 97.9
         Feb + 9,016 + 11,220 − 11,069 + 2,202 − 11,277 − 4,554 + 2,560 1.3359 101.6 99.0
         Mar + 22,401 + 22,167 − 18,759 − 15,284 + 4,712 − 10,437 + 2,251 1.2964 100.2 97.8
         Apr + 14,797 + 16,341 − 20,663 − 18,550 − 5,845 + 3,773 − 41 1.3026 100.5 97.8
         May + 11,311 + 16,906 − 12,709 − 16,578 + 29,627 − 25,204 − 555 1.2982 100.5 98.0
         June + 30,027 + 18,008 − 25,457 − 20,481 + 42,730 − 47,116 − 591 1.3189 101.6 98.8
         July + 24,013 + 18,837 − 25,781 + 7,889 − 34,483 + 574 + 239 1.3080 101.5 98.8
         Aug + 10,180 + 7,107 − 10,214 − 969 + 23,776 − 31,053 − 1,968 1.3310 102.2 99.5
         Sep + 14,715 + 13,516 − 22,270 − 34,690 + 20,190 − 6,640 − 1,130 1.3348 102.0 99.0
         Oct + 26,611 + 19,223 − 27,533 − 1,677 + 4,849 − 31,560 + 855 1.3635 102.8 p) 99.6
         Nov + 27,372 + 18,786 − 29,325 − 12,600 + 48,768 − 65,676 + 183 1.3493 102.6 p) 99.4
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3704 103.9 p) 100.9
2014          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3610 103.4 p) 100.5
*  Source: ECB. 1  See also Tables XII.12 and 13, pp 77−78   2  Including financial indices are computed for the EMU without Latvia. The deflator HICP(EMU-18) is not
derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  By derogation from yet available. The Latvian lats is included in the basket of partner country currencies. 
the standard, the real effective exchange rates of the euro based on consumer price

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2011 1.6 1.8 3.3 9.6 2.8 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.5 5.3
2012 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.7 3.9 − 1.0 0.0 − 6.4 0.2 − 2.5 5.2
2013 ... ... 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2012          Q2 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.6 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 6.4 0.4 − 3.0 4.9
         Q3 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.4 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 0.5 − 2.9 4.6
         Q4 − 1.0 − 0.6 0.0 4.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 4.6
2013          Q1 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 1.3 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 5.5 − 1.8 − 2.8 3.8
         Q2 − 0.6 0.1 0.9 1.1 − 0.8 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 − 2.5 4.3
         Q3 − 0.3 0.4 1.1 0.7 − 1.0 0.5 − 3.0 1.7 − 1.6 4.5
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2011 3.4 4.4 7.2 19.7 2.1 2.3 − 8.0 0.0 1.1 8.8
2012 − 2.5 − 3.3 4 − 0.3 0.3 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 6.5 6.2
2013 − 0.8 ... 5p − 0.0 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.5 p − 3.6 p − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.4
2012          Q3 − 2.3 − 3.4 − 0.7 0.1 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 5.1 5.9
         Q4 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 2.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 6.6 − 7.0 5.7
2013          Q1 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 5.0 − 3.7 − 1.7 − 3.2 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 1.0
         Q2 − 1.0 1.2 − 0.4 4.7 − 6.6 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 3.7 − 0.1
         Q3 − 1.1 0.8 − 0.2 2.6 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 0.2
         Q4 1.3 ... 5p 2.6 1.5 − 2.6 0.4 p − 3.5 p − 1.1 0.1 − 0.6
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
2011 80.7 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6 67.6
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1 70.8
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 70.1 72.0
2012          Q4 77.2 76.6 80.7 70.1 77.4 80.4 65.1 − 69.0 71.6
2013          Q1 77.6 75.5 82.2 70.5 78.3 82.3 65.3 − 68.5 72.1
         Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4 72.0
         Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.8 64.9 − 71.3 71.8
         Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 77.5 79.6 65.9 − 72.2 72.2
2014          Q1 80.0 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.5 65.9 − 72.5 72.1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.5 7.8 9.6 17.7 14.7 8.4 16.2
2012 11.4 7.6 5.5 10.2 7.7 10.2 24.3 14.7 10.7 15.0
2013 12.1 8.4 5.3 ... 8.2 10.8 ... 13.1 ... ...
2013          July 12.1 8.5 5.2 8.1 8.1 10.9 27.6 13.1 12.1 12.1
         Aug 12.1 8.5 5.2 8.5 8.2 10.8 27.6 12.7 12.4 12.1
         Sep 12.1 8.4 5.4 8.9 8.2 10.9 27.7 12.6 12.5 12.1
         Oct 12.0 8.4 5.3 9.1 8.3 10.8 27.8 12.4 12.5 ...
         Nov 12.0 8.4 5.2 9.3 8.4 10.8 ... 12.3 12.8 ...
         Dec 12.0 8.4 5.1 ... 8.4 10.8 ... 12.1 12.7 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2011 9 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9 4.2
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.3
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2013          Aug 1.3 1.1 1.6 3.6 2.0 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 1.2 − 0.1
         Sep 1.1 1.0 1.6 2.6 1.8 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 0.9 − 0.4
         Oct 0.7 0.7 1.2 2.2 1.7 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.8 0.0
         Nov 0.9 0.9 1.6 2.1 1.8 0.8 − 2.9 0.3 0.7 − 0.3
         Dec 0.8 1.2 1.2 2.0 1.9 0.8 − 1.8 0.4 0.7 − 0.4
2014          Jan 10e 0.7 ... 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... e 0.6 ...
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2010 − 6.2 − 3.7 − 4.2 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.1 − 10.7 − 30.6 − 4.5 − 8.1
2011 − 4.1 − 3.7 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 9.5 − 13.1 − 3.8 − 3.6
2012 − 3.7 − 4.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 4.8 − 9.0 − 8.2 − 3.0 − 1.3
 
General government debt 11
 
2010 85.4 95.7 82.5 6.7 48.7 82.4 148.3 91.2 119.3 44.4
2011 87.3 98.0 80.0 6.1 49.2 85.8 170.3 104.1 120.7 41.9
2012 90.6 99.8 81.0 9.8 53.6 90.2 156.9 117.4 127.0 40.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Positively influenced by late reports. 5  Provisional; adjusted in advance by the
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the quarterly
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. production survey and the quarterly survey in the specialised construction industry.
3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. 6  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April,

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
1.9 1.7 0.9 2.8 − 1.2 3.0 0.7 0.1 0.4 2011
− 0.2 0.9 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 2.4 2012
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2013
0.0 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 4.1 2.3 − 3.5 − 1.7 − 2.5 2012          Q2
− 0.5 1.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 2.4 1.9 − 3.0 − 1.7 − 1.9          Q3
0.4 1.9 − 1.5 1.3 − 5.5 0.4 − 3.3 − 1.9 − 3.6          Q4
0.7 1.5 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 4.7 0.5 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 5.1 2013          Q1
2.8 3.3 − 1.7 0.0 − 2.4 0.8 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 6.0          Q2
2.7 1.9 − 0.4 0.5 − 1.7 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.3          Q3
 
Industrial production1,3
 
2.0 − − 0.7 6.8 − 1.0 5.5 1.9 − 1.7 − 8.5 2011
− 3.8 − − 0.5 − 0.2 − 6.1 8.0 − 0.6 − 6.9 − 9.2 2012
... − p 0.7 ... 0.9 ... p − 0.7 p − 1.8 ... 2013
− 4.3 − − 2.3 0.0 − 3.8 11.6 0.4 − 6.8 − 5.0 2012          Q3
− 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 5.2 4.3 − 2.3 − 7.3 − 10.6          Q4
− 6.9 − 2.2 0.5 − 1.4 2.6 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 14.5 2013          Q1
− 6.5 − 0.2 0.2 1.9 2.8 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 12.9          Q2− 2.3 − − 0.4 0.3 − 1.4 4.8 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 11.3          Q3
... −
p 0.4 ... 4.5 ... p 1.9 p 0.8 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 6
 
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201264.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 2013
65.7 74.3 77.0 83.6 72.6 68.4 76.6 72.5 53.7 2012          Q466.9 77.2 77.0 84.9 73.5 60.7 77.8 68.7 52.2 2013          Q1
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.7          Q2
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5          Q3
65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8          Q4
67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 7,8
 
4.8 6.5 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.7 7.9 2011
5.1 6.4 5.3 4.3 15.9 14.0 8.9 25.0 11.9 20125.9 6.5 6.7 ... 16.5 14.2 10.2 26.4 16.0 2013
6.0 6.5 7.0 4.8 16.2 14.3 10.0 26.5 16.1 2013          July
5.9 6.5 7.0 5.0 16.0 14.3 9.8 26.5 16.7          Aug 
6.0 6.6 7.0 4.9 15.8 14.3 9.7 26.4 16.9          Sep 
6.0 6.7 7.0 4.8 15.6 14.1 9.7 26.3 17.2          Oct 
6.1 6.5 6.9 4.8 15.5 14.0 9.9 26.1 17.3          Nov 
6.2 6.7 7.0 4.9 15.4 13.8 10.1 25.8 17.5          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.7 1.0 2.6
p 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 2013
1.7 0.7 2.8 2.0 0.2 1.4 2.2 1.6 0.1 2013          Aug 1.5 0.6 2.4 1.8 0.3 1.1 1.5 0.5 0.3          Sep 
1.0 0.5 1.3 1.5 0.0 0.7 1.1 0.0 − 0.5          Oct 
1.1 0.3 1.2 1.5 0.1 0.5 1.2 0.3 − 0.8          Nov 
1.5 1.0 1.4
p 2.0 0.2 0.4 0.9 0.3 − 1.3          Dec 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2014          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 11
 
− 0.8 − 3.5 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 9.8 − 7.7 − 5.9 − 9.6 − 5.3 2010
0.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 4.3 − 5.1 − 6.3 − 9.6 − 6.3 2011
− 0.6 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 10.6 − 6.4 2012
 
General government debt 11
 
19.5 66.8 63.4 72.3 94.0 41.0 38.7 61.7 61.3 201018.7 69.5 65.7 72.8 108.2 43.4 47.1 70.5 71.5 201121.7 71.3 71.3 74.0 124.1 52.4 54.4 86.0 86.6 2012
July and October. Euro area including Latvia. 7  As a percentage of the civilian labour Estonia from 2011 onwards. 10  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 11  As a per-
force; seasonally adjusted. 8  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: centage of GDP; euro-area aggregate: European Central Bank (ESA 1995),
calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 9  Including member states: European Commission (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          May 23.3 − 7.4 − 10.2 30.7 29.0 13.8 27.3 13.5 − 41.8 − 32.5 − 0.9 − 23.2 14.8
         June 8.3 − 35.3 − 59.6 43.6 18.3 20.6 − 82.0 − 102.6 10.9 − 12.4 − 1.0 − 13.0 37.4
         July − 33.9 − 17.7 − 42.4 − 16.2 − 15.4 9.6 6.3 − 3.3 − 33.3 − 53.4 − 1.1 6.5 14.6
         Aug − 77.5 − 60.6 − 15.2 − 16.9 − 7.6 22.0 − 23.8 − 45.8 3.3 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 2.7         Sep 65.4 32.4 − 3.6 33.0 30.7 − 6.6 − 41.2 − 34.5 − 0.4 − 7.6 − 1.4 − 3.7 12.3
         Oct − 4.7 − 20.5 − 6.1 15.8 1.1 20.5 7.3 − 13.2 − 25.0 − 12.6 − 0.7 − 12.7 0.9         Nov 13.9 − 3.7 − 0.5 17.7 27.2 64.5 − 12.4 − 76.8 − 2.5 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 1.4 4.2
         Dec − 70.9 − 5.5 66.7 − 65.4 − 50.6 32.6 − 89.5 − 122.1 16.1 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 19.5 41.7
2013          Jan 48.0 17.4 − 2.5 30.6 26.5 32.4 60.3 27.9 − 6.1 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 6.3
         Feb − 5.0 − 9.6 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 6.9
         Mar 65.7 30.4 24.1 35.4 29.8 11.4 − 42.1 − 53.6 − 6.0 16.7 − 1.5 − 32.4 11.2
         Apr 10.1 8.9 33.9 1.2 − 8.8 − 6.0 58.9 65.0 − 25.0 − 7.6 − 1.9 − 15.8 0.3
         May 9.9 − 16.6 0.3 26.4 52.0 77.7 0.1 − 77.6 − 5.5 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.5 11.5
         June − 2.4 − 30.8 − 25.0 28.4 36.4 35.9 − 56.6 − 92.5 13.4 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 22.4 37.9
         July − 122.8 − 85.6 − 12.4 − 37.3 − 39.6 − 1.9 − 27.9 − 26.0 − 34.6 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 26.6 − 2.7
         Aug − 52.5 − 34.8 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.0 − 15.9 − 49.8 − 8.8 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 13.6 11.5         Sep 0.4 16.5 − 2.0 − 16.1 − 16.3 22.9 − 31.9 − 54.8 − 10.0 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 1.8
         Oct − 42.4 − 60.2 − 26.3 17.8 5.3 36.1 66.6 30.5 10.0 2.5 − 0.5 15.2 − 7.3         Nov − 27.4 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 26.8 − 8.2 52.1 7.6 − 44.6 − 2.5 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.6         Dec − 171.4 − 98.4 − 40.4 − 73.0 − 71.0 76.5 − 83.9 − 160.3 − 11.3 − 9.7 − 0.5 − 6.6 5.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          May − 33.7 − 25.5 − 20.6 − 8.2 − 2.7 − 21.2 − 5.0 16.2 − 12.6 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 6.0 − 2.7         June 10.1 − 7.5 − 9.2 17.6 7.0 − 27.1 − 28.9 − 1.8 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 1.3 7.0
         July 29.8 34.2 − 0.6 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 16.1 1.5 17.6 − 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 2.2 2.5
         Aug − 4.1 0.6 1.6 − 4.7 2.1 − 7.0 13.2 20.2 − 5.0 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 2.4 0.7         Sep 7.3 2.3 5.0 5.1 6.1 52.6 7.0 − 45.7 − 5.7 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 0.5
         Oct 18.7 8.2 − 5.0 10.5 3.2 10.1 0.9 − 9.2 − 14.0 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.6
         Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.7 − 2.1 11.6 − 7.9 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.2 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.8 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.1 8.0 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 16.8 − 8.1 − 6.1 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.4 − 66.0 − 6.3 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.5 0.9
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
26.2 27.2 − 25.5 19.8 39.1 8.7 30.4 − 25.9 6.6 27.3 12.6 − 6.4 2012          May
17.2 − 35.2 − 36.0 59.0 74.3 11.4 62.9 − 21.9 6.6 − 0.0 − 23.3 6.7          June
− 32.6 15.6 − 26.0 20.3 22.7 3.8 19.0 − 8.0 5.6 4.6 − 1.3 2.0          July− 39.6 − 8.0 − − 11.3 − 3.6 1.8 − 1.3 3.1 − 13.7 8.3 − 13.5 4.3 − 10.4          Aug 
33.5 7.8 − 17.8 43.1 47.2 − 3.5 50.7 − 6.3 2.2 14.2 − 20.7 − 4.2          Sep 
− 22.8 6.6 − 57.0 63.7 34.1 − 2.4 36.5 18.3 11.3 − 20.7 5.3 − 5.1          Oct 
40.5 33.1 − 7.3 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.5 − 13.9 8.1 7.6 − 1.2 − 19.6          Nov 
− 60.6 − 50.3 − 56.5 95.8 82.9 12.7 70.2 − 12.3 25.2 − 42.3 − 26.9 − 6.1          Dec 
33.9 77.1 − − 24.5 − 35.2 − 53.8 − 19.8 − 34.0 − 5.4 24.1 11.8 7.2 − 6.6 2013          Jan 
5.7 − 18.1 − 1.4 10.0 5.2 − 1.2 6.4 − 3.4 8.2 28.0 6.3 − 13.3          Feb 
10.6 27.9 − 44.6 57.9 47.1 11.7 35.4 5.1 5.6 24.2 − 5.9 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.6 21.8 − 57.9 54.1 73.9 7.2 66.7 − 26.5 6.7 − 11.4 − 0.4 1.4          Apr 
62.6 29.5 − 1.0 11.4 25.6 4.9 20.8 − 17.2 3.0 10.9 − 3.4 − 7.4          May30.3 − 3.6 − − 6.5 25.8 45.3 6.3 39.0 − 19.2 − 0.2 22.9 − 19.6 − 2.1          June
− 26.1 − 57.5 − − 6.5 − 7.2 − 8.5 6.9 − 15.4 − 2.1 3.5 − 47.5 − 1.1 − 6.7          July− 55.7 13.6 − 32.3 26.9 25.5 1.4 24.1 − 0.2 1.6 4.9 9.5 1.1          Aug 
11.2 55.8 − − 33.8 − 1.3 23.0 − 0.2 23.2 − 18.5 − 5.7 − 7.2 − 26.4 6.5          Sep 
− 28.0 − 4.2 − 15.8 22.1 38.6 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 8.2 1.3 − 12.3          Oct 
18.4 − 19.2 − 28.1 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 1.2 − 0.9 − 4.2          Nov 
− 49.5 − 20.9 − − 13.2 19.9 20.1 17.9 2.2 − 1.2 1.0 − 10.8 − 13.6 − 13.8          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 0.0 − 62.6 1.7 2.1 20.3 17.2 2.9 0.1 5.3 0.0 − 5.1 2012          May
1.7 − 36.9 1.7 2.8 16.5 18.0 6.6 0.1 − 9.4 0.2 1.0          June
− 5.2 − 5.9 3.5 1.7 30.3 20.4 − 0.8 0.8 7.6 0.0 2.3          July
− 1.1 − 15.8 3.9 − 0.9 10.8 12.4 − 2.1 0.9 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.6          Aug 
1.0 62.5 3.4 − 1.2 2.1 23.9 − 13.5 0.3 − 10.1 − 0.2 1.7          Sep 
− 2.1 − 11.2 2.8 − 0.3 56.1 55.8 − 11.1 0.2 9.9 0.4 1.1          Oct 
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.4 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb − 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.8 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 2.6 31.1 2.5 3.7 − 3.5 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 4.0          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2011          Nov 26,619.6 16,626.5 13,541.3 11,253.0 1,533.8 754.5 3,085.2 1,162.1 1,923.1 5,063.3 4,929.9
         Dec 26,718.7 16,562.9 13,432.5 11,164.1 1,527.4 741.0 3,130.5 1,177.6 1,952.8 5,032.7 5,123.1
2012          Jan 26,895.5 16,673.7 13,478.2 11,196.6 1,532.2 749.3 3,195.5 1,174.8 2,020.7 5,046.6 5,175.2
         Feb 26,832.2 16,686.9 13,451.7 11,165.7 1,539.0 747.0 3,235.2 1,158.9 2,076.3 5,015.7 5,129.6
         Mar 26,693.8 16,707.6 13,447.9 11,163.9 1,526.6 757.3 3,259.8 1,155.6 2,104.1 5,034.1 4,952.1
         Apr 26,862.2 16,703.9 13,447.1 11,157.7 1,520.8 768.6 3,256.8 1,159.6 2,097.2 5,056.0 5,102.3
         May 27,825.4 16,721.3 13,448.4 11,175.7 1,520.6 752.1 3,272.8 1,161.3 2,111.5 5,205.5 5,898.6
         June 27,211.8 16,729.0 13,386.4 11,190.8 1,463.1 732.5 3,342.6 1,187.0 2,155.6 5,089.7 5,393.1
         July 27,534.1 16,699.8 13,371.0 11,218.1 1,416.1 736.8 3,328.8 1,186.4 2,142.4 5,183.4 5,651.0
         Aug 27,305.1 16,627.3 13,304.9 11,165.0 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.4 1,177.0 2,145.4 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,159.9 16,695.7 13,325.3 11,188.4 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.4 1,180.1 2,190.3 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,627.5 16,695.5 13,300.3 11,168.3 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.2 1,194.7 2,200.5 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,695.1 16,718.3 13,292.7 11,161.0 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.4 4,996.6 4,980.2
         Dec 26,245.6 16,606.9 13,241.2 11,040.4 1,433.8 767.0 3,365.7 1,170.3 2,195.4 4,845.6 4,793.2
2013          Jan 26,386.0 16,635.6 13,238.4 11,041.8 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.3 1,174.2 2,223.1 4,799.6 4,950.8
         Feb 26,500.1 16,623.5 13,226.3 11,031.8 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.4
         Mar 26,563.0 16,694.2 13,258.2 11,040.2 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,024.6
         Apr 26,700.1 16,722.5 13,262.1 11,005.8 1,440.9 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.0
         May 26,365.0 16,722.2 13,243.2 10,986.2 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.5 4,844.3
         June 25,924.8 16,690.7 13,199.7 10,974.6 1,432.6 792.5 3,491.0 1,116.9 2,374.1 4,669.1 4,565.0
         July 25,672.5 16,570.6 13,110.6 10,893.1 1,431.8 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.0
         Aug 25,457.3 16,416.3 12,976.3 10,767.0 1,427.7 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.0
         Sep 25,415.7 16,419.3 12,992.3 10,779.4 1,420.3 792.6 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.2 4,409.2
         Oct 25,461.3 16,382.8 12,924.4 10,731.1 1,400.1 793.3 3,458.3 1,118.1 2,340.2 4,626.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,418.4 16,352.9 12,918.3 10,725.6 1,397.6 795.2 3,434.5 1,099.5 2,335.0 4,619.5 4,446.0
         Dec 24,656.3 16,161.2 12,803.5 10,650.3 1,361.0 792.1 3,357.8 1,097.3 2,260.5 4,493.4 4,001.7
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2011          Nov 6,189.0 3,771.3 3,030.2 2,615.1 181.7 233.3 741.1 393.6 347.5 1,179.7 1,238.0
         Dec 6,229.9 3,720.7 2,986.3 2,576.3 183.2 226.8 734.4 396.9 337.5 1,180.4 1,328.9
2012          Jan 6,292.8 3,751.9 3,007.6 2,594.7 182.4 230.4 744.4 400.3 344.0 1,212.0 1,328.9
         Feb 6,239.0 3,746.7 3,001.7 2,595.0 179.9 226.8 745.0 398.1 346.9 1,193.1 1,299.2
         Mar 6,185.1 3,751.3 3,002.6 2,587.7 182.1 232.9 748.7 395.8 352.9 1,191.6 1,242.1
         Apr 6,250.5 3,775.2 3,022.0 2,594.1 179.8 248.0 753.3 401.1 352.2 1,198.9 1,276.4
         May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
841.4 10,536.4 9,961.3 10,007.8 3,722.8 1,437.6 312.5 2,509.9 1,915.2 109.8 2011          Nov 
857.5 10,626.2 10,052.5 10,119.6 3,800.1 1,446.8 310.5 2,524.5 1,928.2 109.4          Dec 
843.0 10,678.5 10,051.3 10,103.0 3,765.6 1,445.1 315.4 2,523.6 1,944.9 108.5 2012          Jan 
842.5 10,704.6 10,055.2 10,101.9 3,735.2 1,464.1 325.6 2,517.3 1,951.1 108.5          Feb 844.9 10,731.4 10,103.4 10,128.0 3,775.3 1,469.1 323.2 2,491.4 1,960.9 108.1          Mar 
847.6 10,689.9 10,094.3 10,126.9 3,783.4 1,468.8 312.1 2,489.2 1,965.2 108.2          Apr 
856.3 10,707.2 10,079.2 10,101.9 3,811.1 1,440.0 312.0 2,459.7 1,971.8 107.4          May867.7 10,754.8 10,113.1 10,103.6 3,869.9 1,411.5 304.0 2,433.6 1,978.1 106.6          June
871.5 10,686.7 10,067.8 10,064.9 3,886.4 1,405.2 302.9 2,381.5 1,983.4 105.5          July
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.2 10,071.1 3,896.1 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4          Aug 866.7 10,716.2 10,109.3 10,110.9 3,940.3 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.2 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.6 10,183.5 10,170.2 3,994.2 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,810.1 10,247.7 10,270.3 4,061.9 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,822.1 10,225.5 10,254.3 4,036.7 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,837.2 10,222.0 10,263.4 4,048.6 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,916.1 10,288.9 10,326.7 4,091.0 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.6 10,325.7 10,355.2 4,148.2 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.6 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.6 10,967.2 10,332.7 10,351.8 4,160.8 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,011.1 10,339.9 10,357.0 4,192.1 1,256.1 371.2 2,360.0 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.4 10,321.6 10,341.9 4,181.9 1,243.1 383.2 2,354.1 2,090.2 89.4          July
894.2 10,923.1 10,336.7 10,362.4 4,208.9 1,240.8 385.7 2,346.5 2,091.3 89.2          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.1 10,347.9 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,342.9 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
897.9 10,915.7 10,342.9 10,373.1 4,264.1 1,193.2 405.4 2,344.7 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,962.3 10,370.3 10,390.1 4,295.5 1,162.8 419.3 2,345.6 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,895.4 10,347.9 10,396.4 4,307.6 1,153.6 430.4 2,334.6 2,083.8 86.4          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
209.1 3,030.2 2,954.6 2,858.9 1,128.2 272.4 44.5 801.4 510.4 102.0 2011          Nov 
212.6 3,038.9 2,962.5 2,867.9 1,130.2 276.1 44.9 799.8 515.8 101.2          Dec 
209.6 3,040.0 2,961.3 2,864.8 1,130.9 274.7 44.8 796.2 518.1 100.3 2012          Jan 
209.4 3,049.0 2,965.8 2,864.0 1,138.8 265.6 45.4 793.2 521.0 100.0          Feb 
209.3 3,041.1 2,968.3 2,857.2 1,143.7 259.8 44.8 788.4 521.4 99.2          Mar 
210.3 3,054.1 2,981.2 2,867.5 1,156.8 260.2 44.1 787.2 520.2 98.9          Apr 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2011          Nov 266.1 262.5 135.1 79.8 4.9 29.3 7.2 6.2 467.0 464.2 547.0 2,999.1 2,312.2
         Dec 259.3 247.4 117.9 81.6 5.2 29.5 7.4 5.9 397.3 394.6 520.4 3,006.2 2,297.0
2012          Jan 319.2 256.4 124.7 81.8 5.3 29.7 7.5 7.4 414.5 411.7 510.6 2,989.8 2,298.4
         Feb 342.2 260.5 122.3 87.9 5.5 29.8 8.0 7.1 428.1 425.7 500.9 2,982.2 2,303.8
         Mar 328.5 275.0 129.4 94.8 5.7 29.8 8.3 6.9 413.6 410.9 511.4 2,988.1 2,312.8
         Apr 289.9 273.2 123.1 99.4 5.6 29.6 8.7 6.8 419.8 417.3 521.0 2,981.5 2,289.4
         May 316.1 289.1 131.3 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 428.4 422.5 533.6 2,983.9 2,272.1
         June 333.3 317.9 134.8 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 428.9 425.1 510.1 2,975.5 2,275.5
         July 300.7 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 433.9 428.0 508.8 2,997.2 2,276.1
         Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 418.0 412.8 513.2 2,966.1 2,265.1
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 427.9 423.9 492.5 2,938.7 2,251.8
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 407.1 403.5 497.3 2,914.7 2,226.4
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 414.8 411.0 495.5 2,889.6 2,206.9
         Dec 251.0 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 372.2 368.2 467.9 2,853.4 2,183.4
2013          Jan 284.9 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 383.6 379.8 459.7 2,807.9 2,172.5
         Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 411.9 406.6 465.9 2,807.2 2,151.8
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 436.4 430.3 459.6 2,775.7 2,122.3
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 424.7 417.3 459.1 2,747.6 2,102.3
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 435.7 428.8 455.7 2,721.6 2,076.7
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 458.4 452.0 436.0 2,696.1 2,062.1
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 410.8 405.0 434.8 2,655.8 2,031.5
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 333.3 327.0 444.4 2,645.5 2,013.2
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 326.0 320.3 417.9 2,642.0 2,003.9
         Oct 245.2 297.4 132.4 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 306.3 300.3 419.1 2,637.3 2,006.3
         Nov 263.6 308.7 140.1 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 300.5 293.2 418.1 2,630.3 2,000.1
         Dec 214.6 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 289.0 282.2 404.4 2,587.2 1,979.7
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2011          Nov 39.9 131.4 43.3 57.9 3.2 24.6 2.0 0.4 111.1 111.1 4.9 689.5 411.6
         Dec 40.1 130.8 40.2 60.3 3.3 24.6 2.0 0.4 97.1 97.1 4.8 691.1 404.5
2012          Jan 44.1 131.1 40.0 60.6 3.4 24.8 1.8 0.4 86.7 86.2 4.5 663.1 384.3
         Feb 47.6 137.4 41.5 65.1 3.6 24.9 1.9 0.4 96.6 96.5 4.4 667.4 389.9
         Mar 36.9 147.0 45.4 70.6 3.7 24.9 1.9 0.4 93.1 93.0 4.1 660.3 379.3
         Apr 36.4 150.2 42.9 76.6 3.7 24.8 1.9 0.4 102.9 102.9 4.2 664.4 380.6
         May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 549.8 309.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
90.9 82.3 2,825.9 4,149.7 2,198.7 − 25.4 4,905.7 − 4,782.4 8,565.2 9,448.4 7,679.9 108.8 2011          Nov 
122.9 83.7 2,799.6 4,089.5 2,219.1 − 17.9 5,020.5 − 4,866.6 8,671.2 9,535.4 7,688.0 116.0          Dec 
109.0 91.6 2,789.2 4,104.0 2,273.3 − 63.8 5,145.6 − 4,815.7 8,640.9 9,495.8 7,731.7 107.7 2012          Jan 
115.6 98.8 2,767.8 4,068.1 2,290.8 − 39.6 5,054.7 − 4,781.8 8,648.7 9,505.8 7,721.3 106.5          Feb 
135.2 103.5 2,749.4 4,139.1 2,271.1 − 58.0 4,852.1 − 4,831.8 8,718.7 9,606.2 7,656.8 107.0          Mar 
119.4 107.7 2,754.4 4,178.1 2,268.7 − 56.3 5,011.8 − 4,837.2 8,721.7 9,608.6 7,656.9 107.8          Apr 
114.2 107.3 2,762.4 4,285.5 2,276.0 − 54.5 5,809.0 − 4,883.1 8,752.8 9,646.5 7,642.1 109.1          May
128.7 102.1 2,744.7 4,158.4 2,312.3 − 56.5 5,260.6 − 4,958.2 8,810.9 9,683.7 7,646.4 111.0          June
136.3 96.2 2,764.7 4,201.6 2,353.7 − 56.4 5,537.2 − 4,982.7 8,834.6 9,713.0 7,654.8 113.5          July
122.9 96.4 2,746.8 4,115.5 2,361.9 − 40.9 5,458.0 − 4,979.0 8,827.3 9,688.8 7,646.4 113.0          Aug 
120.1 92.6 2,726.0 4,047.4 2,405.7 − 61.1 5,325.9 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,702.0 7,665.1 113.1          Sep 
113.8 93.5 2,707.3 4,020.6 2,394.2 − 73.4 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,757.1 7,621.2 112.1          Oct 
96.3 91.2 2,702.1 3,939.7 2,408.7 − 69.6 4,944.7 − 5,091.6 8,957.5 9,761.4 7,627.2 114.6          Nov 
87.6 93.8 2,672.1 3,793.0 2,395.9 − 53.3 4,729.7 − 5,169.3 9,046.2 9,809.9 7,577.5 120.0          Dec 
70.4 92.3 2,645.3 3,774.1 2,387.6 − 38.3 4,932.4 − 5,110.3 9,002.8 9,749.8 7,536.2 112.0 2013          Jan 
62.0 88.2 2,657.0 3,812.2 2,378.1 − 50.6 4,982.3 − 5,120.2 9,019.2 9,758.1 7,529.5 111.1          Feb 
59.5 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.0 2,414.1 − 60.3 4,955.8 − 5,171.0 9,082.6 9,806.8 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.7 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.3 2,390.0 − 46.2 5,122.2 − 5,240.4 9,128.8 9,855.9 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
63.1 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.0 2,377.7 − 52.6 4,825.2 − 5,265.6 9,139.9 9,857.5 7,467.2 111.9          May
66.4 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.5 2,335.8 − 57.0 4,507.1 − 5,309.8 9,166.0 9,850.9 7,397.6 113.0          June
62.3 66.7 2,526.8 3,598.9 2,366.2 − 56.0 4,410.8 − 5,299.6 9,155.8 9,842.4 7,387.4 116.5          July
66.4 63.1 2,516.0 3,571.7 2,392.2 − 57.3 4,310.2 − 5,326.2 9,185.4 9,885.3 7,394.2 115.9          Aug 
76.2 58.3 2,507.5 3,500.3 2,372.6 − 44.2 4,382.8 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,847.2 7,360.7 116.6          Sep 
64.1 58.1 2,515.1 3,511.1 2,377.7 − 40.3 4,436.6 − 5,384.4 9,200.6 9,860.0 7,374.9 114.3          Oct 
63.9 53.4 2,513.0 3,474.3 2,358.2 − 51.9 4,423.1 − 5,432.1 9,236.2 9,888.5 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
37.9 48.9 2,500.4 3,312.2 2,342.6 − 47.7 3,952.1 − 5,450.3 9,253.6 9,855.7 7,314.2 122.9          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
22.5 11.7 655.3 769.8 478.8 − 639.8 1,744.5 170.9 1,171.5 2,061.9 2,212.1 2,062.5 − 2011          Nov 
22.8 9.7 658.6 696.1 473.6 − 607.5 1,835.9 170.5 1,170.4 2,072.8 2,207.2 2,058.1 −          Dec 
19.7 10.3 633.1 801.2 486.8 − 614.9 1,825.4 171.0 1,170.9 2,074.3 2,195.5 2,041.5 − 2012          Jan 
20.2 11.4 635.8 815.9 493.4 − 670.9 1,783.3 172.2 1,180.3 2,082.8 2,215.4 2,047.8 −          Feb 
19.9 9.8 630.5 873.9 491.9 − 710.2 1,730.8 175.5 1,189.1 2,091.3 2,218.3 2,035.4 −          Mar 
16.6 11.5 636.3 889.0 497.3 − 733.8 1,772.5 177.6 1,199.7 2,106.4 2,241.6 2,044.8 −          Apr 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 −          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,953.8 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.0 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.8 5.9 535.1 610.7 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.2 1,853.4 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2011          July 533.6 146.0 311.6 0.2 134.2 29.5 76.9 846.2 73.4 − 111.2 210.9 1 086.6
         Aug 541.3 171.7 321.5 0.1 133.9 56.7 79.2 854.2 71.4 − 104.5 211.5 1 122.4
         Sep 540.3 135.1 389.8 0.3 178.0 121.8 109.8 853.2 52.3 − 103.0 209.5 1 184.5
         Oct 571.0 193.0 373.6 1.5 217.4 168.7 162.9 854.9 50.0 − 88.5 208.7 1 232.2
         Nov 612.1 196.1 387.1 2.8 231.9 204.6 178.0 861.4 57.9 − 80.8 208.9 1 274.8
         Dec 622.1 238.0 389.0 4.4 260.3 253.7 200.5 869.4 63.8 − 85.9 212.2 1 335.3
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2011          July 144.3 22.8 35.8 0.0 31.4 11.1 36.4 211.1 0.3 − 77.3 52.6 274.8
         Aug 146.7 13.6 36.5 0.0 31.3 15.4 35.2 213.0 0.2 − 88.4 52.7 281.1
         Sep 146.7 6.6 33.6 0.0 42.3 27.8 60.2 213.4 0.3 − 124.3 51.8 293.0
         Oct 155.5 10.7 20.8 0.0 52.3 41.5 86.8 213.5 0.3 − 155.0 52.2 307.2
         Nov 167.5 4.0 18.0 0.1 55.7 55.0 87.9 213.8 0.2 − 164.5 53.0 321.8
         Dec 168.7 3.0 17.6 0.1 63.2 60.4 126.2 216.3 0.7 − 205.5 54.4 331.2
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 6.8 + 31.3 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 11.1 + 0.7 + 9.6 + 10.8 − 3.3 + 1.9 + 22.6 2011          July
+ 7.7 + 25.7 + 9.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 27.2 + 2.3 + 8.0 − 2.0 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 35.8          Aug − 1.0 − 36.6 + 68.3 + 0.2 + 44.1 + 65.1 + 30.6 − 1.0 − 19.1 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 62.1          Sep 
+ 30.7 + 57.9 − 16.2 + 1.2 + 39.4 + 46.9 + 53.1 + 1.7 − 2.3 + 14.5 − 0.8 + 47.7          Oct 
+ 41.1 + 3.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 + 14.5 + 35.9 + 15.1 + 6.5 + 7.9 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 42.6          Nov + 10.0 + 41.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 28.4 + 49.1 + 22.5 + 8.0 + 5.9 − 5.1 + 3.3 + 60.5          Dec 
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.7 + 12.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.9 + 6.4 2011          July
+ 2.4 − 9.2 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 + 6.3          Aug + 0.0 − 6.9 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.4 + 25.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 35.9 − 0.9 + 12.0          Sep 
+ 8.8 + 4.1 − 12.8 + 0.0 + 9.9 + 13.7 + 26.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 30.7 + 0.3 + 14.2          Oct 
+ 12.0 − 6.7 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 9.5 + 0.9 + 14.6          Nov + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 5.5 + 38.4 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 41.0 + 1.4 + 9.4          Dec 
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2013 May                31 2,549.4 435.3 255.1 86.4 168.7 27.3 19.9 19.9 −
         June                  7 2,546.6 435.3 255.1 86.7 168.4 28.2 18.9 18.9 −
                              14 2,550.7 435.3 255.6 87.1 168.6 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,545.3 435.3 256.2 86.9 169.3 29.3 18.3 18.3 −
                              28 2,430.4 320.0 247.6 85.3 162.3 27.5 18.1 18.1 −
         July                  5 2,420.3 320.0 248.0 85.3 162.7 26.4 20.4 20.4 −
                              12 2,403.3 320.0 248.3 85.3 163.0 26.6 21.6 21.6 −
                              19 2,399.0 320.0 247.2 85.1 162.1 26.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              26 2,396.2 320.0 247.7 85.1 162.6 25.9 20.8 20.8 −
         Aug                  2 2,391.1 320.0 247.3 85.3 162.0 25.8 21.7 21.7 −
                                9 2,379.3 320.0 250.1 85.6 164.5 24.2 20.8 20.8 −
                              16 2,368.5 320.0 250.1 84.7 165.4 22.7 21.9 21.9 −
                              23 2,360.8 320.0 250.4 84.7 165.8 22.8 22.3 22.3 −
                              30 2,360.6 320.0 249.6 84.6 165.1 24.0 22.3 22.3 −
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 320.0 251.4 84.7 166.8 23.2 22.3 22.3 −
                              13 2,350.1 320.0 251.0 84.6 166.4 23.7 22.3 22.3 −
                              20 2,346.6 320.0 250.7 84.7 166.0 22.7 23.1 23.1 −
                              27 2,338.0 320.0 250.0 84.6 165.4 22.7 23.3 23.3 −
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 343.9 245.4 83.5 161.9 21.5 23.6 23.6 −
                              11 2,340.4 343.9 245.7 83.5 162.2 20.9 22.8 22.8 −
                              18 2,328.0 343.9 244.7 83.3 161.4 21.2 21.5 21.5 −
                              25 2,318.7 343.9 245.4 83.1 162.3 21.3 21.7 21.7 −
2013 Nov                  1 2,314.4 343.9 244.8 83.2 161.6 22.2 21.5 21.5 −
                                8 2,305.4 343.9 243.9 82.7 161.2 22.4 18.7 18.7 −
                              15 2,299.0 343.9 244.2 82.5 161.7 22.5 19.1 19.1 −
                              22 2,293.6 343.9 244.9 82.5 162.4 22.8 19.4 19.4 −
                              29 2,291.0 343.9 244.3 82.5 161.8 23.4 19.3 19.3 −
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 343.9 244.6 82.5 162.1 23.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              13 2,283.0 343.9 243.7 82.4 161.2 23.8 20.2 20.2 −
                              20 2,287.5 343.9 244.0 82.7 161.3 23.3 19.5 19.5 −
                              27 2,285.4 343.9 245.7 82.9 162.8 23.0 19.5 19.5 −
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 303.2 241.6 81.7 159.9 23.2 20.2 20.2 −
                              10 2,220.5 303.2 244.3 81.6 162.7 22.5 21.8 21.8 −
                              17 2,197.9 303.2 245.8 81.6 164.2 22.6 21.0 21.0 −
                              24 2,221.3 303.2 243.9 81.6 162.3 23.3 21.1 21.1 −
                              31 2,217.1 303.2 244.2 81.4 162.8 23.7 20.2 20.2 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Mar 1 002.8 135.8 50.9 22.2 28.7 8.9−−−
         Apr 1 031.3 135.8 51.4 22.4 29.1 8.3−−−
         May 1 087.0 135.8 51.6 22.3 29.3 6.9−−−
         June 1 119.4 136.1 54.2 23.3 30.8 6.2−−−
         July 1 112.9 136.1 54.1 23.3 30.8 3.2−−−
         Aug 1 135.4 136.1 54.5 23.5 31.0 1.7−−−
         Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
824.1 103.2 720.9 − − 0.0 − 91.5 605.6 259.0 346.6 29.0 261.5 2013 May                31
821.9 103.0 717.8 − − 1.1 − 90.2 604.3 256.6 347.6 29.0 263.7          June                  7
821.8 108.3 713.2 − − 0.2 − 95.0 606.0 256.5 349.5 29.0 260.4                               14
815.6 102.0 710.1 − − 3.5 − 92.4 606.9 256.5 350.4 29.0 262.1                               21
822.7 117.3 705.4 − − 0.0 − 92.1 609.5 256.8 352.6 28.4 264.6                               28
811.4 107.7 703.3 − − 0.4 − 91.8 608.4 256.4 352.0 28.4 265.5          July                  5
803.3 102.1 701.1 − − 0.1 − 87.7 606.9 256.1 350.8 28.4 260.5                               12
804.4 104.4 699.9 − − 0.0 − 88.3 606.6 255.7 350.9 28.4 257.2                               19
800.6 102.3 697.5 − − 0.7 − 86.0 607.6 255.4 352.3 28.4 259.3                               26
804.9 109.2 695.7 − − 0.0 0.0 86.8 600.7 252.5 348.2 28.4 255.5          Aug                  2
793.6 99.4 694.0 − − 0.2 − 84.3 602.7 252.5 350.2 28.4 255.2                                 9
790.9 97.6 693.3 − − 0.1 − 82.1 603.9 252.5 351.4 28.4 248.6                               16
790.3 97.7 692.6 − − 0.0 − 80.8 602.5 250.6 351.9 28.4 243.3                               23
790.5 97.1 693.3 − − 0.1 − 79.7 603.1 250.1 353.0 28.4 243.1                               30
786.5 95.6 688.6 − − 2.2 − 75.2 604.2 250.1 354.1 28.4 245.6          Sep                  6
779.5 97.2 682.3 − − 0.1 − 77.1 604.3 250.1 354.2 28.4 243.9                               13
775.4 96.2 678.9 − − 0.2 − 76.1 604.0 249.8 354.3 28.4 246.2                               20
767.3 97.0 670.2 − − 0.1 − 81.3 600.1 246.7 353.4 28.4 245.1                               27
761.6 94.5 667.0 − − 0.1 0.0 74.1 599.9 247.0 352.9 28.3 252.3          Oct                  4753.0 93.4 659.3 − − 0.3 − 76.0 599.7 246.6 353.1 28.3 250.1                               11
749.7 91.2 658.5 − − − 0.0 73.5 599.6 246.6 353.0 28.3 245.6                               18743.9 90.6 653.3 − − − 0.0 77.3 595.0 245.7 349.2 28.3 241.9                               25
740.2 89.3 650.8 − − 0.0 0.0 80.4 593.4 241.6 351.7 28.3 239.8 2013 Nov                  1
729.7 89.5 640.2 − − 0.0 0.0 83.2 593.2 241.6 351.6 28.3 242.2                                 8721.9 87.7 634.1 − − − 0.0 84.0 592.2 241.6 350.7 28.3 242.9                               15717.6 86.9 630.6 − − 0.2 0.0 81.4 592.3 241.5 350.8 28.3 242.9                               22719.0 97.2 621.7 − − 0.1 0.0 77.2 592.2 241.4 350.8 28.3 243.3                               29
709.3 94.6 614.5 − − 0.2 0.0 75.9 591.4 241.4 350.0 28.3 243.4          Dec                  6
713.0 98.5 614.4 − − 0.1 0.0 73.2 591.9 241.3 350.7 28.3 244.9                               13723.3 118.9 604.1 − − 0.3 0.0 74.2 585.3 235.4 349.9 28.3 245.7                               20717.1 133.6 583.3 − − 0.2 − 75.0 586.1 235.4 350.6 28.3 246.8                               27
752.3 168.7 583.3 − − 0.3 0.0 73.5 591.2 235.9 355.3 28.3 245.1 2014 Jan                  3695.9 112.5 583.3 − − 0.0 0.1 72.1 590.8 235.9 354.9 28.3 241.6                               10672.6 94.7 577.7 − − 0.1 0.0 73.1 588.7 234.0 354.7 28.3 242.6                               17693.2 116.3 576.7 − − 0.2 0.0 74.7 589.3 233.5 355.7 28.3 244.5                               24691.9 115.6 576.0 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 587.4 231.3 356.1 28.3 245.3                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
74.6 1.2 73.2 − − 0.1 − 9.4 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 645.3 2012          Mar 
74.9 1.2 73.7 − − 0.0 − 10.1 73.5 68.7 4.8 4.4 672.8          Apr 79.7 3.6 76.1 − − 0.0 − 8.0 73.4 68.6 4.8 4.4 727.0          May79.5 2.5 77.0 − − 0.1 − 8.8 73.1 68.7 4.3 4.4 757.2          June
78.6 2.9 75.7 − − 0.0 − 7.6 73.2 68.8 4.3 4.4 755.7          July
76.8 1.7 75.1 − − 0.0 − 9.4 72.8 68.4 4.3 4.4 779.6          Aug 76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2013 May                31 2,549.4 905.2 556.1 273.4 85.6 197.0 − 0.1 6.6 − 135.2 102.7 32.5
         June                  7 2,546.6 906.9 578.0 280.0 100.9 197.0 − 0.1 6.7 − 106.8 70.7 36.1
                              14 2,550.7 906.6 594.8 309.8 90.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.4 − 99.7 61.8 37.9
                              21 2,545.3 906.3 557.5 279.5 83.0 195.0 − 0.0 6.8 − 134.4 106.4 28.0
                              28 2,430.4 911.0 564.0 276.3 92.2 195.0 − 0.5 7.1 − 135.3 114.4 20.9
         July                  5 2,420.3 915.8 570.1 271.3 103.9 195.0 − 0.0 6.2 − 109.6 89.3 20.4
                              12 2,403.3 917.0 565.5 275.3 94.6 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 105.5 84.3 21.2
                              19 2,399.0 916.8 536.6 264.7 76.4 195.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 135.4 111.0 24.4
                              26 2,396.2 916.7 530.6 255.8 79.2 195.5 − 0.0 6.7 − 137.1 114.4 22.7
         Aug                  2 2,391.1 922.3 555.4 272.3 87.3 195.5 − 0.2 6.5 − 99.7 75.6 24.2
                                9 2,379.3 922.9 553.6 284.0 77.0 192.5 − 0.0 6.4 − 91.2 68.6 22.6
                              16 2,368.5 924.2 555.3 281.5 81.2 192.5 − 0.0 6.5 − 81.4 57.7 23.7
                              23 2,360.8 918.3 535.9 256.1 87.2 192.5 − 0.1 6.1 − 109.5 86.7 22.8
                              30 2,360.6 919.4 533.5 272.3 70.6 190.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 108.8 86.4 22.3
         Sep                  6 2,356.7 920.4 539.6 269.2 79.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.3 − 94.6 70.4 24.2
                              13 2,350.1 919.3 537.8 275.8 71.4 190.5 − 0.1 6.3 − 94.5 67.4 27.1
                              20 2,346.6 916.7 515.1 274.5 50.1 190.5 − 0.0 6.1 − 112.8 84.9 27.9
                              27 2,338.0 917.7 502.2 258.8 52.9 190.5 − 0.0 6.2 − 119.6 94.9 24.7
         Oct                  4 2,350.6 921.7 508.2 265.4 55.3 187.5 − 0.0 6.0 − 103.8 76.6 27.2
                              11 2,340.4 920.1 508.6 268.0 52.6 188.0 − 0.0 5.9 − 94.1 73.4 20.8
                              18 2,328.0 918.6 502.8 269.1 45.7 188.0 − 0.0 5.5 − 101.5 70.7 30.8
                              25 2,318.7 917.9 469.7 230.2 51.3 188.0 − 0.2 5.5 − 119.0 88.8 30.3
2013 Nov                  1 2,314.4 924.5 467.1 226.9 52.1 188.0 − 0.0 5.7 − 110.3 62.7 47.7
                                8 2,305.4 923.6 477.2 230.6 62.4 184.0 − 0.2 5.5 − 89.1 48.3 40.8
                              15 2,299.0 922.6 459.8 231.9 43.9 184.0 − 0.0 5.3 − 106.4 68.0 38.4
                              22 2,293.6 921.0 446.1 218.0 44.0 184.0 − 0.1 5.4 − 117.1 83.4 33.7
                              29 2,291.0 927.5 429.6 215.5 56.1 157.8 − 0.2 5.1 − 133.9 96.5 37.4
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 935.1 442.1 203.7 54.1 184.0 − 0.4 5.2 − 103.8 77.3 26.5
                              13 2,283.0 938.7 446.1 223.6 38.3 184.0 − 0.1 5.0 − 104.3 75.9 28.4
                              20 2,287.5 950.5 462.5 256.1 53.3 152.3 − 0.8 4.2 − 81.4 56.0 25.4
                              27 2,285.4 958.3 443.7 244.1 59.6 139.9 − 0.1 4.2 − 82.3 56.8 25.6
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 952.9 492.0 298.9 88.2 104.8 − 0.0 3.2 − 81.0 55.5 25.5
                              10 2,220.5 941.7 441.3 202.3 59.8 179.0 − 0.2 8.7 − 81.8 57.9 23.9
                              17 2,197.9 934.9 418.0 202.4 36.5 179.0 − 0.1 4.0 − 98.3 72.5 25.8
                              24 2,221.3 929.9 424.0 227.9 44.0 152.1 − 0.0 2.1 − 123.0 93.6 29.3
                              31 2,217.1 932.5 423.1 215.7 56.1 151.2 − 0.2 3.1 − 116.1 92.9 23.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Mar 1 002.8 216.6 424.5 30.9 248.2 145.4 − − − − 3.4 0.8 2.6
         Apr 1 031.3 217.6 452.3 33.0 276.9 142.4 − − 0.0 − 2.0 0.7 1.3
         May 1 087.0 219.9 464.8 33.4 275.0 156.3 − − 0.0 − 2.6 0.6 2.0
         June 1 119.4 222.5 457.1 33.3 262.9 160.9 − − − − 3.2 1.2 2.0
         July 1 112.9 223.6 421.7 178.3 88.1 155.2 − − − − 19.5 7.3 12.2
         Aug 1 135.4 223.2 442.5 201.4 111.4 129.7 − − − − 17.6 5.5 12.1
         Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
151.6 2.5 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 235.7 − 406.6 88.8 2013 May                31
153.1 1.3 7.7 7.7 − 55.1 234.5 − 406.6 89.8          June                  7
145.2 3.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.1 236.9 − 406.6 89.8                               14
146.8 4.2 6.0 6.0 − 55.1 230.7 − 406.6 90.8                               21
141.6 4.0 4.9 4.9 − 54.2 233.2 − 284.7 90.4                               28
145.0 2.6 5.6 5.6 − 54.2 236.0 − 284.7 90.4          July                  5
140.9 2.9 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 230.3 − 284.7 90.4                               12
136.4 1.7 5.3 5.3 − 54.2 231.0 − 284.7 90.4                               19
136.4 1.6 5.4 5.4 − 54.2 232.4 − 284.7 90.4                               26
135.9 1.4 4.8 4.8 − 54.2 235.7 − 284.7 90.4          Aug                  2
135.8 1.9 5.2 5.2 − 54.2 233.0 − 284.7 90.4                                 9
136.8 1.4 5.8 5.8 − 54.2 227.8 − 284.7 90.4                               16
131.8 1.6 5.9 5.9 − 54.2 222.4 − 284.7 90.4                               23
135.0 1.8 5.8 5.8 − 54.2 221.5 − 284.7 90.4                               30
136.4 1.7 6.6 6.6 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4          Sep                  6
132.0 3.0 5.5 5.5 − 54.2 222.5 − 284.7 90.4                               13
134.8 2.6 4.4 4.4 − 54.2 224.8 − 284.7 90.4                               20
134.9 2.5 3.8 3.8 − 54.2 221.8 − 284.7 90.4                               27
129.2 2.1 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 227.0 − 304.5 90.4          Oct                  4
131.1 2.4 3.3 3.3 − 53.6 226.3 − 304.5 90.4                               11
124.2 1.8 3.4 3.4 − 53.6 221.6 − 304.5 90.4                               18
126.7 1.7 4.6 4.6 − 53.6 225.2 − 304.5 90.4                               25
123.5 1.2 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 228.5 − 304.5 90.4 2013 Nov                  1
129.5 1.3 4.5 4.5 − 53.6 226.1 − 304.5 90.4                                 8
122.7 1.3 4.9 4.9 − 53.6 227.4 − 304.5 90.4                               15
122.7 2.2 5.2 5.2 − 53.6 225.5 − 304.5 90.4                               22
114.3 2.3 5.1 5.1 − 53.6 224.6 − 304.5 90.4                               29
114.3 2.0 5.6 5.6 − 53.6 224.2 − 304.5 90.4          Dec                  6
110.2 2.0 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 223.2 − 304.5 90.4                               13
109.6 2.4 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 224.5 − 304.5 90.4                               20
115.2 4.4 3.2 3.2 − 53.6 225.5 − 304.5 90.4                               27
114.2 4.8 3.2 3.2 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 90.7 2014 Jan                  3
110.5 3.5 5.5 5.5 − 52.7 221.3 − 262.9 90.7                               10
106.1 2.7 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 221.6 − 262.9 90.6                               17
105.8 1.3 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 223.2 − 262.9 90.5                               24
106.1 2.9 5.1 5.1 − 52.7 222.0 − 262.9 90.6                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
15.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.0 16.9 175.5 130.8 5.0 2012          Mar 
14.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 17.5 177.6 130.8 5.0          Apr 
52.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.0 18.2 179.3 130.8 5.0          May
83.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 19.5 181.0 133.3 5.0          June
90.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 19.9 184.5 133.3 5.0          July
89.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 20.6 188.5 133.3 5.0          Aug 
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,529.0 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.3 324.6 165.7 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2012          Mar 8,522.7 15.4 2,577.6 2,037.3 1,559.1 478.2 540.3 358.1 182.2 3,698.3 3,292.5 2,722.7 2,427.8
         Apr 8,599.6 15.3 2,593.3 2,049.9 1,574.4 475.5 543.4 365.1 178.2 3,719.9 3,314.2 2,739.4 2,430.9
         May 8,859.6 15.5 2,605.1 2,060.4 1,585.9 474.5 544.7 365.3 179.4 3,692.5 3,288.7 2,722.4 2,434.0         June 8,636.4 15.5 2,566.1 2,041.1 1,571.3 469.8 525.0 351.0 174.1 3,699.4 3,297.2 2,692.7 2,432.4
         July 8,726.8 14.8 2,531.1 2,000.3 1,530.8 469.5 530.8 359.0 171.8 3,731.2 3,327.5 2,724.4 2,467.2
         Aug 8,695.6 15.7 2,538.3 2,016.4 1,547.5 468.9 522.0 349.7 172.2 3,725.2 3,321.8 2,723.8 2,464.9
         Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7
         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,529.0 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.3 324.6 165.7 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
 Changes 3
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.3 − 0.5 −257.2 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 8.1 1.5 − 9.6 13.8 16.6 23.6 21.6
2012          Apr 68.9 − 0.1 17.5 15.1 17.9 − 2.7 2.4 6.5 − 4.2 18.0 18.8 13.9 0.1
         May 226.6 0.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.8 0.9 − 33.0 − 29.2 − 20.4 − 0.4
         June −214.5 0.0 − 37.7 − 18.6 − 14.0 − 4.6 − 19.2 − 13.9 − 5.3 10.7 11.6 − 6.6 1.4
         July 85.2 − 0.7 − 37.3 − 42.0 − 41.4 − 0.6 4.7 7.1 − 2.4 29.8 29.3 30.9 33.9
         Aug − 16.8 0.9 9.4 17.2 17.5 − 0.4 − 7.8 − 8.5 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.9 1.2 − 0.7
         Sep −115.5 0.3 − 72.0 − 67.4 − 65.3 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.8 7.3 2.2 − 0.6 − 4.0
         Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1
         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.5 3.4 − 75.3 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.8 − 16.9 − 0.8 − 15.6 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
295.0 569.8 359.9 209.9 405.8 279.9 159.9 125.9 31.5 94.3 1,004.1 782.1 1,227.4 2012          Mar 
308.5 574.8 365.3 209.6 405.7 282.6 163.2 123.1 31.4 91.7 1,008.5 786.8 1,262.6          Apr 
288.3 566.3 359.8 206.5 403.8 279.3 160.7 124.6 31.5 93.0 1,027.6 804.5 1,518.8          May260.4 604.5 370.2 234.3 402.2 278.2 160.3 124.0 31.8 92.2 992.6 772.1 1,362.8          June
257.2 603.1 367.0 236.1 403.7 282.5 162.1 121.2 31.1 90.1 1,005.2 786.0 1,444.5          July
258.9 598.1 359.6 238.4 403.4 281.3 161.0 122.1 31.7 90.4 1,007.4 787.3 1,408.9          Aug 262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
Changes 3
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 6.9 − 10.9 3.9 − 2.8 − 3.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.6 − 47.0 −420.8 2013
13.8 4.8 5.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 2.0 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 0.3 34.1 2012          Apr 
− 19.9 − 8.8 − 5.6 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 5.1 − 4.4 1.2 0.1 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.5 255.6          May− 8.0 18.2 10.4 7.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 29.4 − 27.1 −158.0          June
− 3.0 − 1.6 − 3.3 1.8 0.5 3.4 0.9 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 2.2 2.6 5.2 90.7          July
1.9 − 5.1 − 7.4 2.3 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.3 12.0 10.2 − 35.6          Aug 
3.4 2.8 − 0.6 3.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 2.2 − 0.4 2.6 6.7 9.1 − 57.7          Sep 
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 10.9 − 6.5 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 26.9 − 26.7 − 55.2          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,529.0 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2012          Mar 8,522.7 1,501.9 1,232.1 269.8 3,037.7 2,924.1 1,157.4 1,147.3 363.0 619.4 520.6 77.3 28.9
         Apr 8,599.6 1,501.9 1,222.4 279.5 3,052.2 2,938.9 1,170.0 1,151.0 368.0 617.9 519.4 77.4 28.3
         May 8,859.6 1,494.1 1,219.3 274.8 3,069.6 2,955.6 1,185.8 1,152.7 372.2 617.1 519.5 78.2 30.1         June 8,636.4 1,469.5 1,207.6 262.0 3,091.1 2,975.0 1,203.3 1,155.7 378.1 616.0 519.4 78.9 30.3
         July 8,726.8 1,454.7 1,190.5 264.1 3,084.9 2,974.1 1,207.7 1,151.3 378.6 615.9 520.1 78.5 30.1
         Aug 8,695.6 1,447.9 1,185.3 262.6 3,092.7 2,985.4 1,221.5 1,149.6 378.2 615.3 521.0 76.3 30.3         Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,529.0 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
 Changes 4
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.3 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.4 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2012          Apr 68.9 1.8 − 7.6 9.4 14.0 12.1 12.5 1.1 2.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 0.6
         May 226.6 − 11.5 − 5.4 − 6.1 15.7 15.2 14.8 1.2 3.8 − 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.7
         June −214.5 − 23.7 − 11.2 − 12.5 21.9 19.8 17.7 3.2 6.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.8 0.2
         July 85.2 − 16.3 − 17.9 1.7 − 7.0 − 1.6 4.0 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 16.8 − 5.4 − 4.4 − 1.0 8.5 11.9 14.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.9 − 2.1 0.3
         Sep −115.5 − 18.4 − 9.1 − 9.3 7.2 5.1 21.0 − 14.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 0.3 1.3 3.4
         Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5
         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.5 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 2005
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.1 38.8 479.5 503.2 944.5 2013
44.9 16.0 3.5 2.6 36.3 35.6 93.1 5.5 1,305.7 72.7 772.9 476.9 1,329.2 2012          Mar 45.6 16.7 3.5 2.6 35.8 33.4 102.9 5.5 1,303.7 68.5 788.9 477.2 1,367.2          Apr 
44.5 15.9 3.6 2.7 35.8 31.5 108.3 5.5 1,304.1 63.6 775.2 482.5 1,620.2          May44.9 16.5 3.8 2.8 37.2 33.8 98.9 5.7 1,291.7 62.9 737.8 489.4 1,452.5          June
44.6 16.1 3.8 2.9 32.3 30.0 106.6 5.7 1,296.0 65.5 748.5 497.0 1,533.4          July
42.1 14.3 3.9 2.9 31.0 27.7 108.1 5.3 1,285.6 62.8 769.0 492.5 1,494.5          Aug 40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8          Sep 
40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.1 38.8 479.5 503.2 944.5          Dec 
Changes 4
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −105.0 − 17.7 −134.0 19.0 −417.0 2013
0.7 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.9 0.2 7.2 − 0.0 − 5.8 − 4.3 13.8 − 0.3 38.3 2012          Apr 
− 1.3 − 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 1.9 5.3 0.0 − 13.8 − 5.4 − 24.4 2.8 252.6          May
0.4 0.7 0.2 0.1 1.3 2.3 − 9.4 0.2 − 8.7 − 0.6 − 34.7 7.6 −167.7          June
− 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 − 4.9 − 3.8 7.6 0.1 − 2.7 2.4 6.3 6.3 90.8          July− 2.4 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.3 − 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 2.5 25.2 − 3.3 − 39.0          Aug − 2.1 − 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 − 0.8 − 10.1 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 38.1 − 3.2 − 49.4          Sep 
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.8 − 3.5 − 53.6 − 11.4 − 56.3          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2013          July 1,866 7,834.4 105.3 2,560.7 1,923.9 629.3 3,961.6 482.4 2,743.7 0.5 722.9 137.2 1,069.5
         Aug 1,864 7,764.1 108.1 2,669.3 2,031.3 630.9 3,850.8 376.2 2,740.6 0.5 718.9 137.4 998.5
         Sep 1,858 7,760.6 113.2 2,642.0 2,006.4 628.0 3,839.7 376.4 2,730.5 0.5 720.9 137.2 1,028.4
         Oct 1,849 7,747.9 76.8 2,658.2 2,029.0 622.1 3,847.3 380.0 2,731.3 0.5 723.2 137.2 1,028.4
         Nov 1,845 7,782.0 77.9 2,687.1 2,054.4 624.6 3,857.7 377.1 2,739.3 0.6 729.0 135.2 1,024.1
         Dec 1,846 7,604.2 104.4 2,565.5 1,935.5 621.0 3,832.5 367.4 2,730.0 0.7 725.0 131.3 970.5
Commercial banks 6
2013          Nov 276 2,888.4 44.9 994.4 903.6 88.4 1,058.5 187.1 656.7 0.3 206.3 69.7 721.0
         Dec 277 2,767.0 60.1 925.1 832.8 89.3 1,042.9 180.9 656.9 0.3 199.6 66.1 672.8
   Big banks 7
2013          Nov 4 1,827.4 13.5 596.9 548.7 46.0 469.0 105.3 248.3 0.2 107.6 62.5 685.5
         Dec 4 1,719.9 24.1 545.7 496.1 47.0 452.6 99.5 246.8 0.3 101.2 58.6 639.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2013          Nov 164 829.0 24.0 233.9 193.2 40.5 534.7 62.9 376.8 0.0 94.8 6.6 29.9
         Dec 164 816.8 24.0 221.7 180.9 40.3 536.1 63.1 378.5 0.0 94.3 6.9 28.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2013          Nov 108 232.0 7.4 163.6 161.7 1.8 54.7 18.9 31.6 0.0 3.9 0.7 5.6
         Dec 109 230.3 11.9 157.7 155.7 2.0 54.3 18.3 31.7 0.0 4.1 0.7 5.7
Landesbanken
2013          Nov 9 1,127.5 5.4 404.0 293.2 108.9 567.1 71.5 377.9 0.1 115.0 14.5 136.5
         Dec 9 1,092.6 4.9 379.3 268.5 108.9 563.2 68.8 375.5 0.1 115.5 14.5 130.7
Savings banks
2013          Nov 421 1,107.4 14.7 225.2 85.3 139.7 834.0 56.3 652.7 0.1 124.8 15.9 17.6
         Dec 421 1,110.8 18.1 224.5 85.6 138.2 834.0 56.5 651.8 0.1 125.6 15.7 18.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2013          Nov 2 276.9 0.9 159.5 125.8 33.7 64.5 12.0 21.7 0.0 30.6 14.5 37.5
         Dec 2 272.9 1.1 158.1 124.2 33.6 64.1 11.6 21.5 0.0 30.8 14.5 35.2
Credit cooperatives
2013          Nov 1,078 761.4 10.5 180.4 60.9 119.3 538.8 32.0 428.7 0.1 77.9 12.0 19.6
         Dec 1,078 761.7 11.8 177.2 59.5 117.5 540.8 32.6 429.1 0.1 79.0 12.1 19.9
Mortgage banks
2013          Nov 18 455.0 0.5 119.4 68.9 47.5 318.7 5.7 240.1 − 73.0 0.6 15.8
         Dec 17 444.6 4.5 114.3 64.9 46.4 308.6 5.7 230.1 − 72.9 0.6 16.6
Building and loan associations
2013          Nov 22 204.8 0.1 60.2 43.0 16.9 137.8 1.6 118.8 . 17.5 0.4 6.2
         Dec 22 205.2 0.5 60.0 43.2 16.9 138.1 1.6 118.9 . 17.6 0.4 6.3
Special purpose banks
2013          Nov 19 960.6 0.9 544.1 473.6 70.3 338.2 10.8 242.7 − 83.9 7.5 69.9
         Dec 20 949.3 3.5 527.1 456.7 70.3 340.7 9.7 246.3 − 84.0 7.5 70.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2013          Nov 145 861.0 26.6 348.8 306.7 40.0 396.0 61.7 238.3 0.1 93.7 5.4 84.2
         Dec 146 830.8 30.0 321.4 278.9 39.8 395.1 60.8 237.7 0.1 94.3 5.4 79.0
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2013          Nov 37 629.0 19.2 185.3 145.0 38.2 341.2 42.8 206.6 0.1 89.8 4.7 78.6
         Dec 37 600.5 18.1 163.7 123.2 37.9 340.8 42.5 206.0 0.1 90.2 4.7 73.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,690.6 399.5 1,291.2 3,355.8 1,501.2 378.4 762.4 161.8 618.2 536.3 95.6 1,231.9 435.7 1,120.4 2013          July
1,776.1 394.6 1,381.5 3,277.2 1,502.2 311.9 750.8 74.3 617.5 536.5 94.9 1,228.5 436.3 1,045.9          Aug 1,748.6 419.5 1,329.1 3,267.4 1,502.5 306.8 747.9 64.7 616.3 536.2 93.9 1,223.9 436.6 1,084.1          Sep 
1,736.3 408.9 1,327.4 3,273.9 1,517.1 301.9 745.6 71.7 616.3 536.2 93.1 1,213.7 437.0 1,086.9          Oct 
1,753.1 437.0 1,316.1 3,302.1 1,540.0 307.2 746.2 73.6 616.2 536.1 92.5 1,206.7 437.2 1,082.9          Nov 1,656.1 348.1 1,308.0 3,306.4 1,528.0 323.6 742.5 77.7 620.0 540.3 92.2 1,179.7 437.5 1,024.4          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
700.5 281.7 418.7 1,201.8 688.4 163.4 207.5 56.4 114.9 101.5 27.5 148.5 141.0 696.6 2013          Nov 629.6 222.7 406.9 1,201.5 685.2 167.5 206.2 60.8 115.0 101.9 27.6 146.5 142.1 647.2          Dec 
Big banks 7
460.1 215.1 245.0 537.9 290.7 81.0 83.6 56.3 72.3 70.0 10.3 110.7 80.4 638.4 2013          Nov 399.8 170.7 229.2 537.6 287.0 85.5 82.4 60.8 72.5 70.3 10.2 109.3 80.4 592.8          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
139.2 42.4 96.9 549.1 325.2 65.4 100.1 0.2 42.4 31.4 16.0 37.2 52.2 51.3 2013          Nov 131.5 32.6 98.9 547.4 325.1 64.0 99.9 0.0 42.4 31.6 16.1 36.6 53.3 48.0          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
101.1 24.2 76.9 114.8 72.6 17.0 23.8 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.7 8.4 7.0 2013          Nov 
98.3 19.4 78.8 116.5 73.2 18.1 23.9 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.5 6.4          Dec 
Landesbanken
340.5 56.9 283.5 303.1 106.2 53.2 128.8 15.0 14.7 10.6 0.2 277.0 61.7 145.3 2013          Nov 315.0 38.0 277.0 307.4 103.1 61.4 127.9 16.2 14.7 10.6 0.2 274.3 61.7 134.2          Dec 
Savings banks
151.7 13.1 138.6 807.9 416.7 28.9 15.7 − 298.6 256.7 47.9 16.4 84.3 47.1 2013          Nov 156.2 14.9 141.3 807.5 413.9 29.4 15.6 − 300.7 258.6 47.8 16.0 84.2 46.9          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
136.2 35.0 101.2 34.4 10.0 10.7 11.4 1.4 − − 2.2 57.6 13.8 34.9 2013          Nov 134.4 32.3 102.1 36.0 9.7 12.8 11.4 0.5 − − 2.2 56.4 13.8 32.3          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
100.1 6.4 93.7 560.4 299.2 37.5 22.7 − 187.4 166.8 13.6 11.7 54.7 34.5 2013          Nov 100.3 6.4 93.9 561.3 298.3 38.1 22.6 − 189.1 168.5 13.4 11.4 54.8 33.9          Dec 
Mortgage banks
119.6 6.7 112.9 158.2 8.3 8.1 141.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 . 139.9 17.5 19.8 2013          Nov 113.7 5.7 108.0 156.9 7.6 8.4 140.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 . 136.8 16.8 20.3          Dec 
Building and loan associations
23.2 2.2 21.0 152.1 0.5 0.6 149.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 4.2 9.0 16.3 2013          Nov 22.7 1.9 20.8 154.7 0.6 0.6 152.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 4.0 9.0 14.8          Dec 
Special purpose banks
181.3 35.0 146.3 84.2 10.7 4.8 68.7 0.7 − − . 551.5 55.2 88.4 2013          Nov 184.2 26.1 158.1 81.0 9.5 5.4 66.1 0.1 − − . 534.4 55.1 94.7          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
233.7 76.2 157.5 458.0 287.4 61.2 75.8 10.2 21.2 20.9 12.4 29.7 46.6 93.0 2013          Nov 206.7 57.8 148.9 460.3 288.3 62.9 75.4 10.7 21.4 21.1 12.3 29.1 46.8 87.9          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
132.6 52.0 80.6 343.3 214.9 44.2 51.9 10.2 21.0 20.8 11.2 29.0 38.2 85.9 2013          Nov 108.5 38.4 70.1 343.7 215.1 44.8 51.5 10.7 21.3 21.0 11.1 28.5 38.4 81.5          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.7 2,692.7 0.5 1.2 437.2
2012          July 14.0 185.5 1,789.7 1,344.8 − 6.3 438.6 2.1 3,257.8 2,833.8 0.5 5.2 418.3
         Aug 14.6 203.4 1,788.0 1,343.7 − 5.4 438.8 2.1 3,252.3 2,824.1 0.5 5.1 422.7
         Sep 14.9 175.1 1,748.0 1,306.1 − 4.1 437.8 2.1 3,253.0 2,817.9 0.5 5.6 429.0
         Oct 15.0 178.6 1,713.5 1,277.5 − 3.6 432.3 2.1 3,271.1 2,837.5 0.5 6.5 426.7
         Nov 14.7 185.4 1,695.0 1,262.7 − 2.8 429.5 2.1 3,265.5 2,825.2 0.5 5.8 433.9
         Dec 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
         Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.3 430.3
         July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.5 2,691.9 0.4 2.1 433.1
         Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6
         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.7 2,692.7 0.5 1.2 437.2
Changes *
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2012          July − 0.6 + 96.3 − 137.2 − 136.8 − + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 30.5 + 32.0 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Aug + 0.6 + 17.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − − 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 4.4
         Sep + 0.3 − 28.3 − 40.0 − 37.7 − − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 6.3
         Oct + 0.1 + 3.6 − 35.7 − 30.3 − − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 19.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.3 + 6.8 − 18.4 − 14.8 − − 0.8 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 5.5 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 7.3
         Dec + 3.8 − 51.2 − 40.0 − 33.7 − − 0.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 − 45.1 − 39.8 + 0.2 − 3.7 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
         Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
         July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 34.9 91.4 1,190.1 128.0 1,062.0 0.0 36.4 3,105.8 1,235.4 1,154.2 615.9 100.3 35.1 2012          July
− 35.2 91.5 1,184.9 124.8 1,059.9 0.0 36.5 3,118.3 1,247.0 1,156.8 615.4 99.1 35.1          Aug − 35.0 90.6 1,175.0 129.2 1,045.5 0.0 36.1 3,112.2 1,262.9 1,137.3 614.1 97.9 35.0          Sep 
− 34.7 90.3 1,160.8 124.6 1,035.9 0.0 36.3 3,124.7 1,292.7 1,121.9 613.6 96.6 34.9          Oct 
− 35.0 90.2 1,160.0 136.1 1,023.7 0.0 36.4 3,137.0 1,317.7 1,111.8 612.8 94.6 35.2          Nov − 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9          Dec 
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
Changes *
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 0.2 + 0.3 − 17.2 − 6.1 − 11.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 2012          July
− + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − + 0.1 + 12.5 + 11.5 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 − 0.3 − 9.9 + 5.3 − 15.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 5.8 + 16.2 − 19.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.3 − 0.4 − 17.2 − 7.6 − 9.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 29.8 − 15.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.2          Oct 
− + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 11.4 − 12.2 − + 0.1 + 12.2 + 25.0 − 10.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.3          Nov − + 0.0 − 0.2 − 19.9 + 1.4 − 21.1 − − 0.1 − 46.5 − 11.2 − 39.1 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3          Dec 
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.9 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.3 2.5 700.8 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.1 287.8
2012          July 0.8 1,103.0 870.2 583.3 286.9 6.8 226.0 2.6 746.8 467.9 113.7 354.2 6.9 272.0
         Aug 1.1 1,096.3 863.0 580.5 282.5 6.9 226.4 2.6 745.7 466.6 116.2 350.3 8.0 271.1
         Sep 1.1 1,096.0 864.6 583.8 280.8 6.4 225.0 2.6 743.6 462.3 116.5 345.8 8.6 272.7
         Oct 0.9 1,087.8 857.6 579.4 278.2 6.4 223.8 2.6 742.9 459.1 116.8 342.4 9.2 274.6
         Nov 0.9 1,067.9 837.2 561.9 275.3 5.9 224.8 2.6 753.2 470.4 127.9 342.5 7.5 275.4
         Dec 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.3 450.6 116.6 334.0 8.6 280.1
         Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1
         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
         July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9
         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
         Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4
         Dec 0.2 1,019.9 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.3 2.5 700.8 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.1 287.8
Changes *
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.8 + 12.7
2012          July − 0.0 + 6.2 + 10.2 + 13.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.0 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Oct − 0.2 − 6.5 − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.6 + 2.2
         Nov − 0.0 − 19.5 − 20.1 − 17.4 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.7 + 11.4 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.0
         Dec − 0.1 − 18.0 − 19.8 − 14.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 21.0 − 25.6 − 22.2 − 3.4 + 1.6 + 3.0
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.2 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
         Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8
         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.9 222.6 293.3 196.0 97.3 0.1 257.7 118.1 139.6 76.8 62.8 1.0 2013
33.1 48.1 852.0 402.5 449.5 325.8 123.7 0.1 247.6 115.4 132.2 68.9 63.3 1.3 2012          July
33.0 49.2 869.9 389.0 480.9 359.2 121.7 0.1 245.9 118.7 127.2 65.0 62.2 1.3          Aug 32.7 48.9 816.2 369.2 446.9 323.2 123.8 0.1 249.4 122.8 126.6 64.9 61.7 1.3          Sep 
33.1 49.0 812.6 371.9 440.7 320.6 120.2 0.1 244.0 118.7 125.2 63.2 62.0 1.4          Oct 
33.1 49.0 780.0 353.5 426.5 307.5 119.0 0.1 244.5 120.2 124.3 62.7 61.6 1.3          Nov 32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2          Dec 
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.9 222.6 293.3 196.0 97.3 0.1 257.7 118.1 139.6 76.8 62.8 1.0          Dec 
Changes *
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 173.9 − 75.6 − 98.3 − 83.1 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 13.4 + 9.6 + 3.8 + 6.9 − 3.1 − 0.2 2013
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 41.9 − 41.3 − 40.5 − 0.8 − + 8.3 + 5.2 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.2 2012          July
− 0.2 + 1.2 + 21.8 − 12.2 + 33.9 + 35.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 4.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 50.1 − 17.8 − 32.4 − 35.1 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 3.0 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 − 32.1 − 18.3 − 13.8 − 13.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov − 0.5 − 2.5 − 86.4 − 63.2 − 23.2 − 21.8 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 12.5 + 6.4 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.8 − 51.7 − 22.1 − 19.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 8.2 + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.7 − 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.7 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.1 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2012          July 3,257.8 2,834.2 429.4 351.6 351.2 0.4 77.8 72.9 4.8 2,828.4 2,304.6
         Aug 3,252.3 2,824.5 415.9 344.6 344.2 0.4 71.3 66.6 4.7 2,836.4 2,310.8
         Sep 3,253.0 2,818.4 413.9 340.9 340.4 0.4 73.1 67.9 5.2 2,839.1 2,311.5
         Oct 3,271.1 2,838.0 430.6 351.1 350.6 0.5 79.6 73.6 6.0 2,840.5 2,309.7
         Nov 3,265.5 2,825.7 410.4 338.2 337.8 0.4 72.1 66.8 5.4 2,855.1 2,316.4
         Dec 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.5 2,315.9
         Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8
         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 389.9 338.8 338.2 0.6 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,848.2 2,319.6
         July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5
         Sep 3,127.5 2,692.3 276.7 226.0 225.3 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
         Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0
         Dec 3,131.7 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.1 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
Changes *
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.2 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2012          July + 30.5 + 32.0 + 24.5 + 27.3 + 27.4 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 6.0 + 4.7
         Aug − 5.5 − 9.7 − 13.5 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 6.5 − 6.3 − 0.2 + 8.0 + 6.2
         Sep + 0.5 − 6.4 − 2.4 − 3.5 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 2.8 + 1.1
         Oct + 17.4 + 19.6 + 16.7 + 10.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 6.5 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.7 − 1.9
         Nov − 5.5 − 12.1 − 20.3 − 12.8 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 6.8 − 0.6 + 14.8 + 6.9
         Dec − 45.1 − 39.6 − 34.3 − 21.4 − 21.4 + 0.0 − 12.9 − 9.2 − 3.7 − 10.8 − 5.5
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
         Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
         July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7         Sep + 0.3 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,116.0 249.7 1,866.3 188.6 31.4 523.8 294.1 39.7 254.4 229.7 − 3.6 2012          July
2,120.7 249.6 1,871.1 190.1 31.6 525.6 293.0 39.3 253.7 232.6 − 3.5          Aug 
2,118.1 249.0 1,869.1 193.4 31.5 527.6 291.9 39.1 252.8 235.7 − 3.5          Sep 
2,120.9 249.8 1,871.1 188.7 31.2 530.8 292.9 39.9 253.0 237.9 − 3.5          Oct 
2,127.7 251.3 1,876.4 188.7 31.5 538.7 293.4 40.1 253.4 245.2 − 3.5          Nov 2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5          Dec 
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.7 30.0 528.6 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June
2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
Changes *
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 7.8 + 1.5 + 6.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 2.6 − − 0.1 2012          July
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 2.9 − − 0.0          Aug − 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 3.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 7.0 + 1.5 + 5.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 7.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.3 − −          Nov − 8.2 − 1.6 − 6.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − − 0.0          Dec 
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2011 2,415.7 1,167.3 1,114.0 914.0 200.0 1,368.0 305.0 134.6 84.4 59.6 124.0 42.7 80.1 196.4
2012          Dec 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Mar 2,451.1 1,173.5 1,136.8 926.0 210.8 1,394.1 311.9 133.2 94.6 60.3 126.9 44.7 76.2 208.8
         June 2,464.2 1,173.0 1,143.3 928.7 214.6 1,402.0 314.0 131.9 94.6 60.1 124.8 45.6 74.0 219.9         Sep 2,352.4 1,177.9 1,152.6 933.4 219.2 1,282.8 316.6 130.3 95.7 60.1 124.9 46.2 72.0 104.5         Dec 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
 Short-term lending
2011 316.2 − 7.7 − 7.7 276.7 3.9 33.8 6.0 11.9 41.8 3.3 7.0 111.0
2012          Dec 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Mar 331.7 − 7.8 − 7.8 294.9 3.9 37.5 7.5 13.1 43.6 3.6 7.0 125.4
         June 338.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 301.4 3.9 37.4 6.7 12.9 41.8 4.1 6.3 135.1
         Sep 225.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 187.8 4.0 35.9 6.5 13.0 42.2 4.0 6.2 23.9
         Dec 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
 Medium-term lending
2011 247.9 − 34.5 − 34.5 176.7 11.8 28.2 6.0 9.4 15.5 4.0 11.8 35.4
2012          Dec 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Mar 249.6 − 34.9 − 34.9 176.5 11.6 25.8 6.8 9.2 16.6 3.9 11.3 37.0
         June 250.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 176.6 12.3 24.7 6.7 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.2 37.7
         Sep 247.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 173.1 12.3 24.8 6.6 9.4 16.5 4.0 11.3 34.5
         Dec 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
 Long-term lending
2011 1,851.7 1,167.3 1,071.8 914.0 157.8 914.6 289.3 72.6 72.4 38.3 66.7 35.4 61.2 49.9
2012          Dec 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Mar 1,869.7 1,173.5 1,094.0 926.0 168.0 922.7 296.5 69.8 80.4 38.1 66.7 37.2 58.0 46.4
         June 1,875.4 1,173.0 1,099.7 928.7 170.9 924.0 297.8 69.9 81.2 37.8 66.1 37.6 56.5 47.1         Sep 1,879.4 1,177.9 1,108.8 933.4 175.4 922.0 300.3 69.6 82.6 37.7 66.2 38.2 54.5 46.1         Dec 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2012          Q4 − 22.5 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 2.7 − 26.2 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 18.5
2013          Q1 + 15.1 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 16.4 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 13.4
         Q2 + 13.1 − 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 10.9         Q3 − 18.8 + 2.4 + 9.1 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 26.5 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 22.6         Q4 + 2.0 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 2.6 + 3.5 − 1.5 + 2.1 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.6
 Short-term lending
2012          Q4 − 24.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 23.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 15.0
2013          Q1 + 16.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 17.2 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.6
         Q2 + 6.5 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 9.8         Q3 − 23.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 23.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 21.4         Q4 − 6.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9
 Medium-term lending
2012          Q4 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3
2013          Q1 − 1.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.1
         Q2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5         Q3 − 0.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1         Q4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
 Long-term lending
2012          Q4 + 0.8 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 2.6 − 3.1 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 3.2
2013          Q1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3
         Q2 + 5.7 − 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.0         Q4 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
646.3 180.0 42.9 177.9 382.9 51.7 1,034.3 805.6 228.7 147.8 13.5 13.4 3.5 2011
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5 2012          Dec 
649.4 184.6 38.5 178.7 387.3 51.3 1,043.6 821.3 222.3 146.5 12.6 13.3 3.5 2013          Mar 
651.2 186.7 38.5 178.1 388.0 51.1 1,048.6 825.8 222.9 147.7 12.4 13.5 3.6          June649.1 187.4 37.4 176.0 388.7 50.7 1,056.2 832.6 223.6 147.0 12.5 13.4 3.5          Sep 652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5          Dec 
Short-term lending
61.9 9.6 11.1 13.2 30.4 7.2 38.5 3.9 34.7 2.5 13.5 0.9 0.0 2011
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0 2012          Dec 
57.3 9.0 8.2 12.8 30.1 7.8 35.9 3.9 32.0 2.0 12.6 1.0 0.0 2013          Mar 
57.1 9.4 7.8 12.5 29.9 7.6 35.8 4.0 31.8 1.9 12.4 1.0 0.0          June56.0 9.2 7.4 12.3 28.8 7.4 36.6 4.1 32.5 1.7 12.5 1.0 0.0          Sep 54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
66.3 8.1 8.4 20.4 31.2 3.6 70.6 22.7 47.9 42.8 − 0.6 0.0 2011
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0 2012          Dec 
65.9 8.6 7.2 19.9 31.9 3.6 72.6 23.3 49.3 43.8 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Mar 
66.2 8.7 7.1 19.8 32.0 3.7 73.4 23.3 50.0 44.7 − 0.5 0.0          June
65.9 9.1 7.0 19.5 32.2 3.6 74.0 23.4 50.7 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
518.1 162.4 23.4 144.3 321.3 40.9 925.2 779.1 146.1 102.5 − 11.9 3.4 2011
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5 2012          Dec 
526.3 167.0 23.1 146.0 325.3 39.9 935.1 794.1 141.0 100.7 − 11.9 3.5 2013          Mar 
527.9 168.6 23.6 145.7 326.1 39.8 939.4 798.4 141.0 101.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
527.2 169.1 23.0 144.2 327.6 39.6 945.6 805.1 140.5 99.9 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 2.8 + 1.8 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 2012          Q4− 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.8 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 4.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q2− 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3+ 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 3.3 + 4.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 2012          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 2013          Q1
− 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2− 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Q3− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q4
− 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 2013          Q1
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 3.9 + 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2012          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q1
+ 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2013          Jan 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 322.4 731.2 32.5 698.7 616.8 90.7 35.0 31.2 81.9
         Feb 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 326.7 729.1 32.2 696.9 616.6 88.5 34.9 30.7 98.0
         Mar 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 335.4 729.3 32.2 697.2 614.5 86.8 34.8 30.4 94.3
         Apr 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 333.6 724.7 32.3 692.5 612.3 85.1 34.6 30.2 95.6
         May 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 332.0 726.2 32.9 693.4 610.7 83.0 34.5 30.1 96.8
         June 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 344.8 724.4 32.2 692.3 609.7 81.0 34.4 30.1 110.9
         July 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 322.8 719.9 31.2 688.8 608.1 79.6 34.4 30.4 88.5
         Aug 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 254.9 709.5 29.2 680.3 607.5 78.8 34.4 30.4 1.2
         Sep 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 251.2 705.7 29.0 676.7 606.4 78.0 33.5 30.2 1.2
         Oct 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 247.6 703.0 29.4 673.6 606.4 77.3 33.4 30.1 3.1
         Nov 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 246.4 701.4 29.6 671.7 606.3 76.9 33.3 30.1 1.0
         Dec 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
Changes*
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2013          Jan − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 19.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Feb + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 16.1         Mar − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.7
         Apr + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 4.6 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.3
         May + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.2         June + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 + 12.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 14.1
         July − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 21.9 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5
         Aug + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.1         Sep − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Oct + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9
         Nov + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0         Dec + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 8.3 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 4.2 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 4.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2013          Jan 179.1 50.6 124.0 67.1 56.9 4.6 52.3 3.1 1.3 32.7 5.9 1.1
         Feb 179.0 50.6 124.0 67.0 57.0 4.5 52.4 3.2 1.3 32.6 5.9 2.2
         Mar 185.9 49.5 131.9 74.1 57.8 5.0 52.8 3.3 1.2 32.6 5.8 1.3
         Apr 184.1 51.5 128.1 71.7 56.4 5.2 51.2 3.3 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.3
         May 190.2 52.1 133.4 76.0 57.4 5.5 51.9 3.5 1.2 32.3 5.8 2.1
         June 194.8 54.0 135.9 78.9 57.1 5.5 51.5 3.5 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.5
         July 189.8 49.2 135.7 78.5 57.2 5.1 52.1 3.6 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.3
         Aug 185.1 50.7 129.3 77.9 51.4 5.1 46.3 3.7 1.4 32.1 5.8 0.2
         Sep 184.4 49.5 129.9 78.9 51.0 5.1 45.9 3.7 1.4 31.2 5.8 0.8
         Oct 177.5 46.8 125.5 74.4 51.2 5.4 45.8 3.7 1.4 31.1 5.8 1.5
         Nov 184.7 49.6 130.0 78.6 51.3 5.4 46.0 3.7 1.5 31.1 5.8 0.5
         Dec 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2013          Jan − 7.1 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 6.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0         Feb − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1         Mar + 5.6 − 1.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9
         Apr − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0
         May + 6.1 + 0.6 + 5.3 + 4.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2         June + 4.6 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6
         July − 5.0 − 4.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug − 4.0 + 1.6 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Oct − 7.0 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 7.2 + 2.8 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Dec − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 4.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.0
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.82013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2013          Jan 2,908.2 1,275.5 929.6 255.3 674.3 27.9 646.4 613.6 89.5 2.3 25.3 80.9
         Feb 2,918.2 1,285.6 931.9 259.7 672.1 27.7 644.5 613.4 87.3 2.3 24.8 95.8         Mar 2,910.4 1,280.8 932.9 261.3 671.5 27.2 644.4 611.2 85.5 2.3 24.6 93.0
         Apr 2,916.2 1,293.0 930.2 261.9 668.4 27.1 641.3 609.0 83.9 2.3 24.4 93.3
         May 2,925.1 1,311.3 924.8 256.0 668.8 27.3 641.5 607.3 81.7 2.3 24.4 94.7         June 2,934.9 1,315.7 933.3 265.9 667.4 26.6 640.7 606.2 79.7 2.3 24.3 110.4
         July 2,915.4 1,325.6 907.0 244.3 662.7 26.1 636.7 604.5 78.2 2.3 24.6 88.2
         Aug 2,838.5 1,322.2 835.1 177.0 658.1 24.1 634.0 603.8 77.5 2.3 24.6 1.1         Sep 2,836.2 1,329.9 827.0 172.3 654.7 23.9 630.7 602.7 76.6 2.3 24.5 0.4
         Oct 2,849.7 1,346.0 825.0 173.3 651.8 24.0 627.8 602.7 75.9 2.3 24.3 1.6
         Nov 2,859.7 1,363.8 817.8 167.8 650.0 24.3 625.8 602.7 75.4 2.2 24.3 0.5         Dec 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
Changes*
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2013          Jan + 4.2 + 19.8 − 12.1 − 12.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.0
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.1 + 2.2 + 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 15.0         Mar − 6.8 − 4.7 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.8
         Apr + 5.8 + 12.5 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 8.9 + 18.3 − 5.4 − 5.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.4         June + 10.1 + 4.4 + 8.8 + 9.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 19.5 + 9.8 − 26.2 − 21.5 − 4.7 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug + 4.1 + 11.7 − 6.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0         Sep − 2.4 + 7.6 − 8.0 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 13.5 + 16.2 − 2.0 + 1.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov + 10.0 + 17.8 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1         Dec + 5.9 − 2.2 + 4.5 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2013          Jan 1,109.2 428.0 658.5 175.7 482.8 10.7 472.2 6.6 16.0 2.3 17.8 80.9
         Feb 1,112.0 427.9 661.5 181.0 480.5 10.9 469.6 6.8 15.9 2.3 17.3 95.8
         Mar 1,104.5 418.0 664.0 184.3 479.7 10.7 469.0 6.8 15.7 2.3 17.2 93.0
         Apr 1,108.9 424.0 662.5 185.6 476.8 11.1 465.8 6.9 15.5 2.3 17.0 93.3
         May 1,110.2 430.2 657.4 180.5 476.9 11.5 465.4 7.1 15.5 2.3 17.1 94.7
         June 1,116.9 426.8 667.6 192.0 475.6 11.4 464.2 7.2 15.3 2.3 17.1 110.4
         July 1,096.9 430.4 644.1 172.1 472.0 11.6 460.4 7.3 15.2 2.3 17.4 88.2
         Aug 1,013.2 417.2 573.4 106.0 467.4 10.0 457.4 7.4 15.3 2.3 17.5 1.1
         Sep 1,013.2 424.3 566.4 102.4 464.0 10.1 453.9 7.4 15.2 2.3 17.3 0.4
         Oct 1,017.9 430.3 565.0 104.3 460.8 10.2 450.5 7.5 15.1 2.2 17.2 1.6
         Nov 1,007.5 427.8 557.4 99.3 458.0 10.4 447.7 7.4 15.0 2.2 17.3 0.5
         Dec 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
Changes*
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2013          Jan + 3.7 + 13.8 − 10.1 − 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.0
         Feb + 2.8 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 5.3 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 15.0         Mar − 6.5 − 9.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.8
         Apr + 4.4 + 6.3 − 1.9 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 1.3 + 6.2 − 5.1 − 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4         June + 7.0 − 3.4 + 10.5 + 11.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 15.7
         July − 20.0 + 3.6 − 23.5 − 19.8 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug − 2.6 + 1.9 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.0         Sep − 0.2 + 7.0 − 7.1 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 4.7 + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.9 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov − 10.4 − 2.5 − 7.7 − 4.9 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.1         Dec + 3.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2013          July 1,818.5 895.2 867.4 155.4 582.9 129.2 27.9 263.0 247.8 16.7 213.6 17.5
         Aug 1,825.3 905.0 876.8 158.4 588.8 129.7 28.1 261.7 246.6 16.6 212.8 17.2
         Sep 1,822.9 905.6 877.3 156.7 593.1 127.4 28.3 260.6 245.5 16.4 212.9 16.2
         Oct 1,831.8 915.7 887.2 161.4 597.0 128.9 28.5 260.0 244.7 16.4 212.4 15.9
         Nov 1,852.2 936.0 908.4 163.0 614.3 131.1 27.7 260.5 245.5 16.4 213.2 15.9
         Dec 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
Changes*
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2013          July + 0.5 + 6.2 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.3
         Aug + 6.8 + 9.8 + 9.5 + 3.0 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Sep − 2.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.5
         Oct + 8.8 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 4.7 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3
         Nov + 20.4 + 20.3 + 21.1 + 1.6 + 17.3 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0
         Dec + 2.2 − 3.5 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.0 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2013          July 189.8 23.5 3.8 5.2 14.4 0.1 16.2 48.1 11.0 13.7 23.1 0.2 15.5
         Aug 185.1 16.7 4.3 3.3 9.0 0.1 16.2 44.7 8.8 12.6 23.1 0.2 15.5
         Sep 184.4 15.4 3.1 3.6 8.5 0.1 16.2 49.0 11.0 14.7 23.0 0.2 14.6
         Oct 177.5 13.9 2.9 2.7 8.2 0.1 16.2 45.9 11.1 11.7 22.9 0.2 14.6
         Nov 184.7 14.3 3.1 2.8 8.3 0.1 16.2 43.2 10.1 10.0 22.9 0.2 14.5
         Dec 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2013          July − 5.0 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Aug − 4.0 − 6.8 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.4 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.5 − + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5
         Oct − 7.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − − 3.1 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 7.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 1.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 4.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 2011
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 201215.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
15.2 72.2 190.8 14.5 176.3 597.3 587.1 10.2 63.1 0.0 7.2 − 2013          July
15.1 71.0 190.6 14.1 176.5 596.4 586.2 10.2 62.2 0.0 7.1 −          Aug 15.1 69.9 190.7 13.9 176.8 595.3 585.2 10.1 61.4 0.0 7.2 −          Sep 
15.3 69.0 191.0 13.7 177.2 595.2 585.2 10.1 60.8 0.0 7.1 −          Oct 
15.0 68.5 192.0 13.9 178.1 595.2 585.5 9.7 60.4 0.0 7.0 −          Nov 15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 −          Dec 
Changes*
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
− 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2013          July
− 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
+ 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 0.6 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 201244.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
41.9 20.4 11.2 6.3 4.0 0.4 76.4 14.0 48.4 13.3 0.7 0.0 2013          July
46.1 23.6 11.9 6.5 4.1 0.4 77.7 14.0 50.1 12.8 0.7 0.0          Aug 43.2 21.5 11.2 6.5 4.1 0.4 76.9 13.9 49.3 13.0 0.7 0.0          Sep 
41.7 20.1 10.9 6.6 4.1 0.4 75.9 12.7 49.0 13.4 0.7 0.0          Oct 
44.2 22.4 11.1 6.7 4.1 0.4 83.0 14.0 54.7 13.5 0.8 0.0          Nov 44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0          Dec 
Changes*
+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013
− 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2013          July
+ 4.2 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
− 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 2.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Nov + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 4.3 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2013          Aug 617.5 607.5 528.6 413.0 78.9 66.6 10.0 7.9 0.2 94.9 78.8 60.8 16.0
         Sep 616.3 606.4 528.3 412.4 78.1 65.8 9.9 7.9 0.2 93.9 78.0 60.4 15.9
         Oct 616.3 606.4 528.3 411.5 78.0 65.6 9.9 7.8 0.3 93.1 77.3 60.1 15.8
         Nov 616.2 606.3 528.3 411.2 78.0 65.7 9.9 7.8 0.3 92.5 76.9 59.7 15.6
         Dec 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 4.4 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
Changes*
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2013          Aug − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Sep − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1
         Oct − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2
         Nov − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Dec + 3.9 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2013          Aug 1,191.1 324.9 29.5 353.7 78.9 91.9 2.8 40.1 4.7 1,059.1 0.2 0.2 37.4 1.1
         Sep 1,185.6 322.9 28.6 350.8 74.5 89.2 2.6 39.1 4.5 1,057.3 0.2 0.2 38.3 1.1
         Oct 1,176.3 319.2 29.8 347.5 72.1 88.9 2.7 38.0 4.7 1,049.5 0.6 0.2 37.4 1.1
         Nov 1,169.1 318.1 28.3 341.0 67.6 83.4 2.6 36.2 4.8 1,049.5 0.6 0.2 37.6 1.1
         Dec 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
Changes*
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013 − 122.4 − 31.0 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2013          Aug − 3.6 − 0.6 − 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 −
         Sep − 5.5 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.0
         Oct − 9.3 − 3.7 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 7.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 −
         Nov − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 6.5 − 4.5 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0         Dec − 26.4 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 19.8 − 12.8 − 14.4 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 10.5 − + 0.0 − 0.6 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 23 197.5 41.4 0.0 17.6 27.1 74.2 15.9 13.0 0.7 22.8 136.7 6.9 5.4 8.3 99.2
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013          Oct 22 204.1 43.2 0.0 17.3 21.4 81.8 16.9 16.9 1.5 21.6 146.0 5.7 4.2 9.0 8.5
         Nov 22 204.8 43.1 0.0 17.2 21.2 82.2 16.9 17.5 1.5 21.6 146.5 5.6 4.2 9.0 8.1         Dec 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 9.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Oct 12 144.1 25.8 0.0 10.7 14.7 64.6 14.5 8.1 1.1 18.0 96.6 5.5 4.2 6.0 5.5
         Nov 12 144.5 25.8 0.0 10.6 14.6 64.8 14.6 8.5 1.1 18.0 97.0 5.5 4.2 6.0 5.3         Dec 12 144.8 26.1 0.0 10.2 14.5 65.1 14.7 8.6 1.1 17.7 98.7 5.6 4.0 6.0 6.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Oct 10 60.0 17.5 0.0 6.6 6.7 17.2 2.3 8.7 0.5 3.6 49.4 0.1 − 3.0 2.9         Nov 10 60.3 17.4 0.0 6.6 6.6 17.3 2.3 9.0 0.5 3.6 49.5 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Dec 10 60.5 17.5 0.0 6.6 6.5 17.4 2.3 9.1 0.5 3.5 50.3 0.1 − 3.0 3.2
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2011 27.6 2.5 6.1 46.2 31.0 40.9 18.1 4.4 8.2 4.1 14.6 12.1 7.5 11.0 9.3 0.5
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013          Oct 2.3 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.5 3.6 1.5 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.6 14.5 8.2 0.9 0.0
         Nov 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.3 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.4 14.4 8.2 1.0 0.0
         Dec 2.5 2.2 0.6 3.4 2.4 3.5 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.4 13.9 8.0 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Oct 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.8 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.2 9.7 4.5 0.7 0.0
         Nov 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.5 1.5 2.4 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.5 4.5 0.7 0.0
         Dec 1.7 1.5 0.2 2.5 1.7 2.6 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 9.2 4.4 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2013          Oct 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.7 0.3 0.0
         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.7 0.2 0.0
         Dec 0.8 0.8 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.6 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count aswhich appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2010 55 212 2,226.3 591.4 564.8 232.0 332.8 26.6 696.7 532.5 27.5 505.0 164.2 938.2 633.9
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013          Feb 55 209 2,052.3 547.0 531.9 165.9 366.0 15.1 578.8 456.2 14.6 441.7 122.5 926.5 650.9
         Mar 55 209 2,007.7 541.0 525.3 162.4 362.9 15.7 580.6 454.3 14.7 439.6 126.3 886.2 636.8
         Apr 55 207 2,034.7 537.8 522.2 163.0 359.1 15.6 578.8 458.2 13.7 444.6 120.6 918.1 656.3
         May 55 208 2,003.3 534.1 518.7 160.6 358.2 15.3 595.4 468.8 13.0 455.7 126.6 873.8 613.0
         June 55 207 1,909.3 528.0 512.8 162.1 350.6 15.2 563.0 446.7 12.8 433.9 116.3 818.3 605.9
         July 54 206 1,845.8 511.4 497.0 156.7 340.3 14.5 540.5 431.2 12.0 419.2 109.3 793.9 544.3
         Aug 54 206 1,812.6 506.8 492.3 147.6 344.6 14.6 533.5 422.8 12.2 410.6 110.7 772.3 508.3
         Sep 55 206 1,720.0 471.0 457.5 143.2 314.3 13.6 560.5 449.8 12.1 437.7 110.7 688.4 492.6
         Oct 55 204 1,779.4 475.8 462.5 145.6 317.0 13.2 549.2 439.7 10.7 429.0 109.5 754.4 487.0
         Nov 55 206 1,787.6 485.8 472.0 146.7 325.3 13.8 540.5 428.9 10.3 418.6 111.6 761.4 494.0
Changes *
2011 + 1 − 3 + 56.9 − 4.6 + 3.2 − 32.9 + 36.2 − 7.9 − 68.9 − 40.9 − 4.3 − 36.7 − 28.0 + 130.4 + 251.0
2012 − 1 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2013          Mar − − − 61.2 − 13.7 − 14.1 − 3.5 − 10.6 + 0.4 − 6.1 − 8.5 + 0.1 − 8.7 + 2.5 − 41.5 − 14.1
         Apr − − 2 + 41.3 + 4.1 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 + 0.0 + 4.4 + 9.0 − 1.0 + 10.1 − 4.6 + 32.7 + 19.5
         May − + 1 − 31.5 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 16.8 + 10.7 − 0.6 + 11.3 + 6.1 − 44.3 − 43.3
         June − − 1 − 89.8 − 4.0 − 3.9 + 1.6 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 30.5 − 20.6 − 0.2 − 20.4 − 9.9 − 55.3 − 7.1
         July − 1 − 1 − 54.0 − 12.0 − 11.4 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 0.8 − 10.9 − 6.3 − 24.0 − 61.6
         Aug − − − 36.5 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 9.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 8.9 − 10.0 + 0.2 − 10.3 + 1.1 − 21.8 − 36.0
         Sep + 1 − − 82.9 − 30.1 − 29.2 − 4.4 − 24.7 − 0.9 + 30.3 + 29.6 − 0.1 + 29.8 + 0.7 − 83.1 − 15.7
         Oct − − 2 + 67.0 + 7.8 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 5.8 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 0.5 + 66.3 − 5.6
         Nov − + 2 + 7.1 + 9.9 + 9.3 + 1.1 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 11.8 − 0.4 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 7.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2010 37 93 495.1 220.9 178.7 98.8 79.9 42.1 218.3 168.8 37.7 131.2 49.5 55.9 −
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013          Feb 35 83 444.4 194.1 161.2 93.6 67.7 32.9 197.3 154.2 29.7 124.5 43.1 53.0 −
         Mar 35 83 455.7 194.6 161.8 95.4 66.4 32.8 205.8 163.0 29.4 133.6 42.9 55.3 −
         Apr 35 83 444.6 188.8 156.6 91.1 65.5 32.1 201.5 158.3 28.5 129.8 43.3 54.3 −
         May 35 83 438.4 193.0 161.6 96.5 65.1 31.4 196.2 154.3 28.9 125.4 41.9 49.2 −
         June 34 81 436.5 189.5 158.7 94.8 63.9 30.8 193.9 153.7 28.4 125.3 40.1 53.1 −
         July 33 78 430.7 190.0 159.2 97.3 61.9 30.8 187.8 148.6 28.6 119.9 39.3 52.8 −
         Aug 33 78 435.0 193.9 163.3 97.8 65.5 30.6 187.4 148.2 28.5 119.7 39.2 53.7 −
         Sep 32 77 430.6 190.9 159.9 97.8 62.2 31.0 187.8 149.6 28.3 121.3 38.2 51.9 −
         Oct 33 77 427.3 190.3 160.1 97.5 62.6 30.2 187.1 148.8 27.9 120.9 38.3 50.0 −
         Nov 33 76 425.6 189.4 160.0 95.1 64.9 29.4 184.0 146.8 27.7 119.1 37.2 52.2 −
Changes *
2011 − 2 − 6 − 20.1 − 12.2 − 7.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 5.0 − 9.6 − 5.5 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.0 + 1.6 −
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2013          Mar − − + 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 −
         Apr − − − 9.3 − 4.9 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 3.4 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.4 − 1.0 −
         May − − − 6.2 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 3.9 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 1.4 − 5.1 −
         June − 1 − 2 − 1.6 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 3.8 −
         July − 1 − 3 − 4.6 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 5.5 − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 −
         Aug − − + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 −
         Sep − 1 − 1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 1.8 −         Oct + 1 − − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.8 −
         Nov − − 1 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.9 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 2.2 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2014
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,131.3 751.9 398.2 353.7 379.4 44.9 39.2 5.7 334.5 187.1 34.7 873.3 648.7 2010
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 20111,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
1,081.6 706.5 347.4 359.1 375.1 29.4 21.7 7.8 345.7 140.1 40.9 789.7 657.4 2013          Feb 
1,054.5 711.5 340.1 371.4 343.0 30.5 23.0 7.5 312.5 137.3 41.2 774.7 653.1          Mar 
1,067.1 702.0 332.0 370.0 365.1 30.3 23.1 7.2 334.8 135.3 41.0 791.2 663.1          Apr 
1,079.0 692.0 338.8 353.2 387.0 28.7 21.6 7.1 358.3 140.3 41.0 743.0 614.7          May1,012.4 675.9 351.9 324.0 336.5 27.8 21.2 6.5 308.7 133.5 40.7 722.8 603.3          June
1,008.1 651.8 323.6 328.2 356.4 27.8 21.4 6.4 328.6 134.3 40.1 663.2 544.5          July
1,010.3 652.1 324.2 327.8 358.3 24.2 19.0 5.2 334.1 125.7 40.1 636.4 528.9          Aug 
940.7 603.9 315.4 288.5 336.8 26.4 21.7 4.7 310.4 125.1 39.9 614.3 502.5          Sep 
1,004.8 649.5 329.4 320.1 355.4 27.7 23.2 4.5 327.6 127.0 39.9 607.6 498.5          Oct 1,010.6 674.3 347.7 326.6 336.2 28.1 23.4 4.7 308.1 126.8 39.4 610.9 501.1          Nov 
Changes *
+ 27.0 + 50.1 + 8.4 + 41.7 − 23.1 − 9.0 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 14.2 − 45.8 + 3.9 + 71.9 + 231.5 2011− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012
− 39.0 − 0.6 − 7.3 + 6.7 − 38.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 39.4 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 19.7 − 4.3 2013          Mar 
+ 22.1 − 4.0 − 8.1 + 4.1 + 26.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 26.2 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 21.3 + 9.9          Apr 
+ 11.4 − 10.5 + 6.8 − 17.3 + 21.8 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 23.5 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 47.8 − 48.4          May− 63.8 − 14.6 + 13.0 − 27.7 − 49.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 48.3 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 18.9 − 11.4          June
+ 1.9 − 20.8 − 28.3 + 7.5 + 22.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 56.1 − 58.8          July
+ 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 1.2 + 4.4 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 28.2 − 15.6          Aug − 62.6 − 44.1 − 8.8 − 35.3 − 18.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 20.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 19.4 − 26.4          Sep 
+ 69.0 + 48.0 + 14.0 + 34.1 + 21.0 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.1          Oct 
+ 4.9 + 24.5 + 18.3 + 6.2 − 19.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 2.6          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
387.4 221.1 136.4 84.7 166.3 31.0 23.6 7.3 135.3 28.9 31.8 46.9 − 2010
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
345.1 194.6 113.1 81.5 150.4 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.1 24.6 32.9 41.9 − 2013          Feb 
355.7 200.6 115.7 84.9 155.1 22.3 18.2 4.1 132.8 24.5 32.4 43.1 −          Mar 
345.1 194.6 114.3 80.4 150.5 22.3 18.2 4.1 128.2 23.9 32.7 42.8 −          Apr 
340.1 189.5 111.0 78.6 150.6 22.0 17.7 4.3 128.6 23.7 32.6 41.9 −          May
341.5 190.0 108.8 81.2 151.4 20.5 16.2 4.3 130.9 23.1 32.1 39.8 −          June
336.8 188.4 109.8 78.6 148.4 21.4 17.3 4.1 127.1 22.5 31.8 39.6 −          July
341.8 191.8 112.4 79.3 150.0 22.5 18.4 4.1 127.6 22.4 32.0 38.8 −          Aug 
337.3 195.4 114.8 80.6 141.9 21.2 17.2 4.0 120.7 22.1 32.0 39.1 −          Sep 
337.9 193.3 111.5 81.8 144.6 22.7 18.7 4.0 121.9 21.9 30.1 37.4 −          Oct 
336.6 193.7 109.7 84.0 142.9 23.0 19.0 4.0 119.9 21.6 29.9 37.5 −          Nov 
Changes *
− 12.5 + 7.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 15.3 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 2011
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
+ 9.1 + 5.2 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 2013          Mar 
− 9.1 − 5.2 − 1.4 − 3.8 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Apr 
− 5.1 − 5.2 − 3.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 −          May
+ 1.7 + 0.7 − 2.1 + 2.8 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 −          June
− 3.6 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 −          July
+ 4.7 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 −          Aug 
− 3.4 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.8 − 7.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 −          Sep 
+ 1.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 −          Oct 
− 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2014
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2013          June 10,554.5 105.5 0.5 105.1 286.5 181.4 0.0
         July 10,494.9 104.9 0.5 104.5 269.6 165.1 0.0
         Aug 10,541.8 105.4 0.5 104.9 274.5 169.6 0.0
         Sep 10,422.7 104.2 0.5 103.8 268.4 164.7 0.0
         Oct 10,423.3 104.2 0.5 103.8 244.9 141.1 0.0
         Nov 10,379.0 103.8 0.5 103.3 220.2 116.9 0.0
         Dec  8 10,385.9 103.9 0.5 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014          Jan  p 10,408.1 104.1 0.5 103.6 ... ... ...
         Feb ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2013          June 2,767,670 27,677 180 27,496 96,958 69,462 0
         July 2,754,066 27,541 180 27,361 87,020 59,659 1
         Aug 2,758,601 27,586 179 27,407 88,737 61,330 0
         Sep 2,749,459 27,495 178 27,317 92,920 65,603 20
         Oct 2,759,639 27,596 178 27,419 78,384 50,965 0
         Nov 2,741,870 27,419 177 27,241 67,149 39,908 0
         Dec 2,743,933 27,439 177 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014          Jan  p 2,772,133 27,721 178 27,544 ... ... ...
         Feb  p 2,733,718 27,337 178 27,159 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank the lump-sum allowance. 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio allowance, including required reserves of Estonia ( €0.187 billion). Required reserves
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios of the euro area up to 31 December 2013 amounted to € 103.2 billion. 
to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2014
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2009 Jan                1 1.62         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 0.12
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2011 July                1 0.37
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          July                1 −0.38
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 1.95 2014 Jan                1 −0.63         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2014 Jan                  8 112,458 112,458 0.25−−−7
         Jan                15 94,737 94,737 0.25−−−7
         Jan                22 116,281 116,281 0.25−−−7
         Jan                29 115,635 115,635 0.25−−−7
         Feb                  5 95,146 95,146 0.25−−−7
         Feb                12 93,282 93,282 0.25−−−7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2013 Dec                19 20,914 20,914 2 ... − − − 98
2014 Jan                15 7,092 7,092 0.25−−− 2 8
         Jan                30 4,955 4,955 2 ... − − − 92
         Feb                12 6,480 6,480 0.25−−− 2 8
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2013          July 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.14 0.10 0.13 0.22 0.34 0.53
         Aug 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.11 0.16 0.10 0.13 0.23 0.34 0.54         Sep 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.10 0.11 0.16 0.10 0.13 0.22 0.34 0.54
         Oct 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.17 0.10 0.13 0.23 0.34 0.54
         Nov 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.11 0.13 0.22 0.33 0.51         Dec 0.17 0.16 0.18 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.17 0.21 0.27 0.37 0.54
2014          Jan 0.20 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.17 0.16 0.19 0.22 0.29 0.40 0.56
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, since 20 June 2005 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money market-derivatives.
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360 method. 3Euro Inter-
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European bank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters sinceCentral Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Dec 1.57 121,482 2.16 228,742 0.78 81,845 3.33 21,289
2013          Jan 1.51 118,094 2.13 227,465 0.72 79,925 3.31 21,296
         Feb 1.47 115,772 2.11 226,984 0.69 79,483 3.30 21,367
         Mar 1.43 112,731 2.10 226,940 0.64 79,303 3.30 21,000
         Apr 1.38 110,618 2.09 226,550 0.60 80,849 3.25 20,869
         May 1.35 108,839 2.06 225,847 0.58 78,814 3.23 20,652
         June 1.30 106,091 2.04 225,027 0.57 77,887 3.23 20,352
         July 1.22 103,026 2.03 224,111 0.55 79,887 3.16 20,464
         Aug 1.16 101,003 2.02 223,993 0.52 80,986 3.14 20,406
         Sep 1.12 99,322 2.01 223,867 0.53 79,626 3.11 20,467
         Oct 1.07 97,939 2.00 223,989 0.50 80,517 3.11 20,505
         Nov 1.05 97,422 1.98 224,581 0.49 79,894 3.10 20,486
         Dec 1.03 96,912 1.97 226,744 0.48 81,898 3.07 20,531
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Dec 3.43 5,411 3.41 29,153 4.26 957,142 7.77 63,468 5.13 75,716 5.25 310,974
2013          Jan 3.35 5,441 3.39 29,130 4.23 956,829 7.64 60,580 5.22 76,521 5.22 310,092
         Feb 3.32 5,358 3.37 28,985 4.21 957,811 7.56 60,776 5.22 75,576 5.21 310,001
         Mar 3.32 5,380 3.34 28,892 4.19 959,296 7.59 61,732 5.19 75,792 5.19 308,862
         Apr 3.35 5,429 3.31 28,943 4.17 960,434 7.57 60,887 5.17 76,405 5.17 309,418
         May 3.34 5,513 3.28 28,887 4.15 962,645 7.51 60,234 5.15 76,791 5.15 309,610
         June 3.33 5,484 3.26 28,964 4.12 965,019 7.56 61,368 5.13 76,634 5.14 308,931
         July 3.28 5,653 3.22 28,977 4.09 968,047 7.53 59,608 5.12 77,021 5.12 309,175
         Aug 3.25 5,525 3.20 28,947 4.07 971,598 7.49 58,961 5.10 77,302 5.10 309,848
         Sep 3.29 5,599 3.18 29,073 4.05 973,595 7.64 61,183 5.08 77,444 5.08 308,292
         Oct 3.23 5,786 3.15 29,061 4.02 976,282 7.64 59,053 5.07 77,656 5.06 308,891
         Nov 3.17 5,644 3.13 29,027 4.01 979,253 7.55 56,483 5.03 77,800 5.05 309,729
         Dec 3.29 5,683 3.12 28,778 3.98 978,742 7.61 59,489 5.01 77,625 5.01 307,842
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Dec 3.17 134,186 3.03 126,718 3.41 579,210
2013          Jan 3.10 133,611 3.02 126,056 3.36 579,904
         Feb 3.11 136,265 3.01 125,664 3.34 581,316
         Mar 3.14 138,467 3.00 125,754 3.33 580,544
         Apr 3.13 135,048 2.96 125,073 3.32 582,836
         May 3.09 135,366 2.93 125,949 3.31 583,258
         June 3.14 136,903 2.92 124,651 3.30 582,718
         July 3.10 133,507 2.89 125,709 3.29 583,497
         Aug 3.05 132,912 2.87 125,631 3.28 581,882
         Sep 3.12 135,674 2.87 123,701 3.28 580,155
         Oct 3.08 132,962 2.86 124,612 3.27 581,133
         Nov 3.07 133,346 2.85 124,895 3.26 584,312
         Dec 3.13 131,319 2.86 124,093 3.24 585,810
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Dec 
0.57 841,703 0.79 8,557 1.74 1,212 1.67 1,463 1.03 528,458 1.50 89,519
2013          Jan 0.54 847,786 0.92 8,877 1.80 1,616 1.77 1,715 0.96 529,365 1.43 87,663
         Feb 0.51 857,813 0.94 7,887 1.45 745 1.68 1,605 0.93 530,687 1.38 86,114
         Mar 0.50 862,900 0.79 7,753 1.37 620 1.52 1,501 0.96 529,260 1.33 85,257
         Apr 0.47 869,149 0.80 7,655 1.37 796 1.38 1,567 0.90 528,646 1.26 83,717
         May 0.46 881,098 0.82 7,485 1.47 868 1.53 1,545 0.90 528,835 1.21 81,737
         June 0.44 888,922 0.77 6,939 1.41 633 1.46 1,345 0.87 528,594 1.18 80,868
         July 0.43 895,155 0.74 8,578 1.26 765 1.37 1,475 0.86 527,971 1.14 79,828
         Aug 0.42 904,740 0.75 7,310 1.17 546 1.36 1,130 0.85 528,142 1.12 78,869
         Sep 0.41 905,457 0.73 7,130 1.16 586 1.45 1,237 0.85 527,842 1.09 78,103
         Oct 0.40 915,399 0.71 7,583 1.06 883 1.44 1,553 0.82 527,870 1.06 78,030
         Nov 0.39 935,789 0.74 7,097 1.09 869 1.58 1,750 0.83 527,862 1.02 77,998
         Dec 0.39 931,980 0.66 7,630 1.06 700 1.48 1,406 0.79 532,012 0.99 77,698
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Dec 
0.22 311,043 0.15 20,225 0.74 546 1.74 381
2013          Jan 0.22 306,757 0.20 22,534 0.95 364 1.09 315
         Feb 0.21 301,494 0.21 16,085 0.97 413 1.65 218
         Mar 0.20 298,710 0.19 19,875 0.77 507 1.30 266
         Apr 0.19 305,231 0.22 16,608 0.77 417 1.17 526
         May 0.18 308,618 0.19 23,572 0.74 508 1.53 202
         June 0.17 300,393 0.21 14,370 0.60 408 1.21 247
         July 0.16 305,708 0.20 15,631 0.96 460 1.60 538
         Aug 0.16 312,892 0.17 16,639 0.73 516 1.62 191
         Sep 0.16 318,355 0.17 17,489 0.72 463 1.38 224
         Oct 0.16 321,180 0.15 18,642 0.71 381 1.48 277
         Nov 0.16 322,015 0.16 17,258 0.72 383 1.46 232
         Dec 0.16 328,268 0.23 23,419 0.79 367 1.63 427
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2012          Dec 
1.84 4,698 3.78 916 2.77 2,376 2.03 2,888 3.98 676 2.71 1,530
2013          Jan 1.97 5,099 3.77 1,171 2.96 2,735 2.27 2,973 3.87 818 2.87 1,602
         Feb 1.84 4,102 3.54 920 2.96 2,125 2.05 2,452 3.73 657 2.91 1,248
         Mar 1.90 4,698 3.80 900 2.88 2,574 2.10 2,636 3.95 717 2.88 1,432
         Apr 1.99 5,235 3.57 1,181 2.95 2,815 2.33 2,916 3.70 882 2.88 1,734
         May 1.80 3,726 3.62 864 2.91 2,318 2.04 2,255 3.80 670 2.88 1,325
         June 1.84 4,485 3.65 886 2.81 2,651 2.01 2,768 3.85 657 2.76 1,497
         July 1.92 5,623 3.30 1,332 3.01 3,583 2.20 3,201 3.41 999 3.00 2,019
         Aug 1.93 4,052 3.55 961 3.03 2,398 2.04 2,464 3.75 628 2.97 1,568
         Sep 1.93 4,695 3.56 900 3.03 2,472 2.08 2,756 3.67 669 2.96 1,331
         Oct 1.85 5,116 3.48 1,047 3.09 2,141 2.05 2,979 3.62 760 3.04 1,271
         Nov 1.89 3,676 3.61 909 2.99 2,024 2.11 2,160 3.78 666 2.92 1,275
         Dec 1.88 6,118 3.45 1,098 2.87 2,943 2.01 3,261 3.57 858 2.85 1,729
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2012          Dec 5.99 5.73 3,747 3.88 556 4.90 1,766 7.48 1,425
2013          Jan 6.72 6.47 5,140 4.85 508 5.22 2,314 8.08 2,318
         Feb 6.54 6.23 4,781 4.61 620 5.10 2,161 7.95 2,000
         Mar 6.33 6.15 5,186 4.56 488 5.00 2,503 7.81 2,195
         Apr 6.30 6.18 5,658 4.89 554 4.94 2,725 7.91 2,379
         May 6.39 6.29 5,325 5.60 697 5.00 2,401 7.89 2,227
         June 6.41 6.29 5,396 5.46 618 5.03 2,399 7.77 2,379
         July 6.52 6.42 5,990 5.28 480 5.15 2,708 7.84 2,802
         Aug 6.44 6.34 5,253 5.40 554 5.09 2,288 7.73 2,411
         Sep 6.40 6.32 4,759 5.79 379 5.02 2,195 7.71 2,185
         Oct 6.40 6.33 5,232 5.95 504 5.02 2,417 7.77 2,311
         Nov 6.31 6.22 4,766 5.78 592 5.01 2,218 7.73 1,956
         Dec 5.97 5.87 4,327 5.32 588 5.00 2,254 7.41 1,485
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Dec . 3.81 294 2.92 100 5.01 103 3.40 91
2013          Jan . 4.00 271 3.06 57 5.01 111 3.42 103
         Feb . 3.56 426 2.90 239 4.93 116 3.56 71
         Mar . 4.10 278 3.43 49 4.70 140 3.52 89
         Apr . 3.92 316 2.96 60 4.55 165 3.40 91
         May . 3.95 273 3.19 41 4.57 141 3.32 91
         June . 4.15 274 3.65 43 4.66 155 3.41 76
         July . 4.09 334 3.27 60 4.74 171 3.48 103
         Aug . 4.16 259 3.49 44 4.69 137 3.60 78
         Sep . 4.28 246 3.47 33 4.67 143 3.87 70
         Oct . 4.37 250 3.63 38 4.70 146 4.07 66
         Nov . 4.40 221 3.64 35 4.71 133 4.12 53
         Dec . 4.24 247 3.48 42 4.63 149 3.79 56
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Dec 2.91 2.82 14,190 2.88 2,222 2.55 1,747 2.78 5,776 2.94 4,445
2013          Jan 2.86 2.79 17,268 2.79 3,178 2.51 2,236 2.75 7,138 3.00 4,716
         Feb 2.86 2.79 14,470 2.80 2,124 2.44 1,802 2.74 6,100 3.00 4,444
         Mar 2.87 2.81 15,659 2.75 2,291 2.54 2,045 2.77 6,235 2.99 5,088
         Apr 2.90 2.83 18,191 2.87 2,887 2.50 2,364 2.74 7,590 3.08 5,350
         May 2.79 2.71 15,740 2.91 2,281 2.38 2,004 2.64 6,498 2.84 4,957
         June 2.71 2.64 16,804 2.79 2,317 2.31 2,054 2.57 6,758 2.78 5,675
         July 2.78 2.71 21,404 2.80 3,304 2.39 2,727 2.67 9,161 2.85 6,212
         Aug 2.87 2.79 16,749 2.81 2,302 2.45 2,166 2.74 7,027 2.97 5,254
         Sep 2.92 2.86 15,567 2.86 2,266 2.46 2,017 2.82 6,594 3.07 4,690
         Oct 2.97 2.89 17,153 2.75 3,065 2.53 2,373 2.91 7,044 3.14 4,671
         Nov 2.98 2.90 14,279 2.82 2,106 2.51 1,912 2.91 5,686 3.09 4,575
         Dec 2.90 2.83 14,896 2.75 2,436 2.45 2,119 2.85 6,169 3.04 4,172
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Dec . 2.72 6,729 2.65 976 2.40 888 2.71 2,777 2.90 2,088
2013          Jan . 2.71 7,856 2.63 1,244 2.44 1,153 2.68 3,320 2.97 2,139
         Feb . 2.73 6,711 2.58 824 2.34 919 2.71 2,873 2.98 2,095
         Mar . 2.71 7,343 2.56 929 2.34 1,012 2.70 2,980 2.95 2,422
         Apr . 2.79 8,545 2.73 1,170 2.39 1,181 2.66 3,591 3.16 2,603
         May . 2.61 7,361 2.69 907 2.23 998 2.58 3,117 2.80 2,339
         June . 2.53 8,137 2.49 958 2.18 1,039 2.51 3,326 2.70 2,814
         July . 2.60 10,324 2.65 1,236 2.27 1,392 2.58 4,435 2.76 3,261
         Aug . 2.69 7,910 2.51 979 2.33 1,045 2.68 3,307 2.91 2,579
         Sep . 2.76 7,391 2.65 860 2.36 1,045 2.76 3,193 2.99 2,293
         Oct . 2.84 8,293 2.64 1,219 2.49 1,268 2.87 3,471 3.09 2,335
         Nov . 2.83 6,718 2.68 801 2.45 969 2.85 2,709 3.03 2,239
         Dec . 2.74 6,812 2.55 895 2.34 1,066 2.80 2,849 2.95 2,002
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2012          Dec 
9.73 47,253 9.62 40,409 14.62 4,615 4.35 69,303 4.36 69,044
2013          Jan 9.62 44,805 9.60 39,081 14.64 3,708 4.19 68,528 4.21 68,280
         Feb 9.54 44,964 9.61 38,999 14.68 3,698 4.22 70,639 4.24 70,383
         Mar 9.55 45,946 9.60 39,869 14.69 3,774 4.24 72,271 4.26 72,031
         Apr 9.52 45,107 9.62 38,827 14.70 3,846 4.25 69,020 4.26 68,777
         May 9.50 45,021 9.60 38,709 14.70 3,891 4.18 69,112 4.20 68,890
         June 9.50 46,126 9.52 39,588 14.65 4,127 4.32 69,789 4.34 69,530
         July 9.55 44,772 9.51 38,381 14.58 4,136 4.30 66,621 4.31 66,406
         Aug 9.44 44,307 9.49 37,586 14.60 4,183 4.22 66,681 4.24 66,472
         Sep 9.48 46,647 9.54 39,833 14.63 4,254 4.31 69,234 4.33 68,982
         Oct 9.43 44,775 9.44 38,011 14.63 4,258 4.26 66,570 4.28 66,316
         Nov 9.35 42,848 9.30 36,099 14.64 4,288 4.21 67,193 4.23 66,944
         Dec 9.30 45,730 9.41 38,334 14.62 4,358 4.28 66,825 4.30 66,572
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2012          Dec 2.94 6,940 3.56 1,665 2.75 1,361 1.89 43,968 2.54 4,465 2.70 7,203
2013          Jan 2.84 7,381 3.50 1,484 2.83 1,177 1.88 43,240 2.94 1,212 2.76 4,860
         Feb 2.92 6,264 3.58 1,204 2.87 926 1.72 32,114 3.16 1,111 2.89 4,347
         Mar 2.92 7,360 3.58 1,322 2.88 1,144 1.83 38,944 2.63 2,000 2.81 4,220
         Apr 2.92 7,813 3.50 1,509 2.85 1,170 1.80 37,523 2.85 1,491 2.77 4,495
         May 3.00 7,028 3.51 1,197 2.67 1,076 1.68 33,009 2.77 1,239 2.52 4,020
         June 2.97 7,849 3.62 902 2.67 1,260 1.75 41,928 2.58 2,153 2.80 5,651
         July 2.95 8,387 3.57 1,131 2.80 1,489 1.71 43,328 2.84 2,497 3.00 6,045
         Aug 2.80 6,715 3.66 830 2.80 1,275 1.70 32,698 2.51 1,386 2.83 4,394
         Sep 2.97 7,696 3.69 822 2.82 1,074 1.80 38,460 2.84 1,757 2.87 4,817
         Oct 2.92 8,264 3.61 992 2.95 1,181 1.79 42,301 2.86 2,872 3.03 4,462
         Nov 2.99 6,860 3.69 903 2.85 1,022 1.70 32,900 2.43 1,180 2.70 5,032
         Dec 3.01 7,750 3.59 1,033 2.74 1,380 1.86 44,537 2.62 3,368 2.75 8,317
of which: collateralised loans 12
2012          Dec 2.79 1,060 2.88 189 2.54 346 2.12 8,861 2.20 2,043 2.82 1,963
2013          Jan 2.68 1,329 2.93 157 2.68 351 2.01 9,850 2.91 334 2.98 1,146
         Feb 2.81 960 3.08 128 2.83 245 2.07 5,702 3.63 362 2.86 1,752
         Mar 2.86 1,027 3.04 127 2.78 319 2.04 7,793 2.45 861 2.70 1,161
         Apr 2.70 1,305 3.03 175 2.71 337 2.19 7,219 2.61 560 2.98 1,458
         May 2.85 961 2.79 134 2.48 321 2.04 5,488 2.82 474 2.78 1,322
         June 2.82 948 2.82 124 2.50 336 2.10 6,829 2.51 1,058 2.55 1,344
         July 2.83 1,301 2.85 184 2.63 468 2.20 7,145 2.98 985 2.95 1,621
         Aug 2.82 799 3.08 130 2.61 404 2.14 4,994 2.60 459 2.86 1,245
         Sep 2.87 904 2.80 138 2.65 318 2.10 5,972 3.08 926 2.71 1,439
         Oct 2.67 1,133 2.88 153 2.79 326 2.22 8,531 2.99 1,523 2.92 1,288
         Nov 2.88 746 2.97 114 2.77 274 2.11 4,596 2.75 415 2.65 1,445
         Dec 2.83 912 2.74 155 2.55 449 2.24 6,744 2.35 1,542 2.73 3,019
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.9 1,634.5 486.8 152.7 240.8 240.3 357.5 79.6 76.9 62.3
2006 1,781.9 1,719.7 524.1 149.8 244.8 261.6 385.5 74.5 79.2 62.3
2007 1,840.0 1,781.6 558.3 156.5 248.6 275.4 409.5 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,769.2 1,713.5 574.5 159.4 242.7 228.9 379.2 65.6 63.2 55.8
2009 1,836.2 1,779.1 588.9 173.9 259.3 210.6 426.9 58.5 61.1 57.1
2010 1,958.8 1,897.4 570.9 210.2 267.0 221.0 501.2 59.9 67.3 61.4
2011 2,008.7 1,945.4 576.2 230.7 271.8 223.8 515.2 62.2 65.5 63.3
2012 2,151.4 2,085.2 560.0 297.7 277.9 224.8 597.1 61.8 65.8 66.3
2011          Q2 1,988.3 1,926.8 578.5 218.9 270.8 223.8 507.4 61.0 66.5 61.4
         Q3 1,999.2 1,937.4 581.7 225.8 272.1 222.6 507.3 61.5 66.4 61.7
         Q4 2,008.7 1,945.4 576.2 230.7 271.8 223.8 515.2 62.2 65.5 63.3
2012          Q1 2,056.8 1,992.9 572.3 254.7 275.4 224.0 538.9 62.1 65.4 63.9
         Q2 2,075.4 2,010.6 568.8 266.6 275.4 222.9 549.4 62.0 65.5 64.9
         Q3 2,120.7 2,055.2 565.9 285.2 276.7 225.0 574.7 61.9 65.7 65.5
         Q4 2,151.4 2,085.2 560.0 297.7 277.9 224.8 597.1 61.8 65.8 66.3
2013          Q1 2,191.6 2,124.4 559.8 312.2 279.9 226.7 615.0 63.7 67.0 67.2
         Q2 2,186.4 2,118.5 554.1 314.5 280.2 226.5 612.6 63.5 67.0 67.9
         Q3 2,204.7 2,135.6 546.8 319.2 283.1 227.2 628.7 63.4 67.1 69.1
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 1,391.5 384.8 130.5 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,499.8 1,455.2 410.3 127.5 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 72.6 44.6
2007 1,528.2 1,487.5 432.9 131.9 226.7 267.2 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,453.5 1,415.2 436.7 133.7 221.2 221.4 283.9 63.2 55.1 38.2
2009 1,489.8 1,451.7 440.4 146.2 236.0 202.9 317.6 55.5 53.1 38.1
2010 1,550.3 1,510.0 419.9 170.7 243.0 208.2 356.4 56.4 55.4 40.3
2011 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.6 190.6 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012 1,691.7 1,648.5 402.0 249.2 251.2 210.6 425.1 57.7 52.5 43.3
2011          Q2 1,572.6 1,532.5 426.9 178.2 245.5 210.8 359.6 57.3 54.2 40.1
         Q3 1,579.5 1,539.3 428.4 184.2 246.7 209.5 358.9 57.8 53.8 40.2
         Q4 1,580.3 1,538.7 419.6 190.6 245.9 210.3 361.2 58.4 52.7 41.6
2012          Q1 1,620.1 1,578.2 414.7 212.0 249.3 210.3 381.3 58.2 52.4 41.9
         Q2 1,634.3 1,591.7 411.4 221.7 249.2 209.0 390.0 58.0 52.5 42.7
         Q3 1,669.3 1,626.3 408.0 238.1 250.3 210.9 408.6 57.9 52.6 43.0
         Q4 1,691.7 1,648.5 402.0 249.2 251.2 210.6 425.1 57.7 52.5 43.3
2013          Q1 1,723.9 1,680.2 400.4 263.2 253.2 212.1 438.2 59.5 53.6 43.8
         Q2 1,718.1 1,673.8 395.5 263.9 253.5 211.9 436.2 59.3 53.5 44.3
         Q3 1,730.1 1,684.9 388.2 267.9 255.8 212.4 448.0 59.2 53.4 45.3
Pension funds 4
2005 260.0 243.0 102.0 22.2 19.5 6.1 85.5 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.2 264.5 113.8 22.3 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 311.9 294.1 125.4 24.6 21.9 8.2 105.5 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.8 298.2 137.8 25.7 21.5 7.4 95.2 2.4 8.1 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.6 387.4 151.0 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.8 3.5 11.9 21.1
2011 428.4 406.7 156.6 40.1 25.9 13.4 154.1 3.8 12.8 21.7
2012 459.7 436.7 158.0 48.5 26.7 14.2 171.9 4.1 13.3 23.0
2011          Q2 415.7 394.3 151.6 40.6 25.3 13.1 147.8 3.6 12.3 21.4
         Q3 419.7 398.1 153.3 41.6 25.4 13.2 148.4 3.7 12.6 21.5
         Q4 428.4 406.7 156.6 40.1 25.9 13.4 154.1 3.8 12.8 21.7
2012          Q1 436.7 414.7 157.7 42.7 26.2 13.7 157.6 3.9 13.0 22.0
         Q2 441.1 418.9 157.4 44.9 26.2 13.9 159.4 3.9 13.0 22.2
         Q3 451.4 428.9 158.0 47.1 26.4 14.1 166.0 4.0 13.2 22.5
         Q4 459.7 436.7 158.0 48.5 26.7 14.2 171.9 4.1 13.3 23.0
2013          Q1 467.6 444.2 159.4 49.0 26.8 14.6 176.8 4.2 13.5 23.4
         Q2 468.3 444.7 158.6 50.6 26.7 14.7 176.5 4.2 13.5 23.6
         Q3 474.6 450.7 158.6 51.4 27.3 14.8 180.7 4.3 13.7 23.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.9 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 66.6
2006 1,781.9 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 71.92007 1,840.0 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 68.62008 1,769.2 14.7 75.1 136.0 1,394.8 1,141.2 253.6 74.6 74.02009 1,836.2 16.2 71.5 136.2 1,459.5 1,211.6 248.0 72.7 80.0
2010 1,958.8 17.8 71.8 137.6 1,573.2 1,319.1 254.1 71.3 87.1
2011 2,008.7 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,626.5 1,362.1 264.4 71.5 109.8
2012 2,151.4 22.1 77.3 158.9 1,699.4 1,432.0 267.4 71.2 122.5
2011          Q2 1,988.3 18.1 71.7 137.8 1,610.4 1,348.8 261.7 71.8 78.5
         Q3 1,999.2 17.5 71.6 108.3 1,621.5 1,358.6 262.8 71.8 108.5
         Q4 2,008.7 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,626.5 1,362.1 264.4 71.5 109.8
2012          Q1 2,056.8 19.2 73.1 134.6 1,652.5 1,384.1 268.4 71.8 105.5
         Q2 2,075.4 18.5 75.6 123.0 1,666.9 1,399.3 267.6 71.5 119.9
         Q3 2,120.7 18.9 77.5 141.1 1,682.7 1,415.7 267.0 71.3 129.2
         Q4 2,151.4 22.1 77.3 158.9 1,699.4 1,432.0 267.4 71.2 122.5
2013          Q1 2,191.6 21.0 78.4 169.7 1,736.2 1,461.5 274.7 72.7 113.6
         Q2 2,186.4 17.8 79.0 172.1 1,748.9 1,474.6 274.3 73.0 95.6
         Q3 2,204.7 16.5 79.7 177.0 1,763.0 1,488.9 274.1 73.3 95.2
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.9 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 82.0 55.2
2006 1,499.8 8.4 89.8 202.1 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 59.1
2007 1,528.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.4 75.7 57.6
2008 1,453.5 14.7 72.3 130.7 1,094.5 841.3 253.2 72.2 69.0
2009 1,489.8 16.2 68.3 130.7 1,135.4 887.8 247.5 70.8 68.3
2010 1,550.3 17.8 68.2 131.8 1,190.9 937.3 253.7 69.2 72.3
2011 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.0 960.1 263.9 69.6 94.3
2012 1,691.7 22.1 73.2 151.9 1,276.1 1,009.2 266.9 69.3 99.0
2011          Q2 1,572.6 18.1 68.0 132.1 1,218.3 957.1 261.2 69.7 66.5
         Q3 1,579.5 17.5 67.8 103.7 1,224.6 962.3 262.4 69.7 96.1
         Q4 1,580.3 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.0 960.1 263.9 69.6 94.3
2012          Q1 1,620.1 19.2 69.2 128.8 1,243.8 975.9 267.9 69.9 89.1
         Q2 1,634.3 18.5 71.7 117.7 1,254.3 987.2 267.2 69.6 102.6
         Q3 1,669.3 18.9 73.5 134.9 1,265.5 999.0 266.6 69.4 107.1
         Q4 1,691.7 22.1 73.2 151.9 1,276.1 1,009.2 266.9 69.3 99.0
2013          Q1 1,723.9 21.0 74.2 162.2 1,305.3 1,031.0 274.3 70.8 90.4
         Q2 1,718.1 17.8 74.8 164.4 1,314.4 1,040.6 273.8 71.0 75.6
         Q3 1,730.1 16.5 75.5 169.1 1,323.9 1,050.2 273.6 71.3 73.9
Pension funds 5
2005 260.0 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 11.4
2006 282.2 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.8
2007 311.9 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.0
2008 315.8 − 2.8 5.3 300.3 299.9 0.4 2.4 5.0
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.5 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.6
2010 408.6 − 3.6 5.8 382.2 381.8 0.4 2.1 14.8
2011 428.4 − 3.8 4.8 402.4 402.0 0.5 1.9 15.4
2012 459.7 − 4.1 7.0 423.3 422.8 0.5 1.9 23.4
2011          Q2 415.7 − 3.7 5.8 392.2 391.7 0.5 2.1 12.0
         Q3 419.7 − 3.7 4.6 396.8 396.4 0.5 2.1 12.4
         Q4 428.4 − 3.8 4.8 402.4 402.0 0.5 1.9 15.4
2012          Q1 436.7 − 3.9 5.8 408.7 408.2 0.5 1.9 16.4
         Q2 441.1 − 3.9 5.4 412.6 412.1 0.5 1.9 17.3
         Q3 451.4 − 4.0 6.2 417.2 416.7 0.5 1.9 22.2
         Q4 459.7 − 4.1 7.0 423.3 422.8 0.5 1.9 23.4
2013          Q1 467.6 − 4.1 7.5 430.9 430.4 0.5 1.9 23.2
         Q2 468.3 − 4.2 7.6 434.5 434.0 0.5 2.0 20.0
         Q3 474.6 − 4.2 7.9 439.1 438.7 0.5 2.0 21.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provi- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
sions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2014
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 71,224 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 71,763 91,170 12,973 8,645 69,552 − 19,945
2010 147,209 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 148,420 97,342 − 103,271 22,967 177,646 49,867
2011 36,526 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 22,952 − 17,872 − 94,793 36,805 40,117 54,398
2012 53,791 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 75,208 8,821 − 42,017 − 3,573 54,409 44,970
2013 − 12,581 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 89,034 21,716 − 25,778 − 12,708 60,202 − 34,297
2013          Feb 22,401 17,420 869 7,068 9,483 4,981 866 − 5,501 − 1,773 8,140 21,535
         Mar − 10,100 − 15,782 − 19,212 5,979 − 2,549 5,682 − 1,617 − 6,735 − 511 5,629 − 8,483
         Apr 7,750 917 − 5,520 2,476 3,960 6,833 12,671 − 2,027 − 1,400 16,098 − 4,921
         May 17,315 − 2,884 − 9,809 421 6,504 20,199 2,426 − 3,962 − 1,050 7,438 14,890
         June − 14,964 − 17,431 − 9,542 − 5,473 − 2,416 2,466 9,797 3,451 − 1,280 7,626 − 24,761         July − 19,328 − 28,318 − 12,903 − 2,594 − 12,821 8,990 − 3,087 − 3,106 − 796 815 − 16,241
         Aug 810 − 6,470 − 12,968 70 6,428 7,280 − 2,162 1,447 − 1,568 − 2,041 2,972
         Sep − 4,587 − 4,784 − 560 − 1,743 − 2,481 198 − 6,311 − 6,077 − 351 117 1,724
         Oct 7,218 5,582 − 5,401 5,716 5,266 1,636 6,195 − 3,717 − 751 10,663 1,023
         Nov 18,985 4,316 − 8,410 − 1,251 13,977 14,669 6,311 7,717 − 167 − 1,239 12,674
         Dec − 39,233 − 39,871 − 24,847 − 4,973 − 10,051 638 − 6,739 − 4,647 − 1,215 − 877 − 32,494
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 36,448 20,049 16,398 41,347 7,340 34,007 − 4,900
2011 25,549 21,713 3,835 39,081 670 38,411 − 13,533
2012 18,808 5,120 13,688 17,663 10,259 7,404 1,144
2013 29,624 10,106 19,517 24,793 11,991 12,802 4,832
2013          Feb − 1,675 306 − 1,981 − 5,405 − 5,352 − 53 3,730
         Mar 5,921 40 5,881 9,432 7,851 1,581 − 3,511
         Apr 34 93 − 59 22,020 18,391 3,629 − 21,986
         May 10,665 5,560 5,105 − 3,214 − 10,712 7,498 13,879
         June 2,369 1,544 825 − 7,533 − 8,772 1,239 9,902
         July 7,449 109 7,340 6,177 4,697 1,480 1,272
         Aug 918 158 760 − 271 − 855 584 1,189
         Sep 1,602 188 1,414 242 3,053 − 2,811 1,360
         Oct 1,374 181 1,193 5,119 − 242 5,361 − 3,745
         Nov − 1,316 153 − 1,469 − 4,625 347 − 4,972 3,309
         Dec − 2,396 1,042 − 3,438 − 7,489 − 2,257 − 5,232 5,094
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2013          May 124,909 77,880 2,159 919 54,712 20,090 5,770 41,259 −
         June 116,746 74,753 3,072 1,595 57,201 12,885 7,268 34,725 −
         July 135,973 93,607 1,571 1,292 73,092 17,652 5,442 36,923 −
         Aug 112,069 71,290 2,809 2,970 50,358 15,153 3,725 37,054 −
         Sep 110,040 61,322 1,038 644 45,215 14,426 3,476 45,242 −
         Oct 128,631 81,762 1,466 1,003 67,675 11,617 7,351 39,518 −
         Nov 128,109 79,061 1,435 1,276 63,765 12,585 7,094 41,954 −
         Dec 87,498 64,466 2,593 83 52,602 9,189 3,694 19,338 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −
2013          May 33,273 16,385 1,140 619 6,906 7,719 3,763 13,125 −
         June 33,900 16,014 2,823 1,270 6,479 5,442 5,659 12,228 −
         July 28,732 10,135 791 767 2,816 5,761 4,382 14,215 −
         Aug 28,577 11,793 1,891 2,931 1,909 5,062 1,789 14,996 −         Sep 31,256 13,633 474 401 6,944 5,814 2,127 15,496 −
         Oct 37,193 15,712 894 1,003 9,319 4,496 5,682 15,799 −
         Nov 34,143 9,962 995 1,266 2,947 4,754 3,910 20,271 −         Dec 15,389 5,600 1,003 83 1,140 3,375 3,013 6,775 −
Net sales  6 
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,057
2013          May 5,999 − 8,363 − 2,268 − 2,090 − 3,310 − 695 − 2,038 16,400 −
         June − 25,069 − 12,488 375 − 873 − 2,120 − 9,869 − 3,102 − 9,479 − 9
         July − 23,544 − 11,919 − 1,224 − 1,029 − 5,673 − 3,993 − 2,324 − 9,301 − 201
         Aug 1,865 − 11,635 − 2,962 − 1,543 423 − 7,552 346 13,154 −         Sep − 5,438 − 3,138 − 1,208 − 1,649 5,047 − 5,328 − 1,167 − 1,134 − 994
         Oct − 491 − 6,757 − 1,376 − 2,986 5,398 − 7,793 5,348 918 −
         Nov 13,485 − 6,268 − 452 − 1,779 − 1,315 − 2,722 1,627 18,127 − 15         Dec − 38,645 − 26,745 − 258 − 2,089 − 14,217 − 10,180 − 3,261 − 8,639 − 264
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2014
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2013          June 3,198,173 1,354,878 135,122 120,366 580,473 518,917 221,281 1,622,013 11,898
         July 3,174,629 1,342,959 133,898 119,337 574,800 514,925 218,958 1,612,712 11,697
         Aug 3,176,418 1,331,248 130,935 117,794 575,223 507,296 219,303 1,625,866 11,697
         Sep 3,170,979 1,328,110 129,728 116,145 580,270 501,968 218,137 1,624,732 10,702
         Oct 3,170,488 1,321,353 128,352 113,159 585,668 494,175 223,485 1,625,650 10,702
         Nov 3,183,974 1,315,085 127,900 111,379 584,353 491,453 225,112 1,643,777 10,687
         Dec 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2013 
1,178,917 554,755 50,939 55,597 226,878 221,341 52,280 571,883 3,875    less than 2
718,870 348,530 39,927 28,416 148,569 131,618 36,977 333,361 2,991 2 to less than 4
412,377 164,224 20,539 14,426 83,422 45,838 31,313 216,839 278 4 to less than 6
286,886 91,338 10,702 4,044 54,069 22,524 21,315 174,233 156 6 to less than 8
217,739 51,518 3,955 4,001 23,868 19,694 14,525 151,695 523 8 to less than 10
75,366 18,088 1,470 2,154 7,285 7,178 5,726 51,552 1,602 10 to less than 15
47,168 16,062 11 278 10,313 5,460 3,004 28,102 30 15 to less than 20
208,004 43,822 100 373 15,731 27,618 56,708 107,474 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2013          June 171,830 851 667 248 332 − − 7 − 163 − 225 1,202,614
         July 171,798 − 33 101 19 1 − − 1 − 79 − 73 1,242,630
         Aug 171,488 − 310 153 43 9 − − 1 7 − 522 1,237,272
         Sep 171,651 163 149 113 1 − − 56 − 24 − 20 1,291,028
         Oct 171,643 − 8 88 8 − − − 60 − 18 − 26 1,358,708
         Nov 171,811 167 63 5 127 − 2 − 13 − 16 1,410,435
         Dec 171,741 − 70 280 − 0 − − 8 − 317 − 27 1,432,658
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2013          Aug 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.4 2.2 3.5 132.71 106.92 398.50 8,103.15
         Sep 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.5 2.3 3.9 133.66 107.48 421.41 8,594.40
         Oct 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.2 3.8 134.19 107.74 443.20 9,033.92
         Nov 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.7 1.3 2.1 3.6 133.97 107.47 460.21 9,405.30         Dec 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.2 3.5 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014          Jan 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.4 2.3 3.4 134.32 108.06 455.15 9,306.48
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,464 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,558 102,867 3,873 6,290 98,994 15,270 3,5982011 47,064 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,843 40,416 − 7,576 − 694 47,992 2,538 6,6472012 111,502 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,560 115,372 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,434 23,122 − 3,8692013 122,010 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 30,673 115,952 771 100 115,181 30,572 6,057
2013          June 4,279 4,779 497 175 474 772 4,282 − 499 4,941 − 803 − 982 5,744 483 − 661         July 17,120 12,845 3,863 − 2 2,856 631 8,983 4,274 16,515 − 141 − 232 16,656 4,506 605
         Aug 3,262 1,764 − 1,122 22 − 524 − 608 2,885 1,498 3,312 − 1,227 − 1,316 4,539 2,814 − 50         Sep 6,137 4,206 498 − 88 419 19 3,708 1,931 5,476 − 14 435 5,490 1,496 660
         Oct 12,590 5,849 1,824 − 105 2,156 − 470 4,025 6,740 10,450 1,332 1,608 9,118 5,132 2,139
         Nov 9,706 8,784 − 2,882 − 94 − 3,139 313 11,666 922 6,775 737 418 6,038 504 2,931         Dec 14,442 13,930 520 15 − 40 398 13,410 512 13,941 − 1,662 − 1,537 15,603 2,049 501
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2012 2013 
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 72.7 66.7 86.4 21.1 22.2 19.9 23.3 8.3 17.9 11.4
Debt securities 2 − 11.4 − 1.9 − 17.0 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 1.0
Shares 13.4 16.1 − 3.4 − 1.0 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 2.6 − 0.6 − 4.3
Other equity 3.0 3.0 3.1 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
Mutual funds shares 10.0 − 14.5 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 1.1 5.0 10.5 3.9 2.8
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 71.4 45.7 71.1 24.6 16.6 12.9 17.0 24.8 16.9 12.4
short-term claims − 1.3 0.6 2.3 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.6
longer-term claims 72.7 45.2 68.8 23.9 16.0 12.3 16.5 24.0 16.3 11.8
Claims from companypension commitments 7.8 11.1 11.9 2.9 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.9
Other claims 
4 − 12.6 17.5 0.3 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 5.3 1.6 0.4 6.6
Total 154.3 143.8 152.5 49.9 38.5 30.0 34.1 47.0 36.9 31.7
  II Financing
Loans 5.1 11.5 15.0 − 1.1 6.7 6.1 3.2 − 3.7 5.8 8.6
short-term loans − 2.3 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0
longer-term loans 7.3 13.6 16.0 − 1.0 5.9 7.0 4.0 − 2.1 6.1 8.7
Other liabilities 0.2 1.6 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 0.0
Total 5.3 13.1 16.0 − 0.6 6.8 6.2 3.6 − 3.7 5.9 8.7
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 7.3 14.1 17.9 − 21.6 − 10.0 15.2 34.3 − 42.0 − 9.8 43.7
Debt securities 2 − 0.1 4.9 − 2.6 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 1.4 − 2.1 1.2
Financial derivatives 27.8 14.7 10.1 − 0.3 4.2 2.2 4.0 1.5 3.2 1.3
Shares 24.9 17.1 19.9 4.8 − 7.2 6.5 15.8 10.6 5.7 5.6
Other equity 54.1 29.3 24.4 7.5 11.2 9.7 − 4.1 11.6 3.0 6.5
Mutual funds shares 8.8 8.2 − 0.2 − 5.2 1.0 0.7 3.3 4.5 − 1.0 2.1
Loans 32.5 11.0 − 6.5 3.5 0.4 − 8.9 − 1.4 5.1 − 1.4 4.2
short-term loans 12.2 9.1 − 8.9 1.7 2.0 − 9.5 − 3.0 10.0 − 2.1 2.8
longer-term loans 20.2 1.9 2.4 1.8 − 1.6 0.6 1.7 − 5.0 0.7 1.5
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 − 0.6 0.6 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4
short-term claims − 0.6 0.6 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 38.2 23.2 31.3 4.9 − 30.0 32.1 24.3 24.0 − 1.3 46.3
Total 192.7 123.1 95.6 − 6.0 − 30.1 57.4 74.3 17.0 − 3.3 111.1
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 4.2 7.6 18.7 3.1 3.9 7.1 4.7 9.1 3.2 − 0.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.2 7.4 2.9 0.6 1.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 0.1 − 0.3
Other equity 13.1 13.8 2.2 2.1 1.3 − 5.1 3.9 1.8 2.3 2.0
Loans 7.6 33.4 − 12.4 − 6.8 3.1 16.4 − 25.1 24.7 14.2 − 17.2
short-term loans − 10.4 18.0 − 17.7 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 8.3 11.8 10.1 − 16.3
longer-term loans 18.0 15.3 5.3 − 3.0 4.7 20.3 − 16.8 12.9 4.1 − 0.8
Claims from companypension commitments 2.6 5.8 6.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6
Other liabilities 66.1 42.0 8.7 − 13.2 1.7 9.6 10.7 − 0.6 − 16.0 17.1
Total 100.8 109.9 26.7 − 12.7 12.5 30.0 − 3.1 37.2 5.4 2.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2012 2013 
Item
2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,860.8 1,927.5 2,014.9 1,948.6 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9 2,023.0 2,040.9 2,052.1
Debt securities 2 254.1 247.1 238.2 249.6 245.4 244.8 238.2 231.7 221.9 220.0
Shares 243.5 221.5 259.2 252.4 229.9 250.0 259.2 267.8 264.4 279.5
Other equity 182.3 189.0 198.7 190.5 196.9 197.9 198.7 199.6 196.9 196.4
Mutual funds shares 435.4 394.9 420.1 410.9 401.7 414.8 420.1 435.0 430.8 439.7
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,358.1 1,401.1 1,475.7 1,420.7 1,437.7 1,455.2 1,475.7 1,500.5 1,517.4 1,529.8
short-term claims 70.8 71.4 73.7 72.0 72.6 73.2 73.7 74.5 75.2 75.8
longer-term claims 1,287.3 1,329.6 1,401.9 1,348.6 1,365.1 1,382.0 1,401.9 1,425.9 1,442.2 1,453.9
Claims from company
pension commitments 284.3 295.4 307.3 298.3 301.4 304.3 307.3 310.2 313.3 316.2
Other claims 4 39.0 38.4 37.1 38.3 38.2 37.9 37.1 37.0 37.0 36.7
Total 4,657.6 4,714.8 4,951.0 4,809.2 4,822.7 4,896.3 4,951.0 5,004.8 5,022.5 5,070.4
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,523.1 1,538.6 1,552.5 1,536.7 1,543.0 1,549.0 1,552.5 1,548.9 1,554.7 1,562.6
short-term loans 75.6 73.9 72.6 73.8 74.4 73.1 72.6 70.2 69.9 69.8
longer-term loans 1,447.5 1,464.7 1,479.9 1,463.0 1,468.7 1,475.9 1,479.9 1,478.6 1,484.7 1,492.8
Other liabilities 11.7 13.4 14.8 15.3 15.1 15.0 14.8 16.0 15.6 16.1
Total 1,534.8 1,551.9 1,567.4 1,552.0 1,558.1 1,564.1 1,567.4 1,564.9 1,570.3 1,578.7
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 450.1 460.5 506.5 452.6 453.1 468.3 506.5 461.8 452.7 492.0
Debt securities 2 48.1 52.6 51.9 53.9 53.6 53.9 51.9 53.0 50.3 51.9
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 917.0 811.8 952.3 906.4 841.6 898.4 952.3 986.1 948.7 1,005.1
Other equity 352.7 389.8 428.0 398.8 422.0 432.2 428.0 439.9 435.3 438.9
Mutual funds shares 119.3 123.1 129.0 120.5 119.6 123.9 129.0 134.1 131.9 135.6
Loans 376.6 387.6 381.2 391.1 391.5 382.5 381.2 386.2 384.8 389.0
short-term loans 255.6 264.6 255.8 266.3 268.3 258.8 255.8 265.8 263.7 266.5
longer-term loans 121.0 123.0 125.4 124.8 123.2 123.7 125.4 120.4 121.1 122.6
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.3 41.9 43.3 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3
short-term claims 41.3 41.9 43.3 42.2 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 766.1 814.6 832.3 818.5 814.4 826.3 832.3 864.4 844.3 855.4
Total 3,071.1 3,082.1 3,324.4 3,184.0 3,138.3 3,228.4 3,324.4 3,369.3 3,292.1 3,412.2
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 134.8 110.7 130.9 115.6 117.2 124.6 130.9 139.6 141.3 137.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,301.8 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,282.5 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6 1,430.9 1,389.6 1,503.6
Other equity 716.9 730.7 732.9 732.8 734.1 729.0 732.9 734.7 737.0 739.0
Loans 1,338.0 1,385.3 1,382.6 1,378.9 1,381.3 1,391.5 1,382.6 1,402.1 1,416.5 1,411.0
short-term loans 419.1 433.3 414.6 429.0 426.7 422.7 414.6 426.0 436.2 432.2
longer-term loans 918.9 952.0 968.0 949.8 954.5 968.8 968.0 976.1 980.3 978.8
Claims from companypension commitments 229.2 235.0 241.5 236.6 238.2 239.9 241.5 243.2 244.8 246.5
Other liabilities 871.6 879.7 891.4 877.6 891.2 896.9 891.4 905.5 871.9 889.7
Total 4,592.3 4,451.9 4,752.9 4,623.9 4,528.4 4,676.8 4,752.9 4,855.9 4,801.0 4,927.3
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2007 + 5.8 − 18.6 + 2.5 + 11.1 + 10.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 73.7 − 38.6 − 18.4 − 2.5 − 14.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 104.2 − 82.9 − 20.1 − 5.2 + 4.1 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 22.0 − 27.3 − 11.3 + 1.4 + 15.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.4 − 14.4 − 6.8 + 5.2 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 pe − 1.9 − 8.5 − 3.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
2011          H2  p − 17.7 − 11.4 − 10.2 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.3
2012          H1  p + 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 11.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  p − 5.8 − 6.5 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
2013          H1  pe + 10.3 − 2.7 + 2.6 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2007 1,583.7 978.1 497.8 123.4 1.6 65.2 40.3 20.5 5.1 0.1
2008 1,652.8 1,007.8 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,769.9 1,075.9 578.5 130.0 1.3 74.5 45.3 24.4 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,057.3 1,313.6 625.1 135.1 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,086.8 1,323.6 640.2 139.3 1.3 80.0 50.7 24.5 5.3 0.1
2012 p 2,160.2 1,368.8 664.2 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2012          Q1 p 2,116.7 1,344.5 646.8 142.6 1.3 80.5 51.1 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 p 2,162.6 1,373.5 665.8 141.9 1.3 81.9 52.0 25.2 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,153.3 1,356.9 671.9 141.3 1.3 81.1 51.1 25.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 p 2,160.2 1,368.8 664.2 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,148.3 1,368.8 656.3 144.0 1.2 80.5 51.3 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,146.8 1,376.4 645.7 142.2 1.1 79.8 51.1 24.0 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,126.8 1,360.4 638.7 143.1 1.1 78.4 50.1 23.5 5.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- ures were released for the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2013 half-year figures
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht are not directly comparable with the annual figures. 2Including the €4.4 billion pro-
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The ceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac- on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
counts. In connection with the publication of the 2013 annual figures, no revised fig-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2007 1,062.3 558.4 400.9 103.0 1,056.8 579.4 178.2 68.5 36.0 194.6 + 5.5 971.3
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 1,072.7 548.1 410.8 113.8 1,146.3 623.6 191.0 63.5 41.6 226.6 − 73.6 969.1
2010 p 1,089.8 549.9 421.2 118.7 2 1,194.1 633.2 195.7 63.5 41.6 2 260.2 2 − 104.3 981.3
2011 p 1,157.2 592.8 437.0 127.4 1,178.7 633.2 199.5 65.7 43.6 236.7 − 21.5 1,040.3
2012 p 1,193.8 617.7 448.9 127.1 1,191.5 643.4 203.8 63.8 41.4 239.1 + 2.3 1,077.3
2013 pe 1,223.1 636.9 458.6 127.6 1,224.8 664.5 208.3 60.0 42.5 249.5 − 1.7 1,106.2
as a percentage of GDP
2007 43.7 23.0 16.5 4.2 43.5 23.9 7.3 2.8 1.5 8.0 + 0.2 40.0
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 45.2 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.3 26.3 8.0 2.7 1.8 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.7 22.0 16.9 4.8 2 47.9 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.4 2 − 4.2 39.3
2011 p 44.3 22.7 16.7 4.9 45.2 24.3 7.6 2.5 1.7 9.1 − 0.8 39.9
2012 p 44.8 23.2 16.8 4.8 44.7 24.1 7.6 2.4 1.6 9.0 + 0.1 40.4
2013 pe 44.7 23.3 16.8 4.7 44.8 24.3 7.6 2.2 1.6 9.1 − 0.1 40.4
Percentage growth rates
2007 + 5.1 + 8.9 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 6.7 + 1.5 . + 5.0
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 − 1.5 − 4.3 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 7.2 + 7.7 . − 2.5
2010 p + 1.6 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 4.9 − 9.0 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.2 + 4.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 1.0 . + 3.6
2013 pe + 2.5 + 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 3.3 + 2.2 − 6.0 + 2.9 + 4.3 . + 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2005 568.9 452.1 31.3 620.6 172.1 245.3 64.0 33.0 14.3 − 51.7 467.8 471.3 − 3.4 947.4 1,002.5 − 55.1
2006 589.9 488.4 18.8 626.2 169.7 252.1 64.4 33.7 11.6 − 36.4 486.3 466.6 + 19.7 987.2 1,003.8 − 16.62007 643.1 538.2 18.1 644.0 176.5 256.5 66.0 33.7 9.5 − 1.0 475.3 466.5 + 8.8 1,023.9 1,016.0 + 7.82008 665.9 561.2 13.9 674.7 180.2 272.7 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 8.8 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.3 1,057.6 − 2.32009 623.0 524.0 7.1 712.9 187.1 286.5 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 89.9 492.0 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.3 − 103.9
2010 
pe 635.0 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.6 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.7 516.5 512.8 + 3.7 1,034.0 1,109.0 − 75.0
2011 pe 712.8 573.4 30.6 737.4 208.3 283.2 60.0 42.4 22.9 − 24.6 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,127.3 1,137.0 − 9.7
2012 pe 745.1 600.0 14.6 771.1 218.9 285.5 70.4 43.3 25.5 − 26.0 535.5 519.2 + 16.3 1,170.6 1,180.3 − 9.8
2011          Q1 p 162.4 134.9 4.1 183.1 49.7 73.8 21.2 6.3 4.6 − 20.7 127.3 127.2 + 0.1 260.5 281.0 − 20.5
         Q2 p 189.5 145.6 18.6 172.6 50.0 68.0 10.9 8.7 8.7 + 16.9 130.3 126.2 + 4.1 292.4 271.4 + 21.0
         Q3 p 162.6 136.6 2.7 182.6 50.9 67.2 18.8 10.8 4.5 − 20.0 127.9 125.8 + 2.0 264.3 282.2 − 17.9
         Q4 p 196.1 156.3 5.0 196.6 55.8 72.6 8.9 15.3 5.0 − 0.6 140.1 132.0 + 8.1 307.6 300.1 + 7.6
2012          Q1 p 174.0 142.9 2.5 192.5 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 18.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.8 292.6 − 17.8
         Q2 p 190.4 150.4 2.7 179.8 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 10.6 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.2 281.5 + 14.7
         Q3 p 178.1 147.5 4.3 182.4 53.7 63.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 4.3 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.6 285.6 − 3.0
         Q4 p 200.3 159.4 4.9 213.8 58.7 76.6 7.2 16.5 14.9 − 13.6 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 314.5 318.0 − 3.5
2013          Q1 p 177.8 149.0 2.6 187.2 53.5 74.8 20.6 5.9 2.9 − 9.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.2 294.3 − 13.1
         Q2 p 193.5 155.0 4.8 184.0 54.4 68.6 11.4 8.4 8.0 + 9.5 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 301.8 291.7 + 10.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2010 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2005 250.0 281.5 − 31.5 237.4 259.6 − 22.2 151.3 153.2 − 1.9
2006 254.6 282.8 − 28.2 250.3 260.1 − 9.8 160.1 157.4 + 2.72007 278.1 292.8 − 14.7 273.1 265.6 + 7.6 169.7 161.5 + 8.22008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.42009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.3 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 
pe 307.1 324.8 − 17.7 304.0 315.3 − 11.3 185.6 187.0 − 1.4
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 321.3 − 9.3 199.8 198.6 + 1.2
2011          Q1 p 65.4 84.5 − 19.1 74.1 75.6 − 1.5 37.1 42.5 − 5.3
         Q2 p 76.6 73.5 + 3.1 76.0 75.8 + 0.2 45.4 44.3 + 1.1
         Q3 p 72.6 84.8 − 12.2 71.9 75.1 − 3.2 46.4 46.6 − 0.2
         Q4 p 92.5 82.0 + 10.5 81.2 87.5 − 6.3 54.7 51.9 + 2.8
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.9 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
2013          Q1 p 67.3 80.2 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.4 77.5 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.3 + 3.3
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.0 − 0.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that government sector, excluding special purpose associations. Annual figures up to and
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- including 2010: excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts andcluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and special purpose associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 ... 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 ... ... 27,775
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,933 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,348 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,901 − 142 7,554
         Q4 ... 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 ... ... 6,813
2012          Dec . 67,793 38,437 26,796 2,560 . . 2,382
2013          Dec . 69,982 38,079 28,090 3,813 . . 2,271
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2012          Dec 72,749 38,150 19,572 10,735 5,706 2,137 17,130 12,886 4,243 1,609 14,387 1,127 346 4,955
2013          Dec 75,248 40,672 20,756 11,517 6,207 2,193 17,250 13,324 3,925 1,567 14,137 1,290 332 5,266
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2013: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2013: 22.3:77.7. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 ... ... ...
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,856 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,265 10,312 3,656         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 ... ... ...
2012          Dec 8,381 1,839 2,111 499 540 574 219 224 . 605 315 207 . . .2013          Dec 8,281 1,649 2,244 513 567 428 216 239 . 650 444 196 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 
p 260,076 181,981 77,044 258,010 219,877 15,521 + 2,066 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2011          Q1 60,804 41,608 18,902 62,188 53,176 3,742 − 1,384 18,063 17,069 819 74 101 4,482         Q2 63,452 44,307 18,855 62,058 52,920 3,731 + 1,394 19,704 18,507 1,019 78 100 4,475         Q3 62,354 43,109 18,902 62,844 53,341 3,761 − 490 19,959 19,266 519 79 94 4,445         Q4 67,748 48,391 19,030 62,823 53,371 3,774 + 4,925 25,339 22,226 2,919 79 114 4,410
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2011          Q1 10,259 5,853 46 3,666 9,583 4,157 685 2,255 − 186 1,205 + 676 −
         Q2 8,802 6,358 − 5 1,605 8,246 3,477 353 2,134 − 175 1,213 + 556 −
         Q3 7,467 6,205 − 4 305 7,450 3,177 168 1,857 26 187 1,229 + 17 −
         Q4 11,036 7,017 − 1 2,470 12,245 2,965 119 2,122 4,484 134 1,443 − 1,210 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,758 158,594 7,200 170,823 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,947 − 1,065
2010 6 179,524 160,792 15,700 175,803 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,553 + 3,721
2011 189,034 170,860 15,300 179,597 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,486 + 9,437
2012 193,291 176,366 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,002
2011          Q1 45,339 40,871 3,825 44,392 15,075 7,158 7,361 2,893 2,528 2,210 2,173 + 947
         Q2 46,887 42,370 3,825 44,955 14,601 7,239 7,372 3,001 2,834 2,106 2,263 + 1,931
         Q3 46,865 42,298 3,825 44,432 14,594 7,236 7,160 2,768 2,762 2,069 2,292 + 2,433
         Q4 49,866 45,291 3,825 45,878 14,418 7,382 7,161 2,997 3,117 2,125 2,682 + 3,988
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2011          Q1 5,306 5,269 5,457 750 2,408 1,165 216 277 − 150
         Q2 5,519 5,496 5,396 713 2,417 1,173 210 263 + 123         Q3 5,513 5,486 5,551 774 2,442 1,191 221 255 − 38         Q4 5,904 5,877 5,526 742 2,442 1,216 223 240 + 378
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 400,100 21 385,070 942,900
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,800 102 411,934 979,2002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,406 4,440 426,900 70 290,596 1,069,4002013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601
2011          Q1 + 76,394 + 15,958 − 607 − 5,206 2011          Q1 1,750,580 4,440 413,000 87 370,453 962,600
         Q2 + 77,158 + 10,392 − 49 + 26,625          Q2 1,763,413 4,440 405,100 82 361,391 992,400
         Q3 + 59,256 − 8,152 − 4,177 − 22,608          Q3 1,759,638 4,440 388,600 82 380,316 986,200
         Q4 + 51,764 − 12,308 − 42 − 7,847          Q4 1,752,476 4,440 356,800 102 411,934 979,200
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,766,324 4,440 399,000 91 353,793 1,009,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,780,408 4,440 410,800 92 324,176 1,040,900
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,772,573 4,440 430,300 92 284,242 1,053,500
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,791,406 4,440 426,900 70 290,596 1,069,400
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 
p 1,801,773 4,440 430,100 20 261,013 1,106,200
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 p 1,805,465 4,440 424,400 23 286,303 1,090,300
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 pe 1,793,211 4,440 422,700 28 274,343 1,091,700
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2007 1,540,381 39,510 329,108 177,394 10,287 574,512 . 329,588 68 75,396 4,443 76
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,757 1,975 302,596 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,694 2,154 292,379 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q3 1,772,573 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,313 1,893 287,023 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,791,406 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 666,998 1,725 288,993 70 113,364 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,722 1,580 289,055 20 111,515 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,805,465 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,194 1,516 294,688 23 111,634 4,440 2
         Q3 pe 1,793,211 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 671,915 1,464 278,637 28 111,886 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10,11
2007 939,988 37,385 102,083 177,394 10,287 574,156 . 22,829 − 11,336 4,443 75
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
State government
2007 484,373 2,125 227,025 .... 194,956 2 60,264 . 1
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,322 1,949 302,720 .... 137,141 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,301 1,425 303,722 .... 133,278 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 p 537,836 270 307,046 .... 130,521 10 99,989 . 1
Local government12
2007 115,920 . − . . 256 . 111,803 66 3,796 . .
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 175 . 121,895 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 181 . 128,531 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q3 135,922 . − . . 181 . 130,771 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 137,552 . − . . 223 . 134,116 18 3,195 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,881 . − . . 223 . 134,445 18 3,195 . .
         Q2 p 136,111 . − . . 223 . 132,675 18 3,195 . .
         Q3 pe 136,306 . − . . 223 . 132,870 18 3,195 . .
Special funds7,8,13
2007 100 . − − . 100 . − − − . .
2008 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2009 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2010 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2011 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2012          Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
2013          Q1 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q2 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q3 − . − − . − . − − − . .
         Q4 − . − − . − . − − − . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8On 1 July 2007 cen-
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- tral government assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the ERP Special Fund.
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from From that date on, the aforementioned special fund is recorded under central govern-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities ment. 9From December 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding Fund. 10From March 2009, including debt of the Investment and Repayment
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the Fund. 11From January 2011, including debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Insti-
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- tutions. 12Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. Data other than
ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from year-end figures have been estimated. 13ERP Special Fund (up to the end of June
housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR 2007), German Unity Fund (up to the end of 2004) and Indemnification Fund. stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2012   2013
  2011   2012   2013   2011   2012   2013   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.8 112.3 112.3 5.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 4.3 0.5 0.8Construction 106.7 104.2 102.9 4.6 − 2.4 − 1.2 1.6 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 9.0 − 0.6 1.3Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.0 104.6 105.5 2.7 0.6 0.9 2.8 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 2.5 1.2 2.6Information and communication 146.9 149.9 151.6 8.4 2.0 1.1 2.8 2.2 2.7 0.5 1.8 2.1 0.9Financial and insuranceactivities 117.9 120.0 114.2 2.2 1.8 − 4.9 − 0.5 0.3 1.1 6.5 1.2 − 5.2 − 5.6Real estate activities 110.8 112.6 113.5 3.5 1.6 0.9 1.4 1.8 1.8 1.2 1.0 1.5 1.5Business services 
1 107.0 110.1 113.8 3.1 2.9 3.4 3.4 3.0 3.1 2.0 1.6 3.9 3.8
Public services, education and
health 110.5 111.5 111.6 1.5 0.9 0.2 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.6 0.0 0.5 0.4Other services 105.2 106.7 105.6 0.2 1.4 − 1.0 2.2 2.0 1.7 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1
Gross value added 111.1 112.0 112.4 3.3 0.8 0.4 1.9 0.8 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 0.8 1.1Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.5 3.3 0.7 0.4 1.8 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 105.7 106.5 107.5 2.3 0.8 0.9 1.7 0.8 0.0 0.5 − 0.4 1.2 1.5
Government consumption 111.3 112.3 113.6 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 0.6 0.3 0.6 0.4
Machinery and equipment 114.2 109.6 107.1 5.8 − 4.0 − 2.2 1.6 − 4.1 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 8.9 − 0.4 1.0Premises 112.3 110.8 110.5 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 3.1 − 8.0 0.5 2.2Other investment 
4 129.7 134.1 138.1 5.1 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.6 3.9 3.3 2.1 3.1 3.3
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.3 − 0.1 0.2
Domestic use 108.9 108.6 109.3 2.8 − 0.3 0.7 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 1.1 0.9 1.7Net exports 
6 . . . 0.7 0.9 − 0.3 0.5 1.3 1.3 0.8 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.5
Exports 136.0 140.3 141.2 8.0 3.2 0.6 4.6 4.6 3.2 0.5 − 2.9 1.1 0.7Imports 135.8 137.8 139.6 7.4 1.4 1.3 4.0 2.2 0.7 − 1.0 − 2.2 1.2 1.9
Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.5 3.3 0.7 0.4 1.8 0.6 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,498.4 1,533.9 1,572.0 4.4 2.4 2.5 3.5 2.1 1.7 2.2 1.2 3.0 3.3
Government consumption 499.6 514.4 534.6 2.5 3.0 3.9 3.3 2.4 3.1 3.1 3.5 3.7 3.2Machinery and equipment 181.2 175.0 171.3 6.2 − 3.4 − 2.2 2.1 − 3.5 − 5.9 − 5.5 − 8.7 − 0.4 1.0Premises 263.3 266.1 270.2 11.1 1.1 1.5 3.5 0.6 1.5 − 0.9 − 6.3 2.4 4.2Other investment 
4 28.6 29.4 30.0 4.5 2.6 2.1 1.9 2.7 2.8 2.8 1.9 2.1 2.2
Changes in inventories 5 3.2 − 10.3 − 8.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,474.3 2,508.5 2,569.1 5.1 1.4 2.4 3.0 0.7 0.8 1.1 0.6 2.8 3.4Net exports 135.7 157.9 166.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,321.4 1,381.0 1,382.4 11.2 4.5 0.1 6.0 6.0 4.5 1.7 − 2.9 0.8 − 0.2Imports 1,185.8 1,223.1 1,215.7 13.1 3.1 − 0.6 6.3 3.9 2.3 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.7 − 0.5
Gross domestic product 
2 2,609.9 2,666.4 2,735.8 4.6 2.2 2.6 3.1 1.9 1.9 1.8 0.4 3.4 3.3
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 108.4 110.2 111.9 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.5 1.7 1.7Gross domestic product 106.3 107.9 110.3 1.2 1.5 2.2 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.5 2.2Terms of trade 97.3 96.9 98.2 − 2.3 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 1.6 1.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,325.9 1,377.6 1,417.1 4.4 3.9 2.9 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.8 3.1 2.7 2.6Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 686.1 676.6 695.3 5.3 − 1.4 2.8 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 4.1 7.2 5.5
National income 2,012.0 2,054.3 2,112.3 4.7 2.1 2.8 2.9 2.3 1.8 1.5 0.4 4.1 3.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,668.9 2,730.1 2,798.7 4.7 2.3 2.5 3.0 2.3 2.0 1.9 0.5 3.5 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2013. Initial annual ing households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and
results for 2013: figures computed in January 2014. 1Professional, scientific, techni- entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net in-
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on crease in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy 3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2010 99.5 99.3 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.2
2011 106.7 107.0 95.6 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.8 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 x 106.2 105.4 95.4 107.7 104.5 113.8 100.2 100.2 108.3 106.0 113.2 115.1
 
2012          Q4 107.8 116.3 100.1 107.6 100.1 116.3 100.5 104.0 104.7 106.6 120.3 108.2
2013          Q1 101.0 77.0 101.6 104.3 102.3 108.8 100.7 97.2 105.6 103.8 105.9 113.6
         Q2 106.0 108.6 89.3 107.7 105.6 113.8 97.9 97.9 109.2 105.0 113.6 116.0
         Q3 107.3 117.2 91.4 108.0 106.2 112.8 98.9 100.8 109.4 106.6 112.1 114.1
         Q4 x 110.5 118.6 99.4 110.8 104.0 119.9 103.1 104.8 109.2 108.3 121.1 116.6
 
2012          Dec 100.8 109.9 100.7 99.5 85.8 113.5 87.1 98.4 91.2 97.0 129.8 87.7
2013          Jan 93.5 64.6 101.5 96.7 98.0 95.5 93.8 97.2 99.5 97.7 92.1 96.8
         Feb 98.0 73.3 96.2 101.7 98.8 107.8 98.3 92.6 102.6 99.6 104.4 114.9
         Mar 111.4 93.1 107.1 114.5 110.2 123.2 109.9 101.9 114.6 114.2 121.1 129.2
         Apr 104.9 104.7 92.2 106.5 103.8 113.0 97.6 97.2 107.4 101.7 111.5 118.4
         May 103.6 107.2 87.3 105.1 105.2 108.4 91.7 98.1 107.1 103.0 106.9 110.9
         June 109.4 113.9 88.3 111.4 107.7 119.9 104.5 98.4 113.0 110.4 122.3 118.8
         July 107.6 119.5 92.5 107.9 107.8 111.6 96.9 99.8 110.6 105.0 113.1 109.3
         Aug 101.8 112.9 89.1 101.9 101.7 104.4 85.6 98.6 102.9 102.7 102.8 105.0
         Sep 112.5 119.3 92.5 114.1 109.0 122.5 114.3 104.0 114.8 112.2 120.3 128.0
         Oct x 112.1 120.3 98.5 112.7 111.2 116.5 107.5 107.1 115.6 110.7 112.1 120.3
         Nov x 116.1 121.3 99.5 117.5 110.7 127.6 112.1 108.2 117.8 115.9 121.7 134.0
         Dec x,p 103.4 114.1 100.2 102.2 90.1 115.6 89.7 99.2 94.2 98.3 129.6 95.6
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.3 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.2 + 7.8 − 4.5 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 x + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 2.0
 
2012          Q4 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 7.1 + 0.7 − 3.6 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 4.3
2013          Q1 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 2.8 − 5.1 − 2.9
         Q2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 1.2 + 1.8
         Q3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 3.2 − 1.8 + 1.9
         Q4 x + 2.5 + 1.9 − 0.7 + 2.9 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.3 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 7.8
 
2012          Dec − 1.3 − 5.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.5 − 4.9 + 2.3 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.2 − 2.3
2013          Jan − 2.7 − 6.2 − 4.4 − 2.0 − 2.5 − 3.3 − 3.9 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 2.8 − 4.8 − 7.6
         Feb − 1.4 + 6.2 − 8.3 − 1.4 − 2.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.4 − 1.9 − 2.5
         Mar − 2.8 − 12.9 + 1.8 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 7.8 + 0.5
         Apr + 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 2.6 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 0.6 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 4.1
         May − 2.0 − 1.2 − 4.9 − 2.0 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 7.4 + 0.6 − 2.1 − 3.0 − 5.1 − 1.7
         June + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.9 + 1.0 + 2.9
         July − 1.5 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 3.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 6.6 − 4.2 − 5.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.7 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 + 9.0
         Sep + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 − 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 3.1
         Oct x + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.9
         Nov x + 3.8 + 1.7 − 0.8 + 4.6 + 4.3 + 5.6 + 4.9 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 10.7
         Dec x,p + 2.6 + 3.8 − 0.5 + 2.7 + 5.0 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 9.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December sector in the base year 2010. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Surveyties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013 p 108.9 + 1.9 102.8 − 1.3 113.8 + 4.2 104.8 + 1.0 99.7 + 0.3 106.5 + 1.1
2012          Dec 102.0 − 1.0 89.7 − 3.3 112.1 + 0.4 92.5 + 1.0 83.4 − 5.0 95.6 + 2.9
2013          Jan 103.4 − 1.9 103.9 − 5.6 103.3 + 0.9 100.9 − 1.2 95.9 − 3.8 102.6 − 0.4
         Feb 106.2 − 0.1 101.7 − 4.1 109.3 + 2.6 106.4 + 0.6 93.1 − 2.0 111.0 + 1.3
         Mar 119.2 − 0.3 114.3 + 0.3 123.9 − 0.3 109.1 − 3.5 109.1 − 2.7 109.0 − 3.9
         Apr 105.9 − 0.6 102.7 − 3.6 108.6 + 0.6 101.7 + 6.5 98.6 − 0.3 102.8 + 9.0
         May 104.9 − 2.3 103.0 − 3.8 106.9 − 1.7 100.6 + 0.2 95.7 − 3.3 102.3 + 1.3
         June 115.6 + 4.8 104.2 − 1.7 125.5 + 9.7 102.2 + 0.0 106.0 + 5.3 100.9 − 1.8
         July
108.9 + 1.6 104.0 − 1.4 112.3 + 3.8 109.6 − 0.1 97.3 − 2.8 113.8 + 0.6
         Aug 99.9 + 2.1 95.9 − 1.7 102.3 + 5.7 103.4 − 1.6 90.9 − 1.8 107.7 − 1.6
         Sep 111.9 + 6.9 101.9 + 1.3 119.4 + 11.4 109.2 + 2.0 108.7 − 2.6 109.4 + 3.6
         Oct 109.5 + 1.3 105.1 + 1.2 112.6 + 1.4 109.8 + 1.9 106.1 + 3.6 111.0 + 1.2
         Nov 114.3 + 6.6 106.4 + 3.2 120.5 + 9.0 109.6 + 5.4 105.5 + 7.9 111.0 + 4.6
         Dec p 107.3 + 5.2 89.9 + 0.2 121.3 + 8.2 94.8 + 2.5 88.9 + 6.6 96.8 + 1.3
From the domestic market
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 p 104.0 + 0.0 101.8 − 1.5 107.0 + 1.5 99.2 + 0.0 97.9 − 3.9 99.6 + 1.4
2012          Dec 
92.6 − 3.6 86.5 − 2.0 100.4 − 4.7 81.8 − 6.0 80.4 − 9.5 82.3 − 4.7
2013          Jan 101.9 − 3.7 103.9 − 4.8 100.6 − 2.8 97.1 − 2.3 97.6 − 8.1 96.9 − 0.1
         Feb 103.3 − 1.1 101.3 − 1.9 105.1 − 0.3 104.1 − 2.5 96.9 − 5.6 106.6 − 1.6
         Mar 115.4 − 0.9 113.2 + 0.3 119.2 − 1.7 105.4 − 2.8 109.2 − 6.2 104.0 − 1.5
         Apr 102.5 − 3.6 101.2 − 6.0 105.0 − 1.8 94.6 + 0.6 97.3 − 3.0 93.6 + 2.0
         May 100.2 − 4.4 101.6 − 4.3 99.7 − 5.1 94.4 − 0.7 91.2 − 5.4 95.5 + 0.8
         June 106.3 + 0.9 102.6 − 1.3 111.6 + 2.9 96.4 + 2.0 98.1 + 3.7 95.8 + 1.4
         July 106.0 + 0.3 103.8 − 1.1 108.6 + 1.5 104.0 + 1.4 94.5 − 4.0 107.3 + 3.1
         Aug 100.2 + 3.9 96.6 − 1.0 103.8 + 10.0 100.8 − 0.5 90.1 − 6.8 104.6 + 1.7
         Sep 105.7 + 3.3 100.8 − 0.1 111.1 + 7.2 103.2 + 0.3 106.8 − 6.9 101.9 + 3.2
         Oct 104.1 + 0.9 103.1 + 0.4 105.3 + 1.8 103.4 − 1.1 108.9 − 2.9 101.4 − 0.4
         Nov 108.2 + 3.9 105.8 + 1.8 111.5 + 6.1 102.7 + 4.1 102.4 − 1.2 102.8 + 6.0
         Dec p 93.9 + 1.4 87.4 + 1.0 102.1 + 1.7 84.3 + 3.1 81.6 + 1.5 85.2 + 3.5
From abroad
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 p 112.9 + 3.4 103.9 − 1.2 118.1 + 5.8 109.5 + 1.7 101.2 + 4.0 112.4 + 1.0
2012          Dec 109.7 + 1.0 93.5 − 4.7 119.3 + 3.2 101.6 + 6.3 86.0 − 1.0 106.9 + 8.52013          Jan 104.6 − 0.4 103.9 − 6.6 105.0 + 3.1 104.1 − 0.4 94.5 + 0.4 107.4 − 0.6
         Feb 108.5 + 0.6 102.1 − 6.8 111.9 + 4.4 108.3 + 3.1 89.7 + 1.6 114.7 + 3.6
         Mar 122.2 + 0.2 115.6 + 0.3 126.8 + 0.5 112.2 − 4.2 109.0 + 0.6 113.3 − 5.7
         Apr 108.6 + 1.9 104.4 − 0.6 110.8 + 2.0 107.8 + 11.4 99.8 + 2.1 110.6 + 14.6
         May 108.8 − 0.7 104.7 − 3.1 111.3 + 0.3 105.9 + 0.9 99.6 − 1.6 108.0 + 1.5
         June 123.1 + 7.7 106.0 − 2.2 134.0 + 13.5 107.1 − 1.6 112.9 + 6.4 105.2 − 4.1
         July 111.3 + 2.6 104.3 − 1.7 114.6 + 5.2 114.3 − 1.3 99.7 − 1.9 119.4 − 1.1
         Aug 99.7 + 0.8 95.1 − 2.7 101.3 + 3.1 105.6 − 2.6 91.6 + 2.8 110.4 − 4.0
         Sep 117.0 + 9.8 103.1 + 2.9 124.6 + 13.8 114.3 + 3.3 110.3 + 1.3 115.7 + 3.9
         Oct 113.9 + 1.6 107.5 + 2.0 117.1 + 1.2 115.2 + 4.1 103.6 + 10.2 119.2 + 2.3
         Nov 119.3 + 8.7 107.0 + 4.7 126.1 + 10.6 115.5 + 6.5 108.2 + 16.6 118.0 + 3.6
         Dec 
p 118.2 + 7.7 92.9 − 0.6 133.1 + 11.6 103.8 + 2.2 95.2 + 10.7 106.7 − 0.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.14 to

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.4 − 5.2 94.1 − 12.3 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.3 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.3 99.7 + 6.0 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.5 + 13.8 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.8 + 13.1 96.0 − 3.8
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.4 91.6 − 0.2 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.1 103.3 + 7.6
 
2012          Nov 91.4 − 6.1 101.0 − 5.7 122.0 + 2.8 98.7 − 7.4 66.7 − 22.4 81.8 − 6.4 94.1 − 10.6 76.4 − 5.1
         Dec 93.4 − 3.0 108.1 + 2.2 122.6 + 2.5 113.5 + 9.6 63.8 − 25.0 78.7 − 9.3 105.2 − 0.7 69.6 − 9.7
2013          Jan 82.2 + 0.5 90.4 − 0.2 102.0 + 2.4 92.6 + 1.3 61.0 − 13.6 73.9 + 1.1 86.6 − 6.7 69.7 + 9.8
         Feb 98.2 + 2.1 100.8 − 1.3 108.3 − 3.6 104.3 + 3.2 75.6 − 10.7 95.6 + 5.8 104.3 + 5.2 87.9 + 1.3
         Mar 130.9 − 3.6 133.1 − 9.8 151.2 + 2.5 131.2 − 17.7 103.2 − 7.7 128.7 + 3.7 129.8 − 8.2 123.9 − 1.1
         Apr 123.6 − 0.5 130.2 + 2.8 145.2 + 2.2 125.5 − 4.1 114.5 + 37.0 117.1 − 3.9 117.8 − 3.6 120.9 + 1.6
         May 125.5 + 5.6 135.3 + 14.0 142.1 + 9.5 140.4 + 16.6 106.7 + 16.1 115.7 − 2.9 127.2 + 6.4 117.0 + 2.8         June 145.9 + 11.7 157.6 + 15.3 182.0 + 12.0 158.1 + 22.0 108.0 + 0.8 134.2 + 7.8 151.3 + 18.5 125.9 + 4.2
         July 142.5 + 14.5 142.0 + 14.7 158.2 + 14.1 142.4 + 12.4 108.9 + 26.8 143.0 + 14.3 133.1 + 9.5 145.8 + 19.7
         Aug 123.8 − 1.2 124.1 − 11.8 144.8 + 5.8 121.1 − 19.3 92.3 − 23.5 123.4 + 12.2 119.3 − 10.8 119.9 + 7.1         Sep 125.9 + 5.0 135.7 + 4.9 152.8 + 10.2 132.8 + 1.3 110.8 + 4.5 116.1 + 5.1 130.5 + 3.0 110.4 + 4.6
         Oct 117.6 − 11.0 128.7 − 2.4 141.5 + 4.0 134.7 − 2.1 85.6 − 19.2 106.5 − 19.7 125.4 − 9.2 100.0 − 19.7
         Nov 106.6 + 16.6 119.6 + 18.4 122.9 + 0.7 132.4 + 34.1 75.0 + 12.4 93.6 + 14.4 123.1 + 30.8 83.2 + 8.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Values exclusive of adjusted business statistics, Tables II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles and motorcycles  3 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 100.0 + 2.2 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.6 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 4 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.2 105.1 + 2.5 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.9 − 1.0
2013 106.3 + 1.7 101.4 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.7 103.6 + 1.3 95.5 − 3.5 102.5 − 1.9 103.9 + 3.5 ... ...
 
2012          Dec 121.3 − 1.1 116.8 − 3.1 122.2 + 0.8 122.1 − 2.2 147.8 − 4.4 106.6 − 6.0 108.2 − 6.3 93.8 − 5.0
2013          Jan 97.8 + 4.4 94.5 + 2.8 99.9 + 5.6 88.2 + 2.2 101.1 − 1.3 89.4 + 0.1 101.1 + 3.8 85.6 − 4.1
         Feb 93.4 + 2.1 89.7 + 1.0 98.0 + 4.0 77.3 + 0.7 85.5 − 1.4 88.5 + 0.3 96.7 + 2.5 90.8 − 5.5
         Mar 108.2 + 0.9 103.0 − 0.4 111.7 + 4.7 98.0 − 10.1 96.3 + 0.6 107.9 − 6.3 106.0 + 1.5 114.2 − 8.2
         Apr 107.2 + 1.8 101.8 + 0.4 108.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 5.4 85.6 − 5.4 108.4 − 1.4 102.6 + 1.0 111.7 − 0.6
         May 107.8 + 2.8 102.3 + 1.4 110.4 + 3.0 103.9 + 2.1 83.3 − 3.4 107.8 + 0.9 102.0 + 1.3 110.3 + 0.1         June 104.7 + 1.6 99.4 − 0.3 110.1 + 4.5 100.8 + 5.9 84.9 − 10.7 101.7 +
 0.0 99.5 + 0.9 110.7 − 0.1
         July 106.3 + 2.2 101.5 + 0.4 111.8 + 6.7 102.9 + 0.3 86.7 − 6.5 103.3 − 1.5 106.7 + 3.9 106.7 − 1.2         Aug 103.4 + 1.8 98.9 + 0.6 108.0 + 4.1 97.9 + 4.8 88.7 − 2.0 98.0 − 5.9 99.8 + 3.7 98.1 + 0.6         Sep 105.0 + 1.5 99.9 + 0.6 103.7 + 1.3 115.5 + 2.0 95.2 + 2.1 102.3 − 1.4 102.2 + 6.6 105.5 − 0.4
         Oct 109.8 + 1.2 104.2 + 0.3 110.9 + 3.8 118.2 +
 0.0 95.9 − 3.0 109.1 − 2.6 107.2 + 5.1 116.1 + 3.0
         Nov 111.9 + 2.4 106.3 + 1.4 112.0 + 4.8 110.7 + 6.8 105.7 − 2.5 110.3 − 1.4 107.1 + 3.7 113.0 + 3.6
         Dec 120.6 − 0.6 115.1 − 1.5 123.2 + 0.8 119.6 − 2.0 136.6 − 7.6 103.4 − 3.0 115.4 + 6.7 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, before based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2012 are provision-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to esti-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from mates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2009 40,372 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,905 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,587 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2011 41,152 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012 41,607 + 1.1 28,991 + 1.9 8,731 19,250 775 4,805 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013
9 41,840 9 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,950 970 6.9 434
2010          Q4 41,058 + 1.1 28,242 + 1.9 8,548 18,710 767 4,905 242 188 2,959 920 7.0 392
2011          Q1 40,588 + 1.4 27,944 + 2.3 8,428 18,578 740 4,852 291 158 3,290 1,088 7.8 412
         Q2 41,064 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,343 + 1.4 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,611 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,145 + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 41,545 + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 41,779 + 1.1 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 41,961 + 0.8 29,391 + 1.4 8,835 19,550 767 4,823 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,398 + 0.6 29,016 + 1.3 8,689 19,405 702 4,765 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 427
         Q2 41,765 + 0.5 29,214 + 1.2 8,737 19,508 726 4,779 99 87 2,941 945
10 6.8 438
         Q3 41,995 + 0.5 11 29,429 11 + 1.2 11 8,803 11 19,607 11 771 11 4,791 ... 11 57 2,903 934 6.7 445
         Q4 9 42,204 9 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,827 891 6.6 428
2010          Sep 40,971 + 0.9 28,269 + 1.7 8,573 18,700 766 4,859 237 214 3,026 948 7.2 398         Oct 41,116 + 1.0 28,296 + 1.8 8,566 18,738 769 4,886 231 209 2,941 907 7.0 401         Nov 41,128 + 1.1 28,277 + 2.0 8,562 18,723 779 4,932 215 194 2,927 903 6.9 395         Dec 40,931 + 1.1 28,033 + 2.0 8,460 18,635 743 4,931 279 162 3,011 949 7.1 380
2011          Jan 40,527 + 1.3 27,863 + 2.3 8,399 18,540 732 4,842 322 177 3,345 1,146 7.9 375
         Feb 40,559 + 1.5 27,912 + 2.5 8,416 18,560 738 4,831 305 155 3,313 1,107 7.9 418         Mar 40,679 + 1.5 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442         Apr 40,908 + 1.5 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,092 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,192 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,209 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,303 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,518 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,656 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,679 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,498 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,140 + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,091 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473         Mar 41,203 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 41,395 + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499         May 41,584 + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 41,655 + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 41,689 + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 41,740 + 1.1 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 41,908 + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,044 + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,034 + 0.9 29,424 + 1.4 8,840 19,580 767 4,851 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 41,804 + 0.7 29,143 + 1.2 8,739 19,471 715 4,854 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,383 + 0.6 28,965 + 1.3 8,678 19,372 699 4,762 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 405
         Feb 41,371 + 0.7 28,981 + 1.4 8,674 19,387 700 4,736 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 431         Mar 41,440 + 0.6 29,062 + 1.2 8,692 19,439 700 4,740 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 444         Apr 41,618 + 0.5 29,201 + 1.3 8,735 19,505 719 4,761 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 441         May 41,809 + 0.5 29,277 + 1.2 8,752 19,542 734 4,796 86 74 2,937 935
10 6.8 437
         June 41,867 + 0.5 29,269 + 1.2 8,757 19,517 748 4,819 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 437         July 41,910 + 0.5 29,266 + 1.2 8,765 19,484 773 4,829 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 444         Aug 41,948 + 0.5
11 29,495 11 + 1.2 11 8,819 11 19,654 11 776 11 4,758 ... 11 47 2,946 956 6.8 445
         Sep 42,126 + 0.5 11 29,782 11 + 1.3 11 8,894 11 19,850 11 784 11 4,751 ... 11 56 2,849 904 6.6 446
         Oct 42,277 + 0.6 11 29,819 11 + 1.2 11 8,892 11 19,895 11 781 11 4,781 ... 11 69 2,801 870 6.5 439
         Nov 9 42,276 9 + 0.6 11 29,760 11 + 1.1 11 8,879 11 19,867 11 774 11 4,834 ... 11 70 2,806 881 6.5 431
         Dec 9 42,059 9 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,873 923 6.7 414
2014          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,136 1,104 7.3 401
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Office. 10From May 2013, calculated on the basis of new labour force fig-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: ures. 11Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2011
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal and 2012, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 0.2 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding 1.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located mum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 
abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 99.1 98.5 . 97.0 93.4 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.0 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.0 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 p 120.8 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
 
2012          Mar 104.1 106.0 102.1 117.2 102.2 102.1 107.1 116.6 104.8 110.0 155.0 110.5
         Apr 103.9 105.7 102.1 117.7 101.3 102.2 107.3 117.1 105.1 109.7 148.6 110.2
         May 103.9 105.4 102.3 115.9 101.7 102.3 105.5 107.0 114.9 105.0 109.2 140.5 110.1
         June 103.7 105.8 101.9 114.2 102.0 102.4 106.6 113.3 104.8 107.7 124.5 108.9
         July 104.1 105.2 101.2 115.4 103.6 102.5 106.6 114.4 105.0 108.2 136.5 116.8
         Aug 104.5 105.1 101.6 118.0 103.5 102.6 106.0 107.0 117.9 105.2 109.2 149.1 114.2
         Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 107.3 121.4 105.2 108.5 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 107.4 122.7 105.0 108.0 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 106.3 107.4 125.2 105.1 108.0 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 107.1 124.4 104.8 107.4 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 107.7 123.9 104.8 107.3 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 107.1 107.5 124.4 104.7 107.6 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 124.0 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 124.9 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 125.2 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 123.0 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 120.6 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 120.3 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 121.3 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 p 120.4 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 p 120.7 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 p 121.1 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 ... ... ... ... 129.4 96.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 . − 2.2 − 8.5 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 . + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.0 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 p + 1.5 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
 
2012          Mar + 2.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 2.8 + 14.4 − 6.1
         Apr + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 5.4 − 6.5
         May + 2.0 + 2.6 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.8 + 1.6 − 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.4 + 6.0 − 4.8
         June + 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.4 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 4.6 − 4.5
         July + 1.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.6
         Aug + 2.2 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 7.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 16.9 + 1.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 9.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 10.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 11.1 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 9.1 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 6.3 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 6.7 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 9.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.6 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 2.0 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 p − 1.9 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 p − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 p − 2.7 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... − 6.6 − 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2005
922.1 − 0.3 625.5 − 0.4 359.8 0.1 985.3 − 0.2 1,463.9 2.0 156.9 3.3 10.7
2006 935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,003.8 0.1 667.7 0.6 384.1 7.8 1,051.8 3.1 1,562.9 − 0.4 170.3 − 5.5 10.9
2010 1,033.2 2.9 696.7 4.4 387.8 1.0 1,084.5 3.1 1,609.9 3.0 174.9 2.7 10.9
2011 1,081.7 4.7 723.4 3.8 384.2 − 0.9 1,107.6 2.1 1,672.0 3.9 173.6 − 0.7 10.4
2012 1,126.6 4.2 751.9 3.9 389.2 1.3 1,141.1 3.0 1,710.3 2.3 176.5 1.6 10.3
2012          Q2 275.5 4.4 180.1 4.2 96.6 1.4 276.7 3.2 423.9 2.2 42.5 2.6 10.0
         Q3 277.9 4.1 189.1 3.8 97.4 1.7 286.6 3.1 431.3 1.6 37.9 1.1 8.8
         Q4 311.7 4.0 207.9 3.7 97.3 1.6 305.2 3.0 429.5 1.9 38.0 − 1.1 8.8
2013          Q1 270.0 3.2 180.2 3.0 100.1 2.4 280.3 2.8 428.1 0.6 56.3 − 3.1 13.1
         Q2 283.5 2.9 183.9 2.1 98.9 2.4 282.8 2.2 434.3 2.4 41.5 − 2.6 9.5
         Q3 285.7 2.8 194.3 2.8 99.2 1.8 293.6 2.4 444.1 3.0 37.8 − 0.2 8.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2013. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2006 101.0 1.0 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8
2007 102.2 1.2 102.5 1.3 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.5 2.0 107.7 2.2 108.1 2.4 104.5 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.4 1.7 109.4 1.7 110.0 1.8 106.9 2.3
2011 110.7 1.8 111.4 1.8 111.5 1.9 112.0 1.8 110.4 3.32012 113.7 2.7 114.3 2.6 114.7 2.9 115.2 2.9 113.6 2.92013 116.4 2.4 117.0 2.4 117.4 2.4 117.9 2.4 . .
2012          Q3 116.1 2.9 116.7 2.8 117.0 2.9 115.9 3.0 111.8 2.9
         Q4 127.2 3.0 127.8 2.9 128.2 3.0 116.1 2.9 124.3 3.0
2013          Q1 107.8 2.8 108.4 2.9 108.8 2.9 117.0 2.9 109.1 2.3
         Q2 109.0 2.1 109.6 2.1 109.9 2.1 117.3 2.1 113.7 2.0         Q3 118.7 2.3 119.4 2.3 119.8 2.4 118.6 2.3 114.0 2.0         Q4 130.1 2.3 130.8 2.4 131.3 2.4 118.8 2.3 . .
2013          June 108.3 1.8 108.9 1.8 109.2 1.8 117.5 1.8 . .
         July 137.4 2.1 138.1 2.1 138.6 2.2 118.3 2.2 . .
         Aug 109.4 2.5 110.0 2.5 110.4 2.5 118.7 2.4 . .
         Sep 109.4 2.4 110.0 2.4 110.4 2.4 118.7 2.4 . .
         Oct 109.4 2.4 110.0 2.4 110.4 2.4 118.8 2.3 . .
         Nov 168.7 2.3 169.5 2.3 170.1 2.3 118.8 2.3 . .
         Dec 112.3 2.3 112.9 2.4 113.3 2.6 118.9 2.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2013. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2013
Item 2010 2011 2012 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account + 5,277 + 8,178 + 126,214 + 24,597 + 56,135 + 48,908 + 14,715 + 26,611 + 27,372 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,576,077 1,789,051 1,919,530 470,550 489,671 479,176 162,496 176,107 166,736
Imports (fob) 1,560,473 1,786,705 1,824,602 439,859 438,416 439,717 148,980 156,884 147,950
Balance + 15,605 + 2,348 + 94,931 + 30,692 + 51,255 + 39,460 + 13,516 + 19,223 + 18,786
2 Services
Receipts 544,361 584,312 626,637 144,873 164,448 174,982 59,090 56,653 51,786
Expenditure 483,984 511,598 537,926 127,324 135,658 143,531 47,917 46,719 44,096
Balance + 60,380 + 72,717 + 88,713 + 17,550 + 28,790 + 31,450 + 11,173 + 9,934 + 7,689
3 Income + 38,040 + 39,416 + 49,331 + 18,498 + 6,843 + 12,755 + 1,293 + 6,160 + 6,385
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 88,210 94,829 97,330 27,751 20,039 17,498 6,006 6,178 8,423
Transfers to non-residents 196,951 201,131 204,089 69,892 50,794 52,254 17,272 14,884 13,911
Balance − 108,740 − 106,302 − 106,757 − 42,141 − 30,754 − 34,755 − 11,266 − 8,706 − 5,488
Capital account + 5,478 + 11,019 + 4,971 + 1,780 + 5,473 + 4,495 + 460 + 2,270 + 1,739 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − + 6,025 − 44,168 − 140,949 − 25,129 − 58,829 − 58,265 − 22,270 − 27,533 − 29,325 C)
1 Direct investment − 79,021 − 85,790 − 3,557 − 23,983 − 55,609 − 27,770 − 34,690 − 1,677 − 12,600
By resident units abroad − 352,585 − 524,034 − 329,878 − 56,721 − 61,963 − 31,804 − 4,789 − 21,799 − 19,515
By non-resident units in the euro area + 273,565 + 438,247 + 326,321 + 32,738 + 6,355 + 4,033 − 29,901 + 20,122 + 6,915
2 Portfolio investment + 109,200 + 231,074 + 72,346 + 16,530 + 67,107 + 3,875 + 18,482 + 2,089 + 53,514
By resident units abroad − 130,909 + 53,205 − 186,367 − 104,486 − 21,822 − 63,382 − 39,379 − 6,664 − 12,507
Equity − 75,169 + 66,024 − 57,583 − 62,696 − 13,892 − 42,881 − 28,054 − 9,529 − 201
Bonds and notes − 100,391 + 21,357 − 126,480 − 34,418 − 8,793 − 18,319 − 7,497 − 564 − 8,274
Money market instruments + 44,653 − 34,176 − 2,303 − 7,373 + 863 − 2,183 − 3,828 + 3,429 − 4,032
By non-resident units in the euro area + 240,109 + 177,871 + 258,717 + 121,015 + 88,930 + 67,256 + 57,861 + 8,753 + 66,021
Equity + 125,362 + 73,770 + 144,102 + 57,395 + 83,855 + 45,386 + 15,907 + 14,396 + 19,738
Bonds and notes + 161,104 + 151,685 + 119,276 + 27,271 + 5,258 − 17,102 + 22,282 + 13,429 + 47,920
Money market instruments − 46,358 − 47,583 − 4,662 + 36,349 − 185 + 38,973 + 19,673 − 19,072 − 1,638
3 Financial derivatives + 10,327 − 5,330 + 3,413 + 8,362 − 595 + 5,608 + 1,708 + 2,760 − 4,746
4 Other investment − 23,962 − 173,855 − 199,237 − 26,049 − 68,547 − 37,119 − 6,640 − 31,560 − 65,676
Eurosystem + 12,297 + 137,729 + 13,824 − 25,456 − 10,623 − 16,508 − 8,955 − 4,992 − 4,140
General government + 23,377 + 69,721 − 970 + 9,899 + 4,318 + 6,212 + 2,444 − 5,523 − 6,161
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 18,793 − 339,639 − 112,181 − 12,301 − 105,614 − 35,561 − 10,100 − 23,840 − 33,411
Long-term + 47,197 − 15,876 + 12,599 − 2,085 + 21,309 + 4,158 + 2,054 − 2,607 − 10,041
Short-term − 65,993 − 323,763 − 124,777 − 10,216 − 126,923 − 39,719 − 12,155 − 21,233 − 23,370
Other sectors − 40,843 − 41,664 − 99,910 + 1,809 + 43,373 + 8,740 + 9,972 + 2,794 − 21,964
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,516 − 10,266 − 13,921 + 12 − 1,187 − 2,859 − 1,130 + 855 + 183
Errors and omissions − 16,783 + 24,966 + 9,759 − 1,248 − 2,778 + 4,860 + 7,094 − 1,347 + 214 D
* Source: European Central Bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Capital trans- Financial account
fers andacquisition/ of whichdisposal of Change in
Supple- non- reserve assets
Balance mentary produced at trans- Errorson current Foreign trade Current non-financial action and
Period account trade 
1 items 2 Services 3 Income transfers assets Total 4 value 5 omissions
DM million
2000 − 69,351 + 115,645 − 17,742 − 95,848 − 16,956 − 54,450 + 13,345 + 66,863 + 11,429 − 10,857
2001 − 23 + 186,771 − 14,512 − 97,521 − 22,557 − 52,204 − 756 − 23,068 + 11,797 + 23,847
€ million
1999
− 25,834 + 65,211 − 8,153 − 46,035 − 12,457 − 24,401 − 154 − 10,396 + 12,535 + 36,384
2000 − 35,459 + 59,128 − 9,071 − 49,006 − 8,670 − 27,840 + 6,823 + 34,187 + 5,844 − 5,5512001 − 12 + 95,495 − 7,420 − 49,862 − 11,533 − 26,692 − 387 − 11,794 + 6,032 + 12,1932002 + 42,669 + 132,788 − 8,552 − 35,728 − 18,888 − 26,951 − 212 − 38,448 + 2,065 − 4,0102003 + 40,525 + 129,921 − 11,148 − 34,506 − 15,677 − 28,064 + 311 − 61,758 + 445 + 20,921
2004 + 102,368 + 156,096 − 16,470 − 29,375 + 19,681 − 27,564 + 435 − 122,984 + 1,470 + 20,181
2005 + 112,591 + 158,179 − 14,057 − 27,401 + 24,391 − 28,522 − 1,369 − 129,635 + 2,182 + 18,4132006 + 144,739 + 159,048 − 12,888 − 17,346 + 44,460 − 28,536 − 258 − 175,474 + 2,934 + 30,9922007 + 180,914 + 195,348 − 9,816 − 14,852 + 42,918 − 32,685 + 104 − 210,151 − 953 + 29,1332008 + 153,633 + 178,297 − 13,628 − 10,258 + 32,379 − 33,157 − 210 − 173,910 − 2,008 + 20,487
2009 + 141,537 + 138,697 − 16,020 − 7,220 + 59,025 − 32,944 + 28 − 158,391 + 3,200 + 16,826
2010 + 155,992 + 154,863 − 12,397 − 2,062 + 53,877 − 38,289 − 575 − 140,144 − 1,613 − 15,2732011 + 161,196 + 158,702 − 20,520 − 2,279 + 59,016 − 33,723 + 673 − 162,610 − 2,836 + 7402012 + 187,206 + 189,841 − 27,313 − 2,873 + 64,373 − 36,822 + 40 − 233,829 − 1,297 + 46,5832013 
p + 201,038 + 198,910 − 26,093 − 207 + 67,482 − 39,054 + 1,793 − 245,332 − 838 + 42,502
2011          Q1 + 45,384 + 40,902 − 2,257 + 2,887 + 17,445 − 13,592 + 950 − 67,319 − 1,393 + 20,985         Q2 + 32,308 + 38,562 − 4,927 − 1,372 + 4,755 − 4,710 − 282 − 50,687 − 438 + 18,660         Q3 + 35,723 + 39,609 − 6,551 − 5,658 + 17,960 − 9,637 + 103 − 13,513 − 639 − 22,313         Q4 + 47,781 + 39,630 − 6,784 + 1,864 + 18,856 − 5,784 − 98 − 31,091 − 366 − 16,592
2012          Q1 + 46,622 + 46,229 − 3,550 + 957 + 18,019 − 15,034 + 191 − 42,769 − 963 − 4,044
         Q2 + 41,431 + 48,058 − 8,897 + 1,391 + 7,301 − 6,422 + 394 − 49,203 − 769 + 7,377         Q3 + 45,383 + 50,775 − 7,710 − 7,227 + 18,983 − 9,437 + 67 − 62,092 − 59 + 16,642         Q4 + 53,770 + 44,780 − 7,155 + 2,005 + 20,069 − 5,929 − 613 − 79,765 + 494 + 26,608
2013          Q1 + 45,166 + 49,289 − 6,720 − 227 + 18,659 − 15,836 + 345 − 40,684 − 86 − 4,827
         Q2 
r + 45,929 + 48,633 − 3,791 + 351 + 8,310 − 7,575 + 341 − 65,241 − 72 + 18,971
         Q3 r + 44,358 + 49,784 − 7,467 − 6,034 + 18,400 − 10,325 + 95 − 66,744 + 784 + 22,291
         Q4 p + 65,586 + 51,203 − 8,116 + 5,704 + 22,112 − 5,317 + 1,011 − 72,664 − 1,464 + 6,066
2011          July + 9,447 + 10,555 − 1,541 − 1,997 + 5,900 − 3,470 − 144 + 4,546 − 428 − 13,850         Aug + 8,404 + 11,740 − 2,347 − 3,923 + 5,982 − 3,049 + 380 − 13,078 + 109 + 4,294         Sep + 17,872 + 17,314 − 2,663 + 262 + 6,078 − 3,118 − 133 − 4,982 − 320 − 12,757
         Oct + 10,828 + 11,000 − 2,131 − 955 + 6,414 − 3,500 − 181 − 16,424 + 55 + 5,777
         Nov + 16,922 + 16,110 − 1,947 + 330 + 6,055 − 3,626 + 120 − 7,177 + 263 − 9,865         Dec + 20,031 + 12,520 − 2,706 + 2,489 + 6,387 + 1,342 − 37 − 7,490 − 684 − 12,504
2012          Jan + 11,370 + 13,536 − 1,346 − 1,605 + 5,039 − 4,254 − 32 − 12,275 − 140 + 938
         Feb + 14,103 + 15,418 − 1,736 + 1,204 + 6,503 − 7,286 + 211 − 7,423 − 547 − 6,891         Mar + 21,149 + 17,275 − 468 + 1,359 + 6,477 − 3,494 + 12 − 23,071 − 276 + 1,909
         Apr + 11,843 + 14,358 − 3,209 + 1,658 + 1,735 − 2,698 + 310 − 17,917 − 581 + 5,764
         May + 10,102 + 15,702 − 3,017 − 660 − 495 − 1,429 + 239 − 18,277 − 207 + 7,936         June + 19,486 + 17,998 − 2,672 + 393 + 6,062 − 2,295 − 155 − 13,009 + 19 − 6,323
         July + 14,703 + 17,169 − 2,870 − 3,297 + 6,240 − 2,539 − 223 − 6,612 + 48 − 7,868
         Aug + 13,658 + 16,747 − 2,529 − 3,072 + 6,195 − 3,683 + 168 − 22,050 − 389 + 8,224         Sep + 17,022 + 16,859 − 2,311 − 859 + 6,548 − 3,215 + 123 − 33,431 + 281 + 16,286
         Oct + 15,531 + 15,967 − 2,523 − 1,592 + 6,918 − 3,240 − 195 − 21,997 − 176 + 6,662
         Nov + 17,817 + 16,872 − 2,657 + 224 + 6,509 − 3,131 + 165 − 27,569 + 308 + 9,588         Dec + 20,422 + 11,941 − 1,975 + 3,373 + 6,642 + 441 − 582 − 30,198 + 362 + 10,359
2013          Jan + 9,684 + 13,622 − 2,071 − 1,583 + 5,504 − 5,789 + 26 + 6,080 − 493 − 15,790
         Feb + 15,030 + 16,809 − 1,668 + 343 + 6,426 − 6,880 − 26 − 16,265 + 321 + 1,261         Mar + 20,452 + 18,858 − 2,981 + 1,013 + 6,729 − 3,167 + 346 − 30,499 + 86 + 9,701
         Apr  
r + 16,720 + 17,995 − 1,103 + 787 + 1,595 − 2,554 + 184 − 24,547 − 56 + 7,643
         May r + 11,274 + 13,622 − 952 − 657 + 1,409 − 2,147 + 111 − 14,317 + 23 + 2,932
         June r + 17,935 + 17,016 − 1,735 + 222 + 5,307 − 2,875 + 46 − 26,377 − 38 + 8,397
         July r + 14,244 + 16,252 − 2,548 − 2,093 + 6,099 − 3,465 + 39 − 12,216 + 654 − 2,066
         Aug  r + 10,097 + 13,256 − 2,451 − 3,574 + 6,610 − 3,745 − 76 − 29,147 − 425 + 19,127
         Sep  r + 20,018 + 20,276 − 2,468 − 367 + 5,691 − 3,115 + 132 − 25,380 + 556 + 5,230
         Oct  r + 18,820 + 17,867 − 1,792 − 816 + 6,649 − 3,088 + 527 − 18,188 + 212 − 1,159
         Nov + 23,260 + 19,114 − 2,815 + 2,433 + 7,281 − 2,754 + 263 − 22,687 − 407 − 836
         Dec  p + 23,506 + 14,222 − 3,509 + 4,086 + 8,182 + 525 + 221 − 31,789 − 1,269 + 8,062
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, exports deduction of goods returned. 3Excluding the expenditure on freight and insurance
fob. From January 2007 onwards, excluding supplies of goods for/after included in the cif import figure. 4Financial account balance including change in
repair/maintenance, which, up to December 2006, were deducted via supplementary reserve assets. Capital exports: − . 5 Increase: − . 
trade items. 2Inter alia warehouse transactions for the account of residents and

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2014
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2013
Country / group of countries  2010  2011  2012 Aug r Sep r Oct r Nov r Dec p Jan / Nov r 
All countries 1 Exports 951,959 1,061,225 1,095,766 1,011,707 84,977 94,576 99,118 94,670 82,214
Imports 797,097 902,523 905,925 827,020 71,721 74,300 81,251 75,556 67,992Balance + 154,863 + 158,702 + 189,841 + 184,688 + 13,256 + 20,276 + 17,867 + 19,114 + 14,222
I Exports 675,024 752,295 751,071 693,944 56,724 64,956 68,397 64,348 ... European countries
Imports 541,720 622,870 629,305 584,018 49,534 52,434 57,835 53,924 ...
Balance + 133,305 + 129,425 + 121,766 + 109,926 + 7,189 + 12,521 + 10,562 + 10,425 ...
Exports 572,919 629,953 622,674 576,727 46,766 54,620 57,378 53,459 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 445,090 506,211 504,494 474,003 39,395 42,722 47,787 43,521 ...
Balance + 127,829 + 123,742 + 118,180 + 102,724 + 7,371 + 11,898 + 9,591 + 9,939 ...
Euro-area (17) Exports 388,103 420,522 406,232 372,348 29,051 35,271 36,781 34,374 ...
countries Imports 300,135 338,330 338,393 316,006 25,787 27,896 31,612 28,520 ...
Balance + 87,968 + 82,192 + 67,839 + 56,342 + 3,263 + 7,375 + 5,168 + 5,854 ...
of which
Austria Exports 52,156 57,671 56,591 52,047 4,544 4,992 5,187 4,825 ...
Imports 33,013 37,028 36,419 33,941 2,884 3,061 3,352 3,121 ...
Balance + 19,144 + 20,643 + 20,172 + 18,106 + 1,660 + 1,931 + 1,835 + 1,705 ...
Belgium and Exports 50,545 53,161 49,424 44,238 3,529 4,035 4,159 3,889 ...
Luxembourg Imports 36,026 41,302 40,528 38,721 3,272 3,561 3,874 3,618 ...
Balance + 14,519 + 11,859 + 8,896 + 5,517 + 257 + 474 + 285 + 272 ...
France Exports 89,582 101,444 102,911 93,013 6,773 9,046 9,445 8,652 ...
Imports 60,673 65,948 64,035 59,277 4,567 4,651 6,321 5,390 ...
Balance + 28,909 + 35,496 + 38,875 + 33,736 + 2,206 + 4,396 + 3,124 + 3,262 ...
Italy Exports 58,589 62,044 55,529 49,575 3,363 4,686 4,829 4,556 ...
Imports 41,977 47,844 47,957 43,721 3,248 3,936 4,353 3,934 ...
Balance + 16,611 + 14,200 + 7,572 + 5,854 + 115 + 750 + 476 + 623 ...
Netherlands Exports 62,978 69,423 70,381 65,476 5,542 6,190 6,380 6,048 ...
Imports 67,205 81,804 85,738 81,346 7,178 7,287 7,836 6,766 ...
Balance − 4,227 − 12,382 − 15,357 − 15,870 − 1,636 − 1,096 − 1,456 − 718 ...
Spain Exports 34,222 34,811 31,047 29,055 2,031 2,616 2,940 2,744 ...
Imports 21,955 22,491 23,206 21,912 1,516 1,871 2,169 2,000 ...
Balance + 12,267 + 12,320 + 7,841 + 7,143 + 514 + 746 + 771 + 745 ...
Other EU member Exports 184,816 209,430 216,442 204,379 17,715 19,349 20,597 19,085 ...
states Imports 144,955 167,881 166,100 157,997 13,608 14,827 16,174 15,001 ...
Balance + 39,860 + 41,550 + 50,341 + 46,382 + 4,107 + 4,522 + 4,423 + 4,085 ...
of which
United Exports 58,666 65,570 73,283 69,867 5,871 6,567 6,869 6,424 ...
Kingdom Imports 37,923 44,741 42,820 38,739 3,402 3,286 3,791 3,595 ...
Balance + 20,743 + 20,829 + 30,462 + 31,128 + 2,468 + 3,281 + 3,078 + 2,828 ...
Exports 102,105 122,342 128,398 117,217 9,958 10,336 11,019 10,889 ... 2 Other European
Imports 96,630 116,660 124,811 110,015 10,140 9,712 10,048 10,403 ... countries
Balance + 5,476 + 5,683 + 3,586 + 7,203 − 181 + 624 + 971 + 486 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 41,659 47,875 48,933 44,066 3,706 3,860 4,250 4,216 ...
Imports 32,507 36,996 37,775 35,595 2,913 3,191 3,528 3,415 ...
Balance + 9,152 + 10,879 + 11,158 + 8,471 + 794 + 669 + 722 + 801 ...
II Exports 276,635 308,193 340,980 315,513 27,980 29,218 30,408 30,097 ... Non-European
Imports 255,377 279,653 276,620 243,002 22,187 21,866 23,416 21,632 ... countries
Balance + 21,258 + 28,541 + 64,360 + 72,511 + 5,794 + 7,352 + 6,991 + 8,465 ...
Exports 19,968 20,717 21,920 20,289 1,720 1,692 1,745 1,642 ... 1 Africa
Imports 17,040 21,944 24,145 21,303 2,101 1,536 1,900 1,698 ...
Balance + 2,929 − 1,227 − 2,224 − 1,014 − 381 + 156 − 155 − 56 ...
Exports 99,464 110,424 128,703 121,600 10,675 11,312 12,082 11,897 ... 2 America
Imports 71,680 80,568 80,549 69,476 5,834 5,938 6,994 6,387 ...
Balance + 27,784 + 29,856 + 48,154 + 52,124 + 4,840 + 5,374 + 5,088 + 5,511 ...
of which
Exports 65,574 73,776 86,971 81,944 7,316 7,938 8,449 7,974 ... United States
Imports 45,241 48,531 51,070 45,070 3,965 3,914 4,357 4,199 ...
Balance + 20,333 + 25,244 + 35,901 + 36,874 + 3,351 + 4,024 + 4,092 + 3,775 ...
Exports 148,231 167,574 179,630 164,348 14,756 15,340 15,733 15,735 ... 3 Asia
Imports 163,523 173,115 167,873 149,078 13,957 14,168 14,318 13,326 ...
Balance − 15,293 − 5,541 + 11,757 + 15,270 + 799 + 1,173 + 1,415 + 2,409 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,138 28,711 32,503 29,640 2,600 2,706 2,928 3,349 ...
Imports 6,878 8,874 8,134 7,881 806 679 834 663 ...
Balance + 21,260 + 19,837 + 24,369 + 21,759 + 1,794 + 2,027 + 2,094 + 2,685 ...
Japan Exports 13,149 15,115 17,138 15,685 1,464 1,585 1,588 1,515 ...
Imports 22,475 23,595 21,910 18,103 1,533 1,732 1,706 1,700 ...
Balance − 9,326 − 8,480 − 4,772 − 2,418 − 69 − 146 − 118 − 185 ...
Exports 53,791 64,863 66,746 61,654 5,680 5,737 5,936 5,890 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 77,270 79,528 78,529 67,768 6,515 6,469 6,631 6,123 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 23,479 − 14,665 − 11,783 − 6,114 − 836 − 733 − 695 − 234 ...
Exports 38,183 41,569 45,651 42,323 3,711 4,007 3,936 3,760 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,562 39,546 37,428 34,015 2,955 3,244 3,274 3,057 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance − 1,379 + 2,023 + 8,223 + 8,308 + 756 + 763 + 662 + 703 ...
Exports 8,972 9,479 10,727 9,275 830 873 849 823 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,134 4,026 4,054 3,144 295 224 205 221 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,838 + 5,453 + 6,672 + 6,131 + 536 + 649 + 644 + 602 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU including Croatia. 1Including fuel and other supplies for Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
4 Services and income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents
Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel 1 services licences Total income portation 2 services  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees 5 
2009 − 7,220 − 33,341 + 7,048 + 4,320 + 154 + 2,644 + 11,955 − 1,261 + 3,062 + 541 + 58,484
2010 − 2,062 − 32,775 + 8,092 + 4,281 + 1,225 + 2,863 + 14,252 − 1,154 + 3,500 + 1,564 + 52,3142011 − 2,279 − 33,762 + 8,562 + 3,891 + 1,189 + 2,939 + 14,903 − 1,201 + 3,413 + 1,885 + 57,1312012 − 2,873 − 35,278 + 8,733 + 5,096 + 1,290 + 3,070 + 14,217 − 1,350 + 2,015 + 1,940 + 62,4332013 − 207 − 33,685 + 8,059 + 4,796 + 6,222 + 3,170 + 11,231 − 630 + 1,338 + 1,967 + 65,515
2012          Q2 + 1,391 − 8,338 + 2,572 + 1,042 + 177 + 821 + 5,118 − 256 + 472 + 401 + 6,901
         Q3 − 7,227 − 15,569 + 2,387 + 1,975 + 752 + 767 + 2,461 − 412 + 493 − 118 + 19,101         Q4 + 2,005 − 6,075 + 1,975 + 1,041 + 768 + 727 + 3,569 − 326 + 455 + 678 + 19,391
2013          Q1 − 227 − 5,058 + 1,736 + 837 + 758 + 796 + 704 − 288 + 229 + 988 + 17,671
         Q2 + 351 − 8,107 + 2,225 + 709 + 1,301 + 921 + 3,302 − 308 + 375 + 408 + 7,902         Q3 − 6,034 − 15,250 + 2,134 + 1,761 + 1,511 + 760 + 3,050 − 72 + 220 − 113 + 18,513         Q4 + 5,704 − 5,270 + 1,964 + 1,489 + 2,652 + 694 + 4,175 + 39 + 514 + 683 + 21,429
2013          Feb + 343 − 1,266 + 668 + 269 + 275 + 256 + 142 − 45 + 4 + 328 + 6,097
         Mar + 1,013 − 2,189 + 527 + 150 + 198 + 273 + 2,054 − 125 + 140 + 329 + 6,400
         Apr + 787 − 1,687 + 759 + 285 + 512 + 271 + 646 − 126 + 134 + 136 + 1,459
         May − 657 − 2,737 + 765 + 188 + 403 + 311 + 414 − 74 + 127 + 135 + 1,274         June + 222 − 3,683 + 702 + 236 + 386 + 338 + 2,242 − 108 + 114 + 137 + 5,170
         July − 2,093 − 3,968 + 800 + 272 + 487 + 261 + 54 − 30 + 77 − 37 + 6,136
         Aug − 3,574 − 6,198 + 568 + 461 + 724 + 235 + 636 − 23 − 5 − 38 + 6,649         Sep − 367 − 5,084 + 766 + 1,027 + 300 + 264 + 2,360 − 19 + 148 − 37 + 5,728
         Oct − 816 − 3,813 + 599 + 203 + 532 + 254 + 1,409 − 23 − 30 + 196 + 6,453
         Nov + 2,433 − 1,086 + 636 + 383 + 1,392 + 254 + 854 + 23 + 84 + 196 + 7,085         Dec + 4,086 − 371 + 729 + 903 + 727 + 186 + 1,912 + 38 + 460 + 291 + 7,891
1From 2001 expenditure is based on household samples. 2Excluding the technical services, research and development, commercial services, etc. 5Wages and
expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. 3Including the receipts from salaries. 
foreign military agencies for goods and services supplied. 4Engineering and other
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million € million
Public 1 Private 1 
International
organisations 2 
 
of which Other Other
European current Workers’ current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total remittances transfers Total  4 Public 1 Private 1 transfers 3 
2009 − 32,944 − 18,575 − 19,037 − 16,573 + 462 − 14,370 − 2,995 − 11,375 + 28 − 1,704 + 1,732
2010 − 38,289 − 23,369 − 22,899 − 19,473 − 471 − 14,919 − 3,035 − 11,885 − 575 − 2,039 + 1,4642011 − 33,723 − 20,197 − 22,303 − 19,105 + 2,106 − 13,526 − 2,977 − 10,549 + 673 − 2,326 + 2,9992012 − 36,822 − 23,826 − 24,367 − 21,098 + 541 − 12,997 − 3,080 − 9,917 + 40 − 2,648 + 2,6872013 − 39,054 − 25,738 − 27,136 − 23,863 + 1,399 − 13,316 − 3,304 − 10,012 + 1,793 − 1,416 + 3,209
2012          Q2 − 6,422 − 3,125 − 6,101 − 5,128 + 2,975 − 3,297 − 770 − 2,527 + 394 − 375 + 769
         Q3 − 9,437 − 6,042 − 5,519 − 5,033 − 523 − 3,395 − 770 − 2,625 + 67 − 556 + 624         Q4 − 5,929 − 2,831 − 1,504 − 803 − 1,327 − 3,098 − 770 − 2,328 − 613 − 1,318 + 706
2013          Q1 − 15,836 − 12,628 − 12,348 − 11,005 − 280 − 3,208 − 826 − 2,382 + 345 − 306 + 651
         Q2 − 7,575 − 4,124 − 7,148 − 6,422 + 3,024 − 3,451 − 826 − 2,625 + 341 − 478 + 819         Q3 − 10,325 − 7,089 − 7,130 − 6,465 + 41 − 3,237 − 826 − 2,411 + 95 − 330 + 425         Q4 − 5,317 − 1,897 − 510 + 29 − 1,387 − 3,420 − 826 − 2,594 + 1,011 − 302 + 1,313
2013          Feb − 6,880 − 5,801 − 5,551 − 5,055 − 250 − 1,079 − 275 − 804 − 26 − 103 + 77
         Mar − 3,167 − 2,178 − 2,254 − 2,216 + 76 − 989 − 275 − 714 + 346 − 117 + 462
         Apr − 2,554 − 1,397 − 2,563 − 2,165 + 1,166 − 1,157 − 275 − 882 + 184 − 157 + 341
         May − 2,147 − 883 − 2,207 − 2,095 + 1,325 − 1,264 − 275 − 989 + 111 − 140 + 251         June − 2,875 − 1,845 − 2,378 − 2,162 + 533 − 1,030 − 275 − 755 + 46 − 182 + 227
         July − 3,465 − 2,369 − 2,214 − 2,054 − 155 − 1,096 − 275 − 821 + 39 − 162 + 202
         Aug − 3,745 − 2,744 − 2,599 − 2,203 − 146 − 1,000 − 275 − 725 − 76 − 151 + 74         Sep − 3,115 − 1,975 − 2,318 − 2,208 + 342 − 1,140 − 275 − 864 + 132 − 17 + 149
         Oct − 3,088 − 2,086 − 1,659 − 1,514 − 427 − 1,002 − 275 − 727 + 527 − 8 + 535
         Nov − 2,754 − 1,875 − 1,354 − 1,288 − 521 − 878 − 275 − 603 + 263 − + 263         Dec + 525 + 2,064 + 2,503 + 2,830 − 439 − 1,539 − 275 − 1,264 + 221 − 294 + 515
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the sector to transfers). 3Payments to developing countries, pension payments, tax revenue and
which the participating domestic body belongs. 2Current contributions to the refunds, etc. 4 Where identifiable; in particular, debt forgiveness. 
budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget (excluding capital

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2013
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 226,210 − 355,772 − 15,520 − 28,397 − 36,643 + 16,537 + 32,983 − 37,709 − 31,479 + 102,170
1 Direct investment 1 − 37,527 − 52,088 − 41,440 − 19,699 − 4,953 − 7,853 − 8,934 − 406 − 7,730 − 799
Equity capital − 21,739 − 34,637 − 9,690 − 5,736 − 5,401 − 1,157 + 2,604 − 2,041 + 5,195 − 550
Reinvested earnings 2 − 25,161 − 27,080 − 31,327 − 9,975 − 5,797 − 9,775 − 5,780 − 3,967 − 1,893 + 79
Other capital transactions
of German direct investors + 9,373 + 9,629 − 423 − 3,988 + 6,245 + 3,079 − 5,758 + 5,602 − 11,031 − 328
2 Portfolio investment − 22,665 − 107,955 − 138,433 − 46,658 − 36,835 − 32,975 − 21,965 − 9,055 − 15,850 + 2,940
Shares 3 + 2,130 − 11,186 − 18,726 − 9,822 − 3,252 − 8,805 + 3,153 − 679 − 259 + 4,090
Mutual fund shares 4 − 1,843 − 21,560 − 30,673 − 10,710 − 4,085 − 7,703 − 8,175 − 6,740 − 922 − 512
Bonds and notes 5 − 18,014 − 75,947 − 84,086 − 21,089 − 30,132 − 16,376 − 16,489 + 850 − 13,025 − 4,315
Money market instruments − 4,938 + 738 − 4,948 − 5,036 + 634 − 91 − 454 − 2,486 − 1,644 + 3,676
3 Financial derivatives 6 − 27,511 − 17,885 − 18,307 − 3,880 − 6,090 − 2,084 − 6,253 − 3,346 − 2,680 − 227
4 Other investment − 135,670 − 176,548 + 183,497 + 41,926 + 11,307 + 58,664 + 71,599 − 25,114 − 4,812 + 101,525
MFIs 7,8 + 44,070 + 62,184 + 56,650 + 15 + 523 + 49,719 + 6,393 − 22,438 − 19,573 + 48,405
Long-term − 12,957 + 47,870 + 50,430 + 11,538 + 13,408 + 13,223 + 12,262 + 1,990 + 2,032 + 8,240
Short-term + 57,027 + 14,315 + 6,220 − 11,523 − 12,884 + 36,496 − 5,869 − 24,429 − 21,605 + 40,165
Enterprises and households − 20,612 + 1,985 − 16,193 − 29,128 − 3,984 + 7,272 + 9,648 − 7,556 − 355 + 17,559
Long-term + 5,169 − 1,763 − 1,442 + 1,097 + 89 − 1,208 − 1,420 − 271 − 778 − 371
Short-term 7 − 25,780 + 3,748 − 14,751 − 30,225 − 4,073 + 8,480 + 11,067 − 7,285 + 422 + 17,930
General government − 21,056 − 48,038 − 2,479 + 4,087 + 1,523 − 3,480 − 4,609 − 3,990 − 1,892 + 1,274
Long-term − 2,226 − 48,048 − 11,228 − 451 − 4,604 − 3,069 − 3,105 − 3,508 − 381 + 784
Short-term 7 − 18,829 + 10 + 8,749 + 4,538 + 6,126 − 411 − 1,504 − 483 − 1,512 + 490
Bundesbank − 138,073 − 192,679 + 145,519 + 66,953 + 13,246 + 5,153 + 60,167 + 8,871 + 17,008 + 34,288
5 Change in reserve assets at
transaction values (Increase: −) − 2,836 − 1,297 − 838 − 86 − 72 + 784 − 1,464 + 212 − 407 − 1,269
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 63,600 + 121,943 − 229,812 − 12,287 − 28,598 − 83,281 − 105,646 + 19,521 + 8,792 − 133,960
1 Direct investment 1 + 35,203 + 5,109 + 24,626 + 7,697 − 7,065 + 4,409 + 19,585 + 13,462 + 2,546 + 3,576
Equity capital + 10,856 − 1,971 + 3,683 − 922 − 685 + 384 + 4,907 + 357 + 558 + 3,992
Reinvested earnings 2 + 2,534 + 7,402 + 7,613 + 4,821 − 883 + 2,544 + 1,131 + 1,463 + 113 − 444
Other capital transactionsof foreign direct investors + 21,813 − 323 + 13,330 + 3,799 − 5,497 + 1,481 + 13,547 + 11,643 + 1,875 + 29
2 Portfolio investment + 49,627 + 42,250 − 23,017 + 5,527 − 12,777 − 6,469 − 9,297 − 609 + 18,317 − 27,005
Shares 
3 − 11,418 + 1,148 + 5,223 − 5,384 + 2,818 + 3,861 + 3,928 − 3,771 + 2,712 + 4,987
Mutual fund shares + 6,647 − 3,869 + 6,057 + 73 − 802 + 1,215 + 5,572 + 2,139 + 2,931 + 501
Bonds and notes 5 + 50,314 + 52,925 − 15,419 − 1,480 − 20,675 − 5,057 + 11,793 + 3,391 + 22,172 − 13,770
Money market instruments + 4,084 − 7,954 − 18,878 + 12,317 + 5,883 − 6,488 − 30,590 − 2,367 − 9,498 − 18,724
3 Other investment − 21,231 + 74,584 − 231,422 − 25,511 − 8,756 − 81,220 − 115,934 + 6,667 − 12,071 − 110,531
MFIs 7,8 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 158,601 − 8,840 − 14,206 − 65,173 − 70,382 − 4,419 + 6,727 − 72,690
Long-term − 18,368 − 10,250 − 17,103 − 10,147 − 2,544 − 2,826 − 1,586 − 1,388 + 1,606 − 1,804
Short-term − 78,340 + 61,758 − 141,498 + 1,307 − 11,662 − 62,347 − 68,796 − 3,031 + 5,121 − 70,886
Enterprises and households + 25,006 − 6,034 − 18,282 + 9,452 + 8,384 − 4,231 − 31,887 − 12,675 + 3,082 − 22,294
Long-term − 11,899 − 9,633 − 20,311 − 4,996 − 3,155 − 4,639 − 7,521 − 3,018 − 682 − 3,822
Short-term 7 + 36,905 + 3,599 + 2,029 + 14,448 + 11,539 + 408 − 24,366 − 9,658 + 3,764 − 18,472
General government + 18,519 − 30,826 − 5,264 + 60 + 8,253 − 8,631 − 4,946 + 3,997 − 6,571 − 2,372
Long-term + 5,083 + 36,179 + 7,891 + 687 + 6,043 + 1,324 − 163 − 1,086 + 1,000 − 76
Short-term 7 + 13,436 − 67,005 − 13,155 − 627 + 2,210 − 9,955 − 4,783 + 5,083 − 7,571 − 2,296
Bundesbank + 31,952 + 59,936 − 49,275 − 26,183 − 11,187 − 3,185 − 8,720 + 19,765 − 15,310 − 13,175
III Financial account balance 9 
(Net capital exports: −) − 162,610 − 233,829 − 245,332 − 40,684 − 65,241 − 66,744 − 72,664 − 18,188 − 22,687 − 31,789
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. 2Estimated. 3Including from changes in stocks. Purely statistical changes have been eliminated as far as
participation rights. 4From 1991, including retained earnings. 5From 1975, possible. 8Excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank. 9Financial account balance
excluding accrued interest. 6Options, whether evidenced by securities or not, and including change in reserve assets. 
financial futures contracts. 7The transaction values shown here are mostly derived

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2012          Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560
         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 20,907 27,473 50 557,391 56,280 70,398 691,332
         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 21,110 28,388 50 512,734 54,154 53,965 662,902
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013 780,219 280,295 499,924 319,864 180,060 164,767 15,293 916,415 142,433 773,982 611,659 162,323 95,260 67,063
2013          July 789,196 289,671 499,525 324,104 175,421 159,571 15,850 950,276 182,792 767,484 608,832 158,652 88,618 70,034
         Aug 776,947 276,054 500,893 329,056 171,837 157,022 14,815 932,467 167,777 764,690 608,525 156,165 85,375 70,790         Sep 792,954 282,635 510,319 329,235 181,084 165,884 15,200 943,934 170,717 773,217 607,824 165,393 96,350 69,043
         Oct 785,639 292,066 493,573 313,150 180,423 164,886 15,537 933,886 160,176 773,710 608,772 164,938 95,315 69,623
         Nov 792,236 290,570 501,666 316,214 185,452 169,885 15,567 932,475 162,642 769,833 605,310 164,523 95,812 68,711         Dec 780,219 280,295 499,924 319,864 180,060 164,767 15,293 916,415 142,433 773,982 611,659 162,323 95,260 67,063
Industrial countries 1
 
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013 690,340 276,963 413,377 291,097 122,280 108,838 13,442 829,534 141,063 688,471 574,254 114,217 79,524 34,693
2013          July 699,521 287,724 411,797 294,599 117,198 103,534 13,664 864,536 181,041 683,495 573,712 109,783 74,615 35,168         Aug 686,029 274,141 411,888 297,891 113,997 101,543 12,454 845,587 166,242 679,345 572,562 106,783 71,004 35,779         Sep 701,704 279,335 422,369 300,148 122,221 109,258 12,963 856,730 169,208 687,522 571,605 115,917 81,012 34,905
         Oct 694,910 288,099 406,811 284,397 122,414 108,945 13,469 847,968 158,631 689,337 573,129 116,208 80,619 35,589
         Nov 699,512 286,240 413,272 287,178 126,094 112,462 13,632 846,787 160,852 685,935 570,094 115,841 80,389 35,452         Dec 690,340 276,963 413,377 291,097 122,280 108,838 13,442 829,534 141,063 688,471 574,254 114,217 79,524 34,693
EU member states 1
 
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013 582,602 262,525 320,077 233,074 87,003 76,438 10,565 694,404 126,314 568,090 488,571 79,519 53,187 26,332
2013          July 579,794 265,588 314,206 229,961 84,245 73,667 10,578 735,969 169,555 566,414 488,420 77,994 51,167 26,827
         Aug 573,795 260,380 313,415 231,907 81,508 72,128 9,380 718,162 155,106 563,056 487,173 75,883 48,653 27,230         Sep 583,499 265,554 317,945 230,762 87,183 77,199 9,984 725,230 158,941 566,289 484,781 81,508 54,958 26,550
         Oct 587,412 273,218 314,194 226,596 87,598 77,207 10,391 715,489 146,426 569,063 487,361 81,702 54,398 27,304
         Nov 593,005 271,654 321,351 230,198 91,153 80,436 10,717 713,716 147,484 566,232 484,065 82,167 55,081 27,086         Dec 582,602 262,525 320,077 233,074 87,003 76,438 10,565 694,404 126,314 568,090 488,571 79,519 53,187 26,332
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013 422,992 195,834 227,158 171,157 56,001 49,799 6,202 587,628 99,689 487,939 434,631 53,308 36,467 16,841
2013          July 430,839 207,800 223,039 168,612 54,427 48,371 6,056 616,842 127,440 489,402 437,104 52,298 35,317 16,981         Aug 423,976 202,514 221,462 168,575 52,887 46,853 6,034 606,856 122,401 484,455 433,578 50,877 33,187 17,690         Sep 425,286 203,030 222,256 166,830 55,426 49,244 6,182 610,391 123,618 486,773 432,759 54,014 36,517 17,497
         Oct 427,683 206,283 221,400 165,590 55,810 49,529 6,281 611,956 120,422 491,534 436,897 54,637 36,748 17,889
         Nov 430,406 203,503 226,903 168,543 58,360 51,865 6,495 608,590 122,289 486,301 431,182 55,119 37,628 17,491         Dec 422,992 195,834 227,158 171,157 56,001 49,799 6,202 587,628 99,689 487,939 434,631 53,308 36,467 16,841
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013 89,879 3,332 86,547 28,767 57,780 55,929 1,851 86,881 1,370 85,511 37,405 48,106 15,736 32,370
2013          July 89,675 1,947 87,728 29,505 58,223 56,037 2,186 85,740 1,751 83,989 35,120 48,869 14,003 34,866         Aug 90,918 1,913 89,005 31,165 57,840 55,479 2,361 86,880 1,535 85,345 35,963 49,382 14,371 35,011         Sep 91,250 3,300 87,950 29,087 58,863 56,626 2,237 87,204 1,509 85,695 36,219 49,476 15,338 34,138
         Oct 90,729 3,967 86,762 28,753 58,009 55,941 2,068 85,918 1,545 84,373 35,643 48,730 14,696 34,034
         Nov 92,724 4,330 88,394 29,036 59,358 57,423 1,935 85,688 1,790 83,898 35,216 48,682 15,423 33,259         Dec 89,879 3,332 86,547 28,767 57,780 55,929 1,851 86,881 1,370 85,511 37,405 48,106 15,736 32,370
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are including Estonia. 3All countries that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not December 2010 including Niederländische Antillen; from January 2011 including
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII External sector
 
11 ECB euro reference exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2012          Oct 1.2596 1.2801 8.1390 7.4582 102.47 7.4076 8.6145 1.2098 0.80665 1.2974
         Nov 1.2331 1.2787 7.9998 7.4587 103.94 7.3371 8.6076 1.2052 0.80389 1.2828         Dec 1.2527 1.2984 8.1809 7.4604 109.71 7.3503 8.6512 1.2091 0.81237 1.3119
2013          Jan 1.2658 1.3189 8.2698 7.4614 118.34 7.3821 8.6217 1.2288 0.83271 1.3288
         Feb 1.2951 1.3477 8.3282 7.4598 124.40 7.4232 8.5083 1.2298 0.86250 1.3359         Mar 1.2537 1.3285 8.0599 7.4553 122.99 7.4863 8.3470 1.2266 0.85996 1.2964
         Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
         May 1.3133 1.3257 7.9715 7.4536 131.13 7.5589 8.5725 1.2418 0.84914 1.2982         June 1.3978 1.3596 8.0905 7.4576 128.40 7.7394 8.6836 1.2322 0.85191 1.3189
         July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
         Aug 1.4742 1.3853 8.1477 7.4580 130.34 7.9386 8.7034 1.2338 0.85904 1.3310         Sep 1.4379 1.3817 8.1690 7.4579 132.41 7.9725 8.6758 1.2338 0.84171 1.3348
         Oct 1.4328 1.4128 8.3226 7.4592 133.32 8.1208 8.7479 1.2316 0.84720 1.3635
         Nov 1.4473 1.4145 8.2221 7.4587 134.97 8.2055 8.8802 1.2316 0.83780 1.3493         Dec 1.5243 1.4580 8.3248 7.4602 141.68 8.4053 8.9597 1.2245 0.83639 1.3704
2014          Jan 1.5377 1.4884 8.2368 7.4614 141.47 8.3927 8.8339 1.2317 0.82674 1.3610
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro reference exchange Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB indicative
rates published by the ECB; for additional euro reference exchange rates, see rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2014
XII  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-39  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
25 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
25 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices  4 product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.6 86.0 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.2 85.2 90.8 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.5 84.5 90.4 87.0 91.3 96.0 85.7 89.9 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.3 89.5 87.8 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.2 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.4 100.5 98.8 106.8 101.6 95.2 94.0 97.2 94.6 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.3 102.3 111.4 105.2 95.5 92.9 99.6 94.9 98.4 97.9 98.2
2005 102.9 103.7 101.4 100.3 109.4 102.7 94.4 91.5 98.8 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.7 100.7 99.2 109.4 102.0 93.3 90.1 98.4 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.7
2007 106.2 106.4 102.7 100.9 112.8 104.0 94.2 89.2 102.4 91.6 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.4 103.9 103.7 117.0 105.9 94.3 87.8 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.7 97.0
2009 110.6 109.0 104.8 106.0 119.8 106.8 93.9 87.9 104.0 90.5 101.7 97.9 97.3
2010 103.6 101.5 96.7 98.6 111.5 98.1 91.7 87.7 97.8 87.2 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.6 95.1 p 96.5 112.2 97.6 91.4 87.6 97.5 86.6 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.9 95.5 89.8 p 91.2 107.1 92.8 89.5 87.4 92.4 84.2 96.0 90.3 88.8
2013 101.7 98.9 ... ... 112.0 96.1 ... ... ... ... p 98.3 p 92.1 p 90.8
2010          Oct 104.9 102.5 113.0 99.0 99.1 94.1 92.6
         Nov 103.7 101.1 95.9 98.4 111.8 97.7 91.5 87.7 97.6 87.0 98.7 93.6 92.0
         Dec 101.6 99.1 109.4 95.6 97.8 92.7 90.9
2011          Jan 101.4 98.9 109.4 95.5 97.8 92.4 90.7
         Feb 102.4 99.8 94.8 96.6 110.7 96.5 91.5 87.8 97.3 86.7 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.5 112.4 98.1 98.6 93.5 91.9
         Apr 105.8 103.3 114.1 99.7 99.5 94.3 92.8
         May 104.8 102.1 96.9 99.1 113.3 98.6 92.4 87.6 100.1 87.6 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 104.9 102.1 113.5 98.7 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.7
         Aug 103.8 100.8 95.0 97.1 113.0 98.1 91.3 87.5 97.3 86.4 98.2 93.1 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.8 112.1 97.4 97.8 92.7 91.6
         Oct 103.0 100.1 112.6 97.8 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.8 93.6 p 93.3 112.1 97.3 90.6 87.3 95.5 85.7 97.6 92.7 91.5
         Dec 100.8 98.0 110.3 95.7 96.8 91.8 90.5
2012          Jan 99.0 96.3 108.1 93.7 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.2 91.4 p 93.1 108.4 94.2 89.9 87.3 93.7 84.8 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.9 97.3 108.7 94.3 96.8 91.1 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.1 108.5 94.2 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.1 95.6 90.2 p 92.1 107.3 93.0 89.6 87.4 92.6 84.4 96.0 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.8 106.6 92.4 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.4 93.1 104.3 90.6 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.2 93.0 88.0 p 89.9 104.5 90.6 88.8 87.4 90.5 83.3 95.0 89.0 87.5
         Sep 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.4 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.4 107.3 92.8 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Nov 97.2 94.8 89.6 p 90.0 106.7 92.2 89.7 87.4 92.9 84.2 95.8 89.9 88.4
         Dec 98.7 96.2 108.3 93.5 96.5 90.6 89.1
2013          Jan 100.4 97.9 109.9 94.8 97.4 91.4 89.9
         Feb 101.6 99.0 92.5 p 94.0 111.1 95.7 91.0 87.5 96.5 85.6 98.1 92.0 90.4
         Mar 100.2 97.8 109.5 94.4 97.7 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 97.8 109.8 94.3 97.5 91.3 89.5
         May 100.5 98.0 p 92.9 p 93.8 110.0 94.5 91.6 87.8 97.5 85.9 98.1 91.7 89.9
         June 101.6 98.8 112.0 96.1 98.3 92.2 90.8
         July 101.5 98.8 112.0 96.1 98.4 92.2 90.8
         Aug 102.2 99.5 p 93.3 p 94.2 113.4 97.3 91.8 87.8 98.1 86.0 98.5 92.4 91.4
         Sep 102.0 99.0 113.3 96.9 98.5 92.3 91.3
         Oct 102.8 p 99.6 114.2 p 97.3 98.9 p 92.6 p 91.6
         Nov 102.6 p 99.4 ... ... 114.2 p 97.2 ... ... ... ... 99.0 p 92.9 p 91.8
         Dec 103.9 p 100.9 115.8 p 98.8 p 99.1 p 93.3 p 92.4
2014          Jan 103.4 p 100.5 115.9 p 98.7 p 98.9 p 93.1 p 92.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkeycompute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4By derogation from the standard,
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more the real effective exchange rates of the euro based on consumer price indicesdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 (columns 2 and 6) are computed for the EMU without Latvia. The deflator HICP(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB (EMU-18) is not yet available. The Latvian lats is included in the basket of partner
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral country currencies. 5Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 includinglia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia) as well as Canada,Hungary, Japan, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the UnitedSweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and States. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-20 group.
wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes 7 Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-39 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2013 see the index attached 
to the January 2014 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2013
– Germany’s balance of payments in 2012
– Banks’ internal methods for assessing and 
maintaining internal capital adequacy and 
their relevance to supervision
April 2013
– The US economy in the current economic 
upturn
– Macroprudential oversight in Germany: 
framework, institutions and toolsMay 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2013 and 2014
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: results of the Bundesbank survey
– Household finances, saving and inequality: an international perspective – conference 
held by the Bundesbank and the Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Policy
– Implementing Basel  III in Eur opean and na -
tional law
July 2013
– European Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks – a first step on the road to a banking union
– Estimating yield curves in the wake of the 
financial crisis
– Differences in money and credit growth in 
the euro area and in individual euro-  ar ea 
countries
August 2013
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
79•

September 2013
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2012
– The development of government interest 
 expenditure in Germany
– Forecasting models in short-  term business 
cycle analysis – a workshop report
October 2013
– The determinants and regional dependen -
cies of house price increases since 2010
– Macroeconomic approaches to assessing 
price competitiveness
– International cooperation in the area of 
 financial sector policy – the Financial Stabil -
ity Board (FSB)
November 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2014 and 2015
– Outlook for European retail payments
– German enterprises‘ profitability and finan -
cing in 2012
– The financial system in transition: the new 
importance of repo markets
January 2014
– Adjustment processes in the member states 
of economic and monetary union
February 2014
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
80•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20132, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20132, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 007 to 
2012, June 20132
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres­
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
2006 bis 2012 , December 20132, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2009 bis 
2010, May 20132, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20131, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
48/ 2013  
Changing forces of gravity: how the crisis 
 affected international banking
49/ 2013  
Current account adjustment in EU countries: 
Does euro ­area membership make a differ ­
ence?
50/ 2013  
Real financial market exchange rates and cap ­
ital flows
51/ 2013  
Learning about fiscal policy and the effects of 
policy uncertainty
52/ 2013  
Does expenditure composition influence the 
debt level? Evidence from German federal 
states
53/ 2013  
Banks’ concentration versus diversification in 
the loan portfolio: new evidence from Ger ­
many
54/ 2013  
The role of interbank relationships and liquidity 
needs
55/2013  
Bank leverage cycles and the external finance 
premium
56/2013  
Market timing, maturity mismatch, and risk 
management: evidence from the banking in ­
dustry
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 82•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
81•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2014  
82•

