Monthly Report
August 2014
Vol 66  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 15 August 2014.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Rising food prices as a cause of political unrest in emerging and developing economies  ... 13
The potential effects of a downturn in the Chinese housing market on the real economy  .. 17
Weather effects on real GDP growth in the USA in the first six months of 2014  ..................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  29
Money market risk premia: indicators for the state of the interbank market  .......................  30
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  33
The level of credit standards in the Bank Lending Survey  ....................................................  44
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  49
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  57
Impact on GDP of the 2014 major revision of national accounts  ........................................  58
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  69Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  56 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  63 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  72 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  81 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
5

Overview
Economic outlook for 
 Germany: cloudier, but 
underlying tendency  
remains positive
Global economic growth failed to meet expect -
ations in the first half of 2014, primarily owing 
to the bumpy start to the year. In the second 
quarter, however, the pace of growth picked 
up again markedly. Accelerated growth in 
China and the strong growth of aggregate out -
put in the United States, which had been 
dragged down by a variety of special factors in 
the first quarter of the year, contributed to the 
faster growth. By contrast, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) in Japan contracted sharply as a 
result of the sales tax increase which took 
 effect on 1 April 2014; this followed very strong 
GDP growth in the winter as purchases were 
brought forward. The UK economy continued 
to expand at the rather rapid pace of the pre -
ceding quarters, whereas euro- area real GDP 
unexpectedly failed to gain any further ground 
but instead stagnated at the previous period’s 
level.
The global economy appears to have got off to 
a good start in the second half of the year. As 
regards the industrial countries, Japan’s econ -
omy is expected to rebound in the third quar -
ter. The US economy is likely to remain on a 
growth path, although it will probably be im -
possible to maintain the rapid pace of growth 
attained in the second quarter of the year. Fol -
lowing second- quarter stagnation, the euro 
area is looking at a resumption of positive eco -
nomic growth, albeit not at the pace predicted 
by many analysts in the spring. The underlying 
cyclical trend in some euro- area countries is 
turning out to be weaker than expected. At the 
same time, the geopolitical tensions in Eastern 
Europe owing to the Ukraine conflict as well as 
in other parts of the world are now appearing 
to weigh more heavily on corporate sentiment. 
Although they will only affect a small percent -age of EU exports directly, the recently enacted 
EU sanctions and the Russian response are 
likely to dampen sentiment.
In the spring months, events in the inter -
national financial markets were dictated largely 
by the very expansionary monetary policy in 
the major currency areas. The Governing Coun -
cil of the ECB adopted further monetary policy 
stimulus measures in June, for instance, which 
led to a considerable reduction in bond market 
yields, especially in the euro area; in many 
countries they hit new all- time lows. At the 
same time, market participants’ risk appetite 
remained high, which meant that risky assets 
were trading at extremely low yield spreads up 
to and into June. The high prices of equities 
and corporate bonds were initially supported 
by market participants’ positive underlying as -
sessment of economic activity. However, the 
market valuations of European corporates in 
particular were dragged down by heightened 
geopolitical tensions as well as – in a probably 
related development  – recent, and in some 
cases unexpectedly weaker business indicators, 
notably for the euro area. As a case in point, 
European equity markets have sustained net 
equity price losses of around 5% since the end 
of March, while the US equity market has fared 
more favourably. Market participants particu -
larly saw the Ukraine conflict as a cause of con -
cerns that the resulting economic sanctions im -
posed on Russia could weigh on corporates. 
The distressed state of a Portuguese bank and 
the partial default of Argentina, on the other 
hand, were regarded by the financial markets 
largely as locally contained events. Foreign ex -
change market price developments were char -
acterised largely by current monetary policy de -
cisions and expectations regarding the future 
monetary policy path on either side of the 
 Atlantic. On balance, the euro has lost about 
2½% of its trade- weighted value since the end 
of March.Global growth 
accelerated markedly in second quarter after weak start to year
Signs of a 
c ontinuation of 
upward trend in economic  activity in the 
current quarterFinancial  marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
6

Against the background of the persistently flat 
price trend, on 5  June 2014 the Governing 
Council of the ECB adopted a package of mon -
etary policy measures designed to help the 
HICP return to levels closer to 2%. As part of 
this package of decisions, the Governing Coun -
cil reduced the interest rate on main refinan -
cing operations and the rate on the deposit 
 facility by 10 basis points each. The main refi -
nancing rate is now only 0.15% and the de -
posit facility rate -0.10%. At the same time, the 
marginal lending rate was lowered by 35 basis 
points to 0.40%.
Along with the interest rate reduction, the 
Governing Council of the ECB adopted a series 
of additional measures in June, including ex -
tending full allotment in its monetary policy 
 refinancing operations until at least the end of 
2016 and eight targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations maturing in up to four years. 
These new operations, to be offered for the 
first time in September of this year, are partly 
attached to banks’ past and future lending to 
the private sector and will run until September 
2018. Since, in particular, the medium- run in -
flation outlook is currently appreciably below 
the inflation rate sought by the Eurosystem, the 
adopted package of measures is justifiable, on 
the whole. Nonetheless, the expansionary 
monetary policy also involves the risk that ex -
aggerations could occur on the markets and 
that the euro- area member states’ resolve to 
persist in their consolidation and reform efforts 
could flag.
The modest macroeconomic recovery in the 
euro area, which took hold in the middle of last 
year, seems to be gradually having an effect on 
lending, even if heterogeneity in the euro area 
remains high. One indication of this is that 
euro- area lending to the private sector in the 
spring quarter was slightly positive, on balance, 
for the first time in two years. Securitised lend -
ing to the private sector was also up some -
what, following some strong outflows in the 
previous quarters. Against this backdrop, the 
modest upward trend in monetary and credit growth that could already be seen in the previ -
ous three- month period continued in the re -
porting quarter. However, this does not yet 
represent a broad- based recovery in lending 
activity.
By contrast, the lending business of banks in 
Germany experienced a clear expansion in the 
second quarter of 2014 compared to the previ -
ous quarters. Banks in Germany upped their 
stocks of securities from private domestic 
 issuers and increased their private- sector lend -
ing, particularly to the non- financial private 
sector. As regards lending to households, the 
positive development seen in the previous 
quarter continued. Loans for house purchase 
were once again the driver of growth, with 
their rate of increase continuing to accelerate 
somewhat. According to bank managers ques -
tioned by the Bank Lending Survey (BLS), de -
mand for housing loans was fuelled by both 
optimism on the part of borrowers about hous -
ing market prospects as well as consumer con -
fidence, which again rose slightly. There was 
also an upturn in lending to domestic non-  
financial corporations, with marked growth in 
short-  term and medium-  term loans being re -
corded in the reporting quarter for the first 
time since the summer of 2012. However, ac -
cording to BLS data, demand in this credit seg -
ment was dampened, as in previous quarters, 
by companies tapping alternative sources of 
funding, particularly internal financing.
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, aggregate output in Germany in 
the second quarter of 2014 was down 0.2% on 
the level of the previous quarter after seasonal 
and calendar adjustment. This was due in part 
to a significantly stronger rise in output in a 
number of weather-  dependent economic sec -
tors than is usual for the time of year, as a 
 result of the exceptionally mild temperatures at 
the beginning of the year; in statistical terms, 
this exerted downward pressure on the quar -
ter- on- quarter rate in the reporting period. This 
is compounded by the fact that cyclical devel -
opments fell short of expectations. If the eco -Monetary policy
Monetary 
 developments  
in the euro areaLending  
in Germany
German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
7

nomic developments over the entire first half of 
this year are considered so as to eliminate the 
effects of the weather, the average pace of 
GDP growth amounted to ¼% per quarter. 
Growth therefore slowed compared with the 
second half of 2013 and growth potential, too, 
was not quite achieved. Overall production 
capacity utilisation therefore declined some -
what from its level at the turn of 2013-14, but 
remained within the range of normal capacity 
utilisation.
German enterprises’ foreign business picked up 
again only very slightly in the second quarter of 
2014. In the reporting quarter, exports to euro- 
area partner countries fared better than aver -
age, while overall exports to countries outside 
the euro area barely rose at all. It is striking that 
the downward trend in exports to Russia al -
ready started at the beginning of 2013, with 
the value of these exports falling by nearly one- 
fifth by May 2014. Quite clearly, the conditions 
necessary for prosperous trade with Russia 
began worsening some time before the Ukraine 
crisis. In terms of aggregate imported goods, 
the upward movement that had been visible 
since the start of 2013 did not continue in the 
second quarter of 2014. The weaker demand 
for foreign products hit suppliers from the euro 
area to a greater extent than suppliers from 
third countries in the reporting quarter.
Seasonally adjusted investment expenditure by 
enterprises for new machinery and equipment 
probably did not quite reach the same volume 
in the spring as it did in the winter months. This 
was therefore a blow to the recovery in invest -
ment activity that had started to take hold one 
year ago. Seasonally adjusted construction in -
vestment in the reporting period fell well below 
that of the previous quarter. This sharp fall, 
however, is primarily due to a technical  reversal 
caused by highly elevated production levels in 
the first quarter resulting from weather- induced 
factors. Private consumption is likely to have 
picked up once again in the second quarter.Labour market developments have remained 
positive on the whole. Job growth continued 
on its upward path in the second quarter of 
2014. Owing, in particular, to the weaker than 
usual spring pick- up due to the mild winter, the 
increase in the seasonally adjusted number of 
persons in work in Germany on the previous 
quarter was less sharp than in the first quarter. 
The rise in the number of people employed 
was once again chiefly attributable to add -
itional jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions. At the same time, there was a further fall 
in the number of self- employed persons. One 
possible reason for this is that some of the 
 immigrant workers from Romania and Bulgaria 
might have taken up dependent employment 
after full labour mobility within the EU was 
introduced for this group of immigrants at the 
beginning of this year. Registered unemploy -
ment did not develop as favourably in the 
spring months as it did in winter, even when 
weather effects are eliminated. On balance, 
 enterprises are likely to take a more cautious 
approach to recruitment in the coming months.
The year- on- year increase in negotiated rates 
of pay in the second quarter of this year was, 
at +3.4%, virtually just as pronounced as in the 
first quarter (+3.3%). In the first quarter, the in -
crease was mainly attributable to the consider -
able back payments in the retail sector, whereas 
growth in basic rates of pay (+2.8%) was lower. 
By contrast, in the reporting period it was the 
substantial increases in the scheduled rates of 
pay under the first agreements in this year’s 
pay round that made themselves felt. The year- 
on- year increase in collective wages, at +3.5%, 
excluding one- off payments and fringe bene -
fits, is likely to have peaked in the reporting 
period. One reason for this is that the second 
round of increases that such agreements often 
contain has been lower than the first in the 
agreements to date. What is more, the in -
creases contained in the most recent agree -
ments fell short of the increases negotiated in 
the agreements concluded at the beginning of 
the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
8

In the second quarter, prices at the upstream 
stages of the economy declined further in sea -
sonally adjusted terms in Germany. The main 
reason was a downwards trend in the price of 
energy, and here especially the sharply reduced 
prices for gas and electricity, while the cost of 
petroleum products even rose slightly, in line 
with prices on the international markets. Other 
industrial goods prices, too, moderated both at 
the import level and at the domestic producer 
level. Consumer price inflation slowed some -
what again in the second quarter. The slightly 
weaker uptrend was due, in particular, to a 
clear drop in prices for fruit and vegetables, 
which had risen considerably in 2013 as a result 
of weather- related factors. Almost none of the 
sharp corrections in the prices of gas and elec -
tricity at the producer and import level have, to 
date, been passed on to consumers. In July, 
consumer prices – as measured using the na -
tional and the harmonised European con -
cepts – were up 0.8% on the year.
A flurry of unfavourable news reports relating 
to the international environment have damp -
ened Germany’s economic outlook in the 
second half of the year. Current indicators cast 
doubt on the assumption on which the spring 
forecasts were based, namely that the under -
lying cyclical trend would strengthen further in 
the second half of 2014. The Ifo Institute’s 
business climate index has dropped three times 
in a row of late, with the expectations com -
ponent, in particular, falling. The fact that the 
order flow declined perceptibly over the course 
of the second quarter and export expectations 
have dropped suggests that the industrial econ -
omy will be especially hard hit by the disruptive 
external factors. This can probably be explained 
in part by the fact that sanctions against Russia 
have been tightened and the Russian govern -
ment has taken countermeasures, which will 
impact foreign trade. Nonetheless, sentiment 
has deteriorated from a high level, which, to -
gether with the fact that the trend for domestic 
demand remains basically upwards, suggests 
that the economy will not change direction. In 
any case, the prospects for the construction in -dustry remain favourable, and consumer senti -
ment has, so far, been undented by the in -
creased economic risks.
Germany’s public finances remain in compara -
tively good shape, and the very high debt ratio 
is starting to come down. Supported by gener -
ally favourable underlying conditions such as 
very advantageous funding conditions, small 
surpluses were recorded in both 2012 and 
2013, and a roughly balanced government 
budget is expected for 2014 and 2015. Interest 
spending could drop further due not only to 
favourable cyclical factors, but also to lower 
average interest rates and reduced debt.  By 
contrast, various fiscal measures are weighing 
on public finances. For instance, additional 
funds are earmarked for transport infrastruc -
ture, childcare, education and research as well 
as, notably, pensions. Nevertheless, the legal 
provisions limiting the amount of reserves that 
the statutory pension insurance scheme is 
allowed to hold could lead to the pension con -
tribution rate being cut, which would acceler -
ate the foreseeable reduction of the scheme’s 
financial reserves.
The Federal Finance Ministry’s latest medium-  
term projection forecasts general government 
surpluses in a magnitude of ½% of GDP from 
2016 onwards. The debt ratio is to be reduced 
rapidly, albeit not enough to bring it below the 
60% limit by the end of 2018 (65%). It is basic -
ally a welcome development that a structural 
surplus of up to ½% of GDP is forecast, provid -
ing a clear safety margin vis- à- vis the medium- 
term European budget objective. However, the 
cyclical adjustment method used appears to 
paint too rosy a picture of the structural 
budgetary position and consequently the safety 
margin. Moreover, the structurally compara -
tively stable balance can be attributed in part 
to lower interest expenditure, which masks a 
slight easing of the fiscal stance. It is some -
times recommended that Germany pursue a 
significantly more expansionary fiscal policy, 
particularly by increasing government invest -
ment on an unfunded basis, and that it should Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
9

exploit deficit ceilings more fully. The reasoning 
is that this would, inter alia,  strengthen growth 
potential. While basically laudable, this object -
ive could, however, readily be achieved by initi -
ating structural shifts or changing policy prior -
ities without further easing the budgetary 
stance.
With regard to its pattern of expenditure, Ger -
many’s Federal government has, to date, clearly 
focused additional spending on pension bene -
fits, while devoting considerably fewer add -
itional funds to government investment, for 
instance. This appears counterproductive in 
terms of strengthening growth potential. Given 
both the extremely favourable conditions for 
public finances and the ongoing budgetary 
risks, it would, in fact, be advisable to pursue a 
more ambitious budgetary policy rather than 
loosening fiscal policy. This would allow the 
debt ratio to be brought below the 60% 
threshold more quickly, helping to lessen the impact, in particular, of the demographic chal -
lenges that lie ahead. Furthermore, it would 
appear advisable to make the most of the cur -
rently favourable auspices and push ahead 
more energetically with the budget consolida -
tion required at various levels of government. 
The Federal government has, however, notice -
ably lowered last year’s medium- term fiscal tar -
gets and forecasts a deterioration in the struc -
tural budget situation for next year despite a 
balanced budget. Given that conditions are 
very favourable for the Federal budget, there is 
much to be said for planning on maintaining 
clear safety margins vis- à- vis the strict national 
deficit ceilings, not least as procyclical correc -
tions may otherwise be necessary if the situ -
ation takes a turn for the worse. Experience 
shows the importance of prudent budgetary 
policy in good times in order to have scope for 
manoeuvre if the environment deteriorates. 
This is equally true of Germany as the euro ar -
ea’s stability anchor.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Global economic growth failed to meet expect -
ations in the first half of 2014, primarily be -
cause the year got off to a bumpy start. The 
pace of growth picked up again markedly in 
the second quarter. Global industrial output, at 
+½% after seasonal adjustment in April- May, 
was only slightly up on the average for the win -
ter quarter, but the volume of global trade 
picked up again distinctly at the end of the 
period under review – after a seasonally ad -
justed decline of more than ½% in the first 
quarter. At the same time, the fairly rapid re -
covery in a number of key economies’ labour 
markets continued in the past few months. Key 
factors in the slightly faster pace of global eco -
nomic activity in the spring were, first, acceler -
ated growth in China and, second, the strong 
growth of aggregate output in the United 
States, which a variety of extraordinary factors 
had dragged down in the first quarter of the 
year. Looking at the group of industrial coun -
tries as a whole, however, the US economy’s 
return to growth contrasted with the sharp 
contraction of real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in Japan as a result of the VAT hike on 
1 April 2014, following a very steep rise there in 
the winter thanks to anticipatory effects. The 
UK economy continued to grow at the fairly 
high pace of the preceding quarters. Economic 
output remained at the prior- period level in the 
euro area, again dashing hopes of the upturn 
strengthening and stabilising. In the aggregate, 
real GDP in the aforementioned group of coun -
tries was up by a seasonally adjusted ¼% in the 
spring quarter as against the previous period, in 
which it had grown only slightly. It exceeded its 
year- earlier result by 1½%.
Economic growth in Japan is set to point up -
wards again in the current quarter. The US 
economy is likely to remain on a growth trajec -
tory, although it will probably be unable to 
maintain the fast pace of the second quarter. Following stagnation in the spring, the euro 
area is looking at renewed real GDP growth, 
although probably not on the scale predicted 
by many analysts in the spring. At least the 
survey- based indicators already available for 
July point to moderate growth. For example, 
industrial confidence in the euro area con -
tinued to outperform the long-  term average, 
and the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) 
for manufacturing and services were clearly 
above the threshold that indicates growth. The 
geopolitical tensions in eastern Europe caused 
by the Ukraine conflict as well as in other parts 
of the world now seem to be weighing more 
heavily on business confidence. Although they 
will only affect a very small percentage of EU 
exports directly, the recently enacted EU sanc -
tions and retaliatory measures by Russia are 
likely to dampen sentiment.
The IMF staff, in response to the factors men -
tioned at the beginning of this article, reduced 
its global growth forecast for the current year 
by 0.3 percentage point to 3.4%.1 This means 
that the pace of growth in 2014 will be fairly 
sluggish in a longer- term comparison. The 
growth forecast of 4.0% was retained for 2015. 
Overall, the adjustments focus on the current 
year, with the estimate for the group of indus -
trial countries reduced by 0.4 percentage point 
to 1.8% and that for the group of emerging 
market economies (EMEs) by 0.2 percentage 
point to 4.6%. The growth forecast for the 
United States was lowered particularly sharply, 
from 2.8% to 1.7%, primarily owing to the 
weak start to the year. However, a marked up -
ward correction is to be expected again here as Global growth 
accelerates markedly in spring after weak start to year
Signs that the 
upward trend will continue in the current quarterIMF forecast again revised downwards
1 It should be noted that the IMF now uses the recently 
published new purchasing power parities for its aggregate 
calculations. This perspective gives the EMEs and develop -
ing countries a greater weighting in the global economy. 
Consequently, the forecasts, but also the historical values, 
for global GDP growth are somewhat higher than previ -
ously estimated. This effect is not evident in the revisions 
mentioned here, however, as the reference figures on 
which they are based, ie the forecasts made in the April 
World Economic Outlook, were corrected accordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
11

the quarterly profile in the last three months of 
2013 and the first quarter of 2014 is more fa -
vourable following the revisions and given the 
good performance in the spring. The projection 
for the euro area was confirmed at 1.1%, as 
downward revisions for France and Italy and in -
creases for Germany and Spain more or less 
balanced each other out. However, a reduction 
now seems likely for the euro area as a whole 
following the disappointing result for the 
second quarter. In addition, the growth rates 
for the United Kingdom and Japan were lifted 
to 3.2% and 1.6% respectively. In the group of 
EMEs, the CIS countries in particular were af -
fected by negative corrections, with Russia’s 
forecasts for 2014 and 2015 reduced by more 
than 1 percentage point in each case, to 0.2% 
and 1.0%. For Latin America, the rates were 
cut by ½ percentage point and ¼ percentage 
point respectively to 2.0% and 2.6%, whereas 
the downward revisions for the Asia region 
were fairly moderate. IMF staff made some -
what more cautious estimates for China’s growth prospects than in the spring, forecast -
ing 7.4% for this year and 7.1% next year. The 
2014 forecast for global trade growth was also 
revised downward by 0.3 percentage point to 
4.0%. The IMF believes that downward risks 
for the global economy continue to predomin -
ate. With regard to the oil markets, the geopol -
itical risks arising from events in the Middle East 
are now classified as higher, while the risks em -
anating from the Ukraine conflict are estimated 
as being unchanged.
Intensifying geopolitical tensions at times had a 
considerable impact on the crude oil market 
during the reporting period. Having mostly 
traded below the US$110 per barrel mark in 
the first two months of spring, the spot price of 
Brent rose significantly in June given the mili -
tary escalation in Iraq. Tensions on the crude oil 
market subsequently eased, probably partly 
based on the expectation of a resumption of 
exports from Libya and concerns about a slump 
in demand. On average across July, prices fell 
back to their May level. The weakness in the 
spot market was probably one reason that 
mark- ups had to be paid for deliveries made 
some months later. Spot prices had not been 
lower than forward prices for quite some time 
prior to this. As this report went to press, the 
spot price for Brent fell to its lowest point this 
year, of US$103¾ per barrel, with only small 
discounts being offered for deliveries well into 
the future. Prices for industrial commodities 
trended sideways in the past few months. By 
contrast, food and beverages became notice -
ably cheaper from the beginning of May as 
harvest prospects improved thanks to more fa -
vourable weather. In the past, surges in food 
prices in international commodities markets 
have often been seen as triggers for political 
unrest in EMEs and developing countries. An 
econometric analysis shows, however, that 
– unlike local prices – global market prices have 
no significant influence on a measure of polit -
ical instability (see box on pages 13 to 16).
General consumer price inflation clearly gained 
strength in the industrial countries over the Temporary rise 
in price of crude oilWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  HWWI.  • Average  of  1  to 
8 August or 1 to 13 August 2014 (crude oil).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201460708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commoditiesFood and 
beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
12

Rising food prices as a cause of political unrest in emerging 
and developing economies
Prices on international commodity markets 
rose sharply between the start of the mil-
lennium and the outbreak of the global 
 fi  nancial and economic crisis. Between July 2001 and July 2008, the US- dollar price of Brent crude oil increased by 446½%, while 
the HWWI price indices for industrial raw 
materials and for food and beverages1 rose 
by 176¾% and 179¾% respectively. In the summer of 2008, prices for these commod-ities not only reached record highs in nom-
inal terms, they also rose considerably in real terms too, ie taking increases in US consumer prices into account, although 
some real prices remained well below previ-ous highs.
The recession- induced fall in prices in the winter of 2008-2009, which was particu-
larly pronounced for crude oil and industrial 
raw materials, was followed by a swift re-
covery. In the fi  rst half of 2011, the HWWI 
price index for food and beverages reached new historical highs in nominal terms. Since 
mid-2011, there has been a moderate downward trend in commodity prices. However, prices for food and beverages 
were recently still 106½% higher than the 
average of the pre- crisis period from 2000 
to 2007, with equivalent fi  gures for wheat 
and corn up 70½% and 87% respectively.
When major unrest broke out in Tunisia in 
December 2010 and quickly spread to other 
Arab countries, many saw increased food 
prices as a causal factor. Similar arguments had already been made in 2008, when the 
sharp rise in prices on food markets coin-
cided with unrest in India, Haiti, and some 
countries in Africa and the Middle East. In-
deed, anecdotal evidence can be found from all periods of history to suggest that 
political unrest has been triggered by sharp increases in food prices.It would therefore seem to tie in rather well 
that North African countries, where wheat 
fl  our is the most important basic foodstuff, 
account for about 17% (in 2011) of global 
wheat imports and that Egypt and Algeria 
were the world’s top two wheat importers in 2011. However, the causal relationship to 
the events that took place in 2011 is less 
clear than it might seem at fi  rst glance. For 
example, during the Arab Spring, unrest 
spread from North Africa to countries in the 
Middle East such as Saudi Arabia, Iran and 
Bahrain, where broad sections of the popu-
lation have a fairly high level of material 
wealth compared with North African coun-tries. Indeed, even when a rise in prices for 
basic foodstuffs has triggered large- scale 
unrest in the past, it is possible that this was 
merely the fi  nal straw, with the underlying 
causes of the unrest being serious eco-
nomic, political and social failings. This the-
1 This includes cereals, soya, coffee and sugar.Indices of commodity prices in nominal 
and real terms
Source: HWWI and Bundesbank calculations. 1 On a US-dollar 
basis. 2 Deflated using the US consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank1969 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 13251025501002003004002010 = 100, log scale
102550100200300400Industrial raw materials
Food and beverages
Crude oil
Real 2Nominal 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
13

ory is borne out by the fact that unrest and 
revolts are usually local phenomena, while 
increases in international food prices tend 
to affect many countries.
In this context, it is important to note that 
the signifi  cance of fl  uctuations in inter-
national food prices can vary dramatically from country to country. One important 
factor is the extent to which fulfi  lling basic 
dietary requirements in a given country is 
dependent on certain foods. Another is the extent to which price increases at the inter-
national level cause domestic prices to 
change. According to IMF estimates, a rise 
of 1% in international food prices leads on average to a long- term rise of 0.34% in do-
mestic consumer food prices in emerging 
and developing economies.2 The fi  gure for 
industrial countries is estimated to be 
0.18%. However, there are considerable dif-
ferences from country to country and the correlation between world market prices 
for wheat and prices for wheat- based foods tends to be low.
The fact that the correlation between inter-
national and domestic prices is not particu-larly high, either on average or in individual 
countries, can be explained by various fac-
tors. For example, domestic prices are also 
infl  uenced by the cost of distribution and logistics. Moreover, governments, particu-larly in emerging and developing econ-omies, frequently use import and export tariffs or non- tariff barriers to partially or completely uncouple domestic markets 
from global markets. Furthermore, subsidies 
and government price controls, which are 
common for basic foodstuffs in many coun-tries, also limit the infl  uence of world mar-
ket prices on domestic prices. In light of 
this, it is too simplistic to see a direct causal 
relationship between developments on 
international commodity and food markets 
and events in individual countries.
Furthermore, the direction of the effect of 
rising food prices on the occurrence of pol-itical unrest is, theoretically, only clear when food is predominantly imported. In this case, increasing food prices mean that al-most all inhabitants of a country will see their real income fall. However, if most or all food is produced domestically, higher 
prices reduce the purchasing power of con-sumers but also increase the income of pro-
ducers, meaning that the (net) effect of  rising prices on political stability is unclear a  priori. Indeed, there are also many ex-amples from history of farmers revolting 
and taking to the streets in periods of low 
global market prices because producer 
prices were too low.
All things considered, an examination of the empirical effects of increases in food prices on political stability should not be limited to anecdotal evidence, but should be supplemented and substantiated by 
econometric analyses that incorporate con-
trol variables. We therefore performed a 
panel data analysis examining the infl  uence 
of the price of wheat, corn, rice and soya 
on political stability in developing countries, 
based on data from 57 emerging and de-veloping economies over a period of 29 
years (1980 to 2008). First of all, the degree 
of political instability as measured by an 
index devised by Banks and Wilson (2014)3 
was regressed on the average annual per-centage change – linear and squared – in domestic prices for wheat, corn, rice and 
soya.4 For comparison, the index was also 
regressed on the average annual percent-
age change in world market prices for the 
aforementioned foodstuffs. The instability 
index is a weighted indicator calculated on 
the basis of the amount of political assas-
sinations, general strikes, guerrilla warfare, 
government crises, political purges, riots, revolutions and anti- government demon-
2 See IMF, Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price 
Swings and Monetary Policy, IMF World Economic 
Outlook, September 2011.
3 A S Banks and K A Wilson (2014), Cross- National 
Time- Series Data Archive, Databanks International, 
 Jerusalem.
4 Where data was missing, the mean of the available price data was used.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
14

strations per year and per country.5 The 
price data (domestic data in local currency) 
were taken from the FAOSTAT database of 
the UN’s Food and Agriculture  Organisation 
(FAO). The selection of control variables 
(GDP per capita, infl  ation rate, globalisa-
tion,6 population density, degree of democ-
ratisation, length of time in offi   ce and polit-
ical ideology of the current government as 
well as infant mortality) is in line with the 
existing literature.7 The regressions were es-
timated using OLS and panel- corrected standard errors.
8 Furthermore, controls 
were carried out for regional fi  xed effects 
and AR(1) autocorrelation.9
The results show that there is no signifi  cant correlation between a change in the global price of wheat, corn, rice and soya and pol-itical instability in emerging and developing 
economies. However, such a correlation does exist for domestic prices, with price 
rises having a destabilising effect. The nega-tive but relatively small quadratic term could 
imply, on the one hand, that political in-stability tends to recede when there are 
very large changes to domestic prices. This 
may be because large price fl  uctuations 
lead to famine or because both famine and 
large price fl  uctuations are the result of crop failures and in such situations the 
starving population initially focus on survival 
and put political activities on hold. On the 
other hand, the signifi  cantly negative quad-
ratic term could indicate an asymmetric 
 effect of positive and negative price changes on political stability.
According to this analysis, increasing glob-
alisation has a stabilising effect when 
viewed in isolation, probably partly due to 
the possibility to balance out domestic price 
fl  uctuations through trade. Furthermore, 
other things being equal, governments with a longer period in offi   ce are correlated with 5 For a detailed description of how the index is consti-
tuted, see Banks and Wilson (2014), op cit.
6 Measured by the economy’s degree of openness, 
i. e. the sum of imports and exports as a percentage of nominal GDP .7 See, for example, A Alesina and R Perotti (1996), In-
come distribution, political instability, and investment, 
European Economic Review 40 (6), pp  1203-1228; 
L Blanco and R Grier (2009), Long live democracy: The 
determinants of political instability in Latin America, Journal of Development Studies 45 (1), pp  76-95; 
P Dutt and D. Mitra (2008), Inequality and the instabil-
ity of polity and policy, Economic Journal 118 (531), 
pp 1285-1314.8 See N Beck and J N Katz (1995), What to do (and not 
to do) with time- series cross- section data, American 
Political Science Review 89 (3), pp 634-647.
9 The results remain largely robust even when using 
other estimation methods (standard errors robust to 
spatial autocorrelation and clusters as well as pooled 
FGLS, each controlled for AR(1)).Political instability and changes 
in food prices
 
VariableWorld 
market prices Domestic prices
GDP per capita 1 –     0.01 0.00
[–     0.28] [0.06]
Infl  ation rate 0.12 0.05
[1.51] [0.30]
Globalisation –    21.38*** –  20.13***
[–     4.50] [–   4.12]
Population density 0.03 0.02
[1.23] [0.80]
Degree of 
 democratisation 16.32 14.58
[1.12] [0.99]
Length of govern-
ment’s time in offi   ce –    20.74*** –  21.47***
[–     2.83] [–   2.90]
Political ideology (left/right wing) –    12.30 –  89.44
[–     0.08] [–   0.58]
Infant mortality (per 1,000) 1.82 4.29
[0.52] [1.15]
Asia –   246.89 – 101.30
[–     0.62] [–   0.24]
Sub- Saharan Africa –   592.36 – 687.04*
[–     1.53] [–   1.76]
Middle East and 
North Africa –   254.47 – 286.05
[–     0.79] [–   0.89]
Eastern Europe –   466.12* – 597.67**
[–     1.86] [–   2.37]
Average world 
 market price (% change pa) 41.07
[0.11]
Average world  market price 
(% change pa), 
squared – 1,511.34
[–     1.20]
Average domestic 
price (% change pa) 124.19***
[2.77]
Average domestic price (% change pa), 
squared –   1.85***
[–   2.76]
Number of  observations 1.417 1.318
R- square 0.04 0.05
Number of countries 57 57
1 In PPP terms. *** p<0.01. ** p<0.05. * p<0.1. Dependent 
variable: combined index of political instability. Z- statistics 
in parentheses.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
15

course of the spring quarter. The year- on- year 
change in an appropriately constructed price 
index, for instance, rose from 1.1% in March to 
1.7% in June. This was particularly, but not 
solely, attributable to the VAT hike in Japan and 
higher energy prices. If Japan is excluded from 
the analysis, and energy and food are also left 
out of the underlying basket of goods, the core 
rate defined in this way still went up by 0.2 per -
centage point to 1.6%. Although general infla -
tion remains subdued, there is nothing to sug -
gest that inflation in the industrial countries as 
a group will ease significantly.
Selected emerging market 
economies
Following a rather subdued start to the year, 
the Chinese economy picked up momentum 
again in the spring quarter. According to the 
official estimate, real GDP rose 2% in season -
ally adjusted terms on the previous period, in which it had grown by 1½%. Economic output 
was up 7½% year- on- year in the first half of 
2014. The acceleration in the spring is likely to 
be attributable partly to the expansionary fiscal 
and monetary policy measures previously initi -
ated by the government. In addition, foreign 
demand again provided more of a catalyst. In 
contrast to this, the slowdown in the Chinese 
housing market continued, although it does 
not appear to have had a notable effect on 
overall economic activity so far (see box on 
pages 17 to 20). The fairly high GDP growth 
reported is in marked contrast to developments 
in Chinese imports of goods, however, which 
rose by just 1½% in the first half of the year on 
a US dollar basis. In real terms, however, this 
growth could have been somewhat stronger, 
as lower prices, especially for commodities, 
have to be taken into account. Consumer price 
inflation remained muted until recently, with 
the inflation rate moving around the 2% mark 
over the course of the quarter.Consumer price 
inflation in the industrial coun-tries gains strength
Higher pace 
of overall  economic growth in Chinahigher stability. This fi  nding appears plaus-
ible at fi  rst sight, but contradicts the theory 
of institutional sclerosis. According to this 
theory, over time, governments become in-
creasingly negatively infl  uenced by interest 
groups and government action increasingly 
deviates from the optimum due to the self- interest of those in power.
10 The underlying 
level of instability varies from region to re-
gion. Countries in Sub- Saharan Africa and 
Eastern Europe are more stable than those 
of the South American peer group.11
While there is therefore no evidence of a statistically signifi  cant correlation between world market prices for food and political instability in emerging and developing economies, there is evidently a systematic correlation between domestic food prices 
and political instability in these countries,12 
with price rises increasing the likelihood of 
political unrest, depending on the specifi  c 
circumstances.10 See M Olson (1982), The Rise and Decline of 
 Nations, Yale University Press, New Haven.
11 The model’s explanatory power is relatively low. 
However, this is common for macro panel models 
without fi  xed country effects.
12 Studies examining the impact of price increases for 
crude oil and industrial raw materials on political stabil-
ity have uncovered completely different mechanisms 
of infl  uence. A decisive factor is often that the increas-
ing resource wealth of a country or region within a country resulting from rising raw material prices in-
creases the incentive of certain population groups to 
exercise control over the exploitation of these raw 
 materials, which increases the probability of a coup or 
of military confl  ict. See R Bates, A Greif and S Singh 
(2002), Organizing violence, Journal of Confl  ict Reso-
lution 46 (5), pp  599-628; T Besley and T Persson (2010), State capacity, confl  ict, and development, Econometrica 78(1), pp 1-34. Standing somewhat in 
contrast to this is the “resource curse” literature, which examines the effects of natural resource abundance. It 
fi  nds no robust, systematic correlation between the  resources a country has at its disposal and the fre-
quency of civil wars, although anecdotal evidence with regard to diamonds and crude oil in African countries, 
for example, would suggest otherwise. See P Collier 
and A Höﬄ   er (2004), Greed and grievance in civil war, Oxford Economic Papers 56 (4), pp 563-595; J D Fearon (2005), Primary commodity exports and civil war, Jour-nal of Confl  ict Resolution 49 (4), pp 483-507; M Hum-phreys (2005), Natural resources, confl  ict, and confl  ict 
resolution – Uncovering the Mechanisms, Journal of Confl  ict Resolution 49 (4), pp  508-537; M L Ross (2006), A closer look at oil, diamonds, and civil war, 
Annual Review of Political Science 9 (1), pp 265-300. 
For an overview see P Collier (2007), The Bottom Bil-
lion, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
16

The potential effects of a downturn in the Chinese housing 
market on the real economy
There have been signs of a slowdown in ac-
tivity in the Chinese housing market since 
the beginning of 2014. The number of homes purchased has decreased consider-
ably and house prices have shown a slight 
downward trend on average across the country. Apart from periods of consolida-tion in 2008 and in the fi  rst half of 2012, 
the Chinese housing market experienced a 
prolonged and extremely robust upturn in previous years. In the process, property prices and construction activity may also 
have been exaggerated. The Chinese hous-
ing market appears to be particularly vul-nerable to this, not least because savings deposits only generate low returns as a 
 result of the country’s interest rate regula-
tion and property is therefore a popular in-
vestment choice. Over the last few years, the authorities have thus tried to prevent 
property speculation by placing restrictions 
on the purchase of second and third homes. To support demand, however, these restric-tions have been eased again in many cities in recent months.
Various signs of imbalances in the Chinese 
property market have led to worries that the slowdown currently emerging could 
signal the start of a considerable structural 
adjustment. In this case, the construction sector, too, would face a deep and more prolonged downturn, which would prob-ably have a marked dampening effect on macroeconomic growth in China. China’s 
national accounts show the key importance 
of the construction sector. Last year, the construction sector as a whole (including 
housing construction, commercial construc-
tion and public sector construction) ac-
counted for 7% of total value added. This 
share has also risen considerably over the past few years. In 2013, the Chinese con-struction sector (measured in terms of its nominal value added based on market  exchange rates) even overtook the US con-
struction sector to become the largest in 
the world.1
The expenditure side of gross domestic product (GDP) generally provides a more 
comprehensive overview of how important 
the construction sector is to an economy 
than residential investment (which also in-
cludes components from other sectors).2 
However, the Chinese national accounts show only total gross fi  xed capital forma-tion and not the individual components. Residential investment can therefore only be gauged approximately. The estimation 
presented here is based on the value of all 
new buildings constructed in one year ac-cording to  Chinese construction statistics. 
Last year, it was RMB 9 trillion, or 16% of 
GDP . Yet, as these constructions could be 
homes, commercial property or public sec-
tor buildings, the latter two have to be 
 removed from the data. To do this, invest-
ment in buildings is weighted by the share 
of newly built fl  oor space that is designated for housing purposes in the individual years according to the construction statistics. This results in a share of just under 11% of GDP last year.
3
The share of residential investment in GDP 
calculated using this method appears very 
high compared with the corresponding per-
1 China’s cement consumption also indicates that its 
construction sector is the largest in the world. Accord-
ing to offi   cial fi  gures, China used no less than 2.4 bil-lion tonnes in 2013. Apart from a few countries in the 
Middle East, China also has the highest per capita 
 cement consumption.
2 As a rule, it also includes imported services, which 
are not usually of major signifi  cance.3 The approach taken here is more likely to underesti-
mate the level of residential investment because it 
does not include renovations. In other countries, this 
component accounts for a fairly considerable share of overall residential investment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
17

centages in industrial countries.4 However, 
it must be remembered that there is far 
greater demand for additional housing in 
China. This is mainly due to the large num-
bers of people migrating to the cities. The 
urban population grew by 3¾% per year on average between 2000 and 2010. The United Nations assumes that the growth 
rate will be 2½% per year this decade. Fur-thermore, according to offi   cial Chinese fi  g-ures, the average living space per person in 
the cities has risen steadily from just over 
20m² in 2000 to 33m² in 2012. The trend 
towards larger and better quality housing is likely to continue as households’ income is 
expected to increase further over the next 
few years.
However, the impression that residential  investment in China is very high by inter-national standards is also supported by a 
comparison of its share of GDP with that of 
Japan and South Korea when they had a similar income level to China today (in 
around 1967 in Japan and in around 1988 
in South Korea). At those times, residential 
investment amounted to only about 6% of 
GDP in both countries. Even as develop-
ment progressed, this fi  gure never exceeded the 9% mark.Beyond the evidence that residential invest-ment in China has reached a fairly high level 
by international standards, further indica-
tions suggest that there is a structural sur-
plus of newly constructed housing. In many 
cities, a considerable amount of vacant 
housing stock appears to have accumulated 
in the meantime. Although the National 
Bureau of Statistics of China and other na-tional authorities do not publish any offi   cial 
fi  gures in this area, based on a large- scale 
household survey, the Survey and Research 
Center for China Household Finance esti-
mates that the  vacancy rate in cities rose to 22% in 2013.
5
Against this background, it is fairly likely 
that the new housing stock created by the 
construction sector currently exceeds de-
mand. In the next few years, Chinese con-
struction investment may therefore not only 
expand less strongly than before, but may 
even contract. Based on the share of GDP 
mentioned above, a decline in residential 
investment of 10% in one year would lower 
GDP growth by around one percentage 
point in purely statistical terms.
The dampening effect on GDP growth 
would probably be distinctly larger because lower residential investment is likely to have 
a negative impact on other aggregate de-
mand components. For example, job losses 
in the construction sector and reduced 
 demand for furniture and furnishings would affect private consumption. However, these effects are very diffi   cult to estimate. In turn, 
it must be remembered that residential  investment also comprises a small volume 
of imports, which would slightly reduce the 
impact on Chinese GDP , but which would 
accordingly affect foreign trading partners, 
4 For example, residential investment in the USA 
amounted to just 6½% of GDP in 2005, ie at the 
height of the property boom.
5 See Housing Vacancy Rates and Housing Market 
Trends – Findings from CHFS, presentation by Li Gan, 
July 2014, unpublished.Indicators for the Chinese 
housing market
Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBS). Values for 
2014 extrapolated by the Bundesbank based on data for the 
first  seven  months.  1 On  a  square  metre  basis.  2 Average 
transaction prices (in renminbi) on a square metre basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141002003004005006007002000 = 100, log scale
Sales 1
Housing prices 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
18

particularly exporters of commodities such 
as Australia, which would, for instance, 
supply less iron ore to China due to a drop 
in sales of construction steel.
A marked correction in the Chinese prop-
erty market could also have a negative im-
pact on the real economy via other chan-
nels. It should therefore be assumed that a 
downturn will bring about a fall in house 
prices, which is likely to generate negative 
wealth effects for non- fi  nancial corpor-ations and households. This is particularly 
true given the prominent role that property 
plays as an investment choice. Apart from 
this, losses in value on property that is used 
as loan collateral could lead to losses for 
commercial banks. In the worst case scen-
ario, this would place a strain on the stabil-
ity of the fi  nancial system and curb invest-
ment owing to a reduced supply of credit. 
However, a risk of this nature appears to be 
limited by the fact that a relatively large amount of equity is generally provided 
when purchasing a home in China – due in part to households’ high propensity to save. This means that even if property prices were 
to fall sharply, the value of a house would 
be unlikely to fall below the loan amount in the vast majority of cases and homeowners would therefore be unlikely to have any in-centive to stop their loan repayments.
A property market downturn could also spill 
over to the real economy via land sales, 
which are a major source of funding, espe-
cially for local governments. According to 
calculations by the IMF, the corresponding 
net general government revenue (ie after 
the deduction of costs for the acquisition of 
land or compensation payments to house-
hold owners in the case of expropriation) 
has been between 2% and 3% of GDP in 
the past few years.6 In the event of a down-
turn in the property market, this revenue 
would probably shrink sharply as a result of 
falling land prices but also as a result of a 
reduction in the number of designated building sites. As local governments already 
have a considerable level of debt, they 
might then be forced to scale back their in-vestments.
All in all, there is much to suggest that a 
reduction of the imbalances in the Chinese 
housing market, which may be about to occur, could perceptibly impair the coun-try’s macroeconomic development. How-
ever, given that the statistics are fairly rough 
and incomplete, estimates of the probabil-
ity of a correction as well as the extent and the macroeconomic effects thereof are sub-ject to considerable uncertainty.
6 See IMF, People’s Republic of China – Staff Report 
for the 2014 Article IV Consultation, July 2014.Residential investment in China, Japan 
and South Korea during their period of economic recovery
Sources: National data, Penn World Table 7.1 and Bundesbank 
calculations.  1 Investment  in  housing  construction  according 
to  the  Bundesbank’s  estimation  (see  box  for  more  informa-tion). GDP per capita for 2011 to 2013 extrapolated. 2 Based 
on purchasing power parities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,00034567891011
GDP per capita in US dollars (in prices from 2005) 2China (2000 to 2013) 1
Japan (1955 to 1990)South Korea (1970 to 2005)Residential investment 
as a percentage of GDPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
19

The Indian economy remained on a flat growth 
path in the first quarter of the year, the latest 
for which official national accounts data are 
available. Real gross value added – India’s pre -
ferred indicator of aggregate output – was up 
by 4½% year- on- year. In this context, the 
manufacturing sector’s weak performance, 
where real value added declined for the second 
time in a row, is particularly striking. According 
to industrial production statistics, there seems 
to have been a certain upturn in the second 
quarter, however. In addition, a number of sur -
vey- based indicators for the situation in the ser -
vices sector have recently shown a marked im -
provement. The expectations of reforms by the 
new government could have played a signifi -
cant role in this change of mood. The inflation 
rate tailed off slightly in the past few months, 
averaging 8.1% in the second quarter.
The Brazilian economy got off to a very weak 
start in 2014. In the first quarter, the last for 
which national accounts results have been 
published, real GDP only grew by ¼% on the 
previous period in seasonally adjusted terms. 
The available indicators suggest that economic 
output stagnated or even contracted some -
what in the second quarter. Industrial produc -
tion, for example, which had already declined 
slightly in the first quarter, fell by 2%. Even the 
positive demand stimuli in a number of services 
sectors thanks to the country hosting the FIFA 
World Cup is unlikely to have offset this. Con -
sumer price inflation increased slightly in recent 
months, reaching 6.5% in June. The central 
bank had raised its policy rate to 11% in April; 
it has left it unchanged since then, however, in 
part because of the weak economy.
Adjusted for seasonal effects, Russian eco -
nomic output in the second quarter is likely to 
have seen weak, if any, growth from the de -
pressed level of the preceding quarter. This is 
suggested by an initial, not yet seasonally ad -
justed national accounts estimate issued by the 
Russian Federal State Statistics Service. Real 
GDP grew by ¾% year- on- year. The conse -
quences of the Ukraine conflict, which has led to considerable losses in confidence and rising 
financing costs, had a heavy impact on the 
Russian economy in the first half of the year. 
The sanctions imposed against Russia by the 
European Union in July, including a block on 
exports of certain goods and restrictions on the 
access of major state- run Russian banks to the 
European capital market, will probably con -
tinue to have a distinctly dampening effect on 
the country’s overall economic development, 
including indirectly via shrinking inflows of dir -
ect investment from abroad. Consumer price 
inflation picked up again in the past few 
months, due primarily to the depreciation of 
the rouble. The inflation rate rose to 7.8% in 
June, its highest level since mid-2011. Against 
this backdrop, the Russian central bank once 
again lifted its policy rate in July. Russia’s coun -
termeasures are likely to drive food prices sig -
nificantly higher in the coming months.
United States
The US economy recovered in the spring from 
the economic setback in winter. According to 
the data currently available, real GDP was up 
1% after adjustment for the usual seasonal ef -
fects from the previous quarter, in which it had 
shrunk by ½%. The primary factor in this turn -
around was the fact that inventory changes no 
longer perceptibly depressed growth in aggre -
gate output, but instead drove it up consider -
ably. In addition, foreign trade did not act as a 
brake as much as in the first quarter of the 
year. What must also be considered, however, 
is that domestic final demand returned to a 
steeper growth path following a sluggish start 
to the year. Households in particular stepped 
up their consumption of goods, especially of 
durable goods, whereas consumption of ser -
vices again increased only a little. Private gross 
fixed capital formation also grew fairly substan -
tially in the spring. The rates of change in real 
spending on commercial machinery and equip -
ment and private housing construction turned 
positive. Although the upwards momentum 
that the US economy regained in the spring Recent signs of 
improvement in Indian economy
Weak economic 
growth in Brazil
Russian 
 economy hit by 
Ukraine conflictRecovery from economic downturnDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
20

quarter was broadly spread across the individ -
ual expenditure components, the underlying 
driving forces could nonetheless have differed. 
For example, it is likely that the upturn in do -
mestic final demand not least reflects the nor -
malisation of activity following the negative im -
pact of the unusually harsh winter weather at 
the start of the year. By contrast, the contribu -
tions to growth made by inventory changes 
and foreign trade seem to have continued their 
volatile pattern from the preceding quarters, 
with no connection to weather effects. This is 
signalled by calculations that can be used to 
estimate the influence of the unusual winter 
weather on the economy in the first half of the 
year (see box on pages 22 to 24). All in all, the 
underlying pace of the economic upswing 
probably remained quite moderate. Private do -
mestic final demand grew by 2¾% year- on- 
year in the spring; its average rate of growth 
since the start of the economic recovery was 
thus exceeded by a small margin. The improve -
ment in the labour market was ongoing as this 
report went to press. Although the unemploy -
ment rate rose slightly on the month in July, at 
6.2% it was nonetheless still ½ percentage 
point lower than in March. Furthermore, con -
sumer price inflation strengthened. Inflation 
measured by the consumer price index (CPI) 
climbed from 1.5% in March to 2.1% in June, 
while the corresponding core rate rose to 1.9%.
Japan
The VAT hike that took effect in April 2014 also 
helped shape economic activity in Japan in the 
spring. In the winter, anticipatory effects had 
already contributed quite significantly to the 
steep rise in real GDP by a seasonally adjusted 
1½% as against the preceding quarter. This an -
ticipatory demand was then absent in the 
second quarter, which meant that aggregate 
output shrank by 1¾%. Statistically speaking, 
production still improved considerably thanks 
to a slump in imports and a slowdown of de -
stocking. Private domestic demand, in which 
inventory changes are also an input, sank by 3¾%. Alongside consumer spending, private 
residential investment in particular was severely 
reduced. The public sector was unable to pick 
up the slack as demand rose only marginally. Its 
efforts to step up government investment were 
potentially counteracted by the expiry of pre -
ceding fiscal policy measures. In addition, Jap -
anese enterprises’ foreign business was disap -
pointing; exports fell slightly compared with 
the previous period and hence did not help 
boost domestic production. The failure of ex -
ports to pick up – despite the preceding depre -
ciation – is not alone in clouding the Japanese 
economy’s prospects. Pay for wage and salary 
earners also fell substantially in real terms in the 
spring. When the VAT hike came into effect, 
CPI inflation jumped from 1.6% in March to 
3.4% in April, and stood at 3.6% in June. In the 
same month, the unemployment rate was 
slightly higher than at the end of the winter 
quarter, at 3.7%.Domestic 
 demand slumps following VAT hikeContributions to quarter-on-quarter growth in US real GDP
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Private  consumption 
and private gross fixed investment. 2 Public demand, inventory 
changes and net exports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 14654321012345
––––––+++++Percentage points, seasonally adjusted, annualised
GDP (in %)
All other demand 2Private domestic final demand 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
21

Weather effects on real GDP growth in the USA 
in the fi  rst six months of 2014
According to current estimates, real gross 
domestic product (GDP) in the USA slumped 
by an annualised rate of 2% (after seasonal 
adjustment) in the fi  rst quarter of 2014 
compared with the previous quarter. That is one of the sharpest drops in aggregate out-
put during a period of expansion that has 
ever been recorded in US statistics.1 Many 
analysts have ascribed this contraction to 
the unusually severe winter weather in the 
USA.2 Mirroring this development, the 
strong macroeconomic growth seen in the 
second quarter might be regarded as the outcome of weather conditions returning 
to normal. This box presents the results of a simple regression equation that indicate the 
potential magnitude of weather effects 
over the previous six months. The main aim 
is to explain the annualised growth of real 
GDP vis- à- vis the previous quarter using  deviations of the population- weighted in-
dices for the number of heating and cool-
ing degree days from the long- run aver-age.
3 To capture potential countermove-
ments in the following quarter, these devi-
ations are also included with a lag of one quarter.
4 Average growth, which changes 
over time, is modelled using dummy vari-
ables for the individual periods of expansion 
and recession in line with the reference 
dates determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Overall, the estimated coeffi   cients have 
plausible signs. Thus the rate at which ag-
gregate output expands when there is an unusually high number of heating degree 
days in one quarter is lower than normal. In 
the following period, the effect reverses. 
The signs change accordingly for the num-
ber of cooling degree days. However, only 
the contemporaneous effect of the number of heating degree days proves to be statis-
tically signifi  cant. This thus shows that un-
usual winter weather curbs GDP growth in 
the current quarter without there being a 
countermovement of the same magnitude and signifi  cance in the following quarter. 
More in- depth calculations do not indicate 
that weather effects differ greatly depend-
ing on whether it is the fourth or the fi  rst 
quarter that is directly affected. Positive and negative deviations of the number of heat-ing degree days from the long- run average 
also appear to produce effects of a similar 
magnitude, albeit in different directions. However, it should be noted that the re-gression only captures the average histor-ical effects of unusual temperatures. The 
impact of particularly heavy precipitation is 
not captured by the explanatory variable 
 selected.
If the estimation is repeated for the contri-
butions of individual expenditure compon-
ents to annualised GDP growth, the impact 
of the winter weather can be traced back 
predominantly to private gross fi  xed capital 
formation and private consumption, where 
an unusually harsh winter curbs real ex-
1 See K L Kliesen (2014), How Negative Is Negative 
Real GDP Growth?, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, 
Economic Synopses, No 17.
2 Recent fi  ndings have shown that exceptional wea-
ther conditions can have a considerable impact on sea-
sonally adjusted GDP growth in Germany. See Deut-
sche Bundesbank, The impact of weather conditions on gross domestic product in the latter part of 2013 and early part of 2014, Monthly Report, May 2014, 
pp 54-55.
3 The researchers at Macroeconomic Advisers have 
chosen a similar approach. The estimation period pre-sented here extends from the fi  rst quarter of 1990 to 
the second quarter of 2014. The underlying data are 
taken from the Haver Analytics database; the informa-
tion about heating and cooling degree days comes 
from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration. These are fi  gures designed to show demand 
for energy depending on temperature. They are based on the (positive or negative) deviation of daily average 
temperatures from a certain base temperature. See Macroeconomic Advisers, A Winter Chill in Q1 GDP; A Spring Thaw in Q2: Follow- Up, Macro Musing, 
posted on 5 March 2014 at http://www. macroadvisers.com/ 2014/ 03/a- winter- chill- in- q1-gdp- a- spring- thaw- in- q2-follow- up/.4 By contrast, the Macroeconomic Advisers’ approach already implicitly assumes such a countermovement of 
GDP growth once temperatures return to normal by 
including the fi  rst differences of weather variables as 
explanatory variables.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
22

penditure on consumer durables in particu-
lar – above all on motor vehicles. The con-temporaneous effect of an unusual number of heating degree days on the contribution 
of the consumption of services as a whole 
to growth is not signifi  cant. However, con-
sideration should also be given to the fact 
that, within the US statistical framework, an elevated demand for energy on account of 
the severe winter weather considerably pushes up real expenditure in the services category of housing and utilities. For the aggregate position, this should even out the dampening effect recorded by other 
types of services. As for the contributions of real expenditure on consumer durables and on housing and utilities services to growth, 
the lagged effect with the sign reversed proves to be signifi  cant; the magnitude is 
also in line with that of the contemporan-
eous effect. These subcomponents there-fore undergo quite sizeable corrections in the following quarter. However, the fact that private consumption as a whole does 
not record a signifi  cant countermovement 
is most likely due to the opposing directions 
in which the effects on spending on con-
sumer durables and demand for energy de-velop; at the same time, growth in demand for other types of services merely seems to 
return to its longer- term average without 
making up for previous shortfalls. The win-
ter weather is not found to have a signifi  -
cant impact on the contributions of foreign trade and changes in inventories to growth. 
These items are rather volatile over time 
and the model presented here can scarcely explain them.
In quantitative terms, the effects of the un-
usually cold weather last winter are indeed likely to have been important for macroeco-nomic developments in the fi  rst six months of 2014. The estimates presented here indi-cate that annualised GDP growth in the fi  rst 
quarter should have been down by just Regression* of real GDP growth in the USA and of the contributions 
of its expenditure components on weather variables
 
ItemGDP
Private 
consump-
tionPrivate gross fi  xed 
capital 
 formationChanges in inventories Net exportsPublic  demand
Regression coeffi   cients
Heating degree days
Contemporaneous – 0.59*** – 0.27** – 0.20** – 0.01 – 0.02 – 0.09
Lagged 0.28 0.07 0.12 – 0.05 0.10 0.04
Cooling degree days
Contemporaneous 0.10 0.02 0.02 – 0.04 0.03 0.07
Lagged – 0.10 – 0.13 – 0.05 0.02 0.08 – 0.02
Dummy variables
Periods of expansion
1990 Q1 to 1990 Q3 1.54*** 1.09*** – 0.56*** 0.17 0.39** 0.41*
1991 Q2 to 2001 Q1 3.67*** 2.56*** 1.18*** 0.06 – 0.39* 0.25**
2002 Q1 to 2007 Q4 2.68*** 1.90*** 0.43 0.16 – 0.13 0.31**
2009 Q3 to 2014 Q2 2.14*** 1.53*** 0.73*** 0.44 – 0.23 – 0.33*
Periods of recession
1990 Q4 to 1991 Q1 – 3.08*** – 1.69*** – 1.86*** – 1.14** 1.13*** 0.51***
2001 Q2 to 2001 Q4 0.01 1.62** – 1.31*** – 0.59 – 0.40* 0.72***
2008 Q1 to 2009 Q2 – 2.65* – 1.12** – 2.55*** – 0.97** 1.24*** 0.74***
Coeffi   cient of determination 0.51 0.58 0.62 0.07 0.25 0.28
F- test for insignifi  cance of all  weather variables (p value) 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.99 0.68 0.28
* Regression of annualised growth rate (or corresponding contributions to growth) of quarter- on- quarter seasonally adjusted 
real GDP . Explanatory weather variables are deviations of the population- weighted indices for the number of heating or cooling 
degree days from the long- run average, normalised using standard deviations. Underlying data are taken from the Haver Ana-lytics database. Estimation period: 1990 Q1 to 2014 Q2. Standard errors corrected using the Newey and West method; aster-
isks (*, **, ***) denote coeffi   cients that are signifi  cant at the usual levels (5%, 1%, 0.1%).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
23

under 1½ percentage points. The model 
nonetheless suggests that aggregate out-
put should have risen by ¾% (also in annu-
alised terms). This thus does not provide a 
suffi   cient explanation for the considerable 
contraction in real GDP . Analysing the con-
tributions of the individual expenditure components to growth shows that weak fi  nal domestic demand can be chiefl  y ascribed to weather conditions. However, the clear drop in aggregate output is also 
attributable to the sharp retarding effects of changes in inventories and of foreign trade 
for which weather effects have not been 
relevant in the past. Yet the retarding effect 
of these expenditure components must be 
examined in light of the fact that they con-versely considerably boosted GDP growth in previous quarters.
Lagged weather effects did not prove to be 
statistically signifi  cant in the regression pre-
sented here. Nonetheless, taking the esti-
mated coeffi   cients at their face value results 
in a weather- induced rise of 1 percentage point in annualised GDP growth in the 
second quarter of 2014, and the strong per-formance of private consumption as well as private gross fi  xed capital formation can be 
primarily interpreted as an – albeit incom-plete  – countermovement to the adverse 
weather effects seen in the previous quar-
ter. On average, GDP growth of just over 2% is expected in the current upturn. This 
means that just under 1 percentage point 
of the annualised growth rate of aggregate output of 4% in the second quarter remains 
unexplained. This residual is mainly due to 
increased inventory building.
All in all, swings in the rate of change for 
real US GDP in the fi  rst six months of 2014 are attributable to weather effects to a con-siderable extent. But changes in inventories 
and foreign trade, whose contributions to 
aggregate growth are generally rather vola-
tile, also play a role here. The moderate underlying pace of US economic growth, which is primarily driven by fi  nal domestic demand, appears to still be intact. Due to the notable deceleration of trend growth 
over time, if the rate of change of quarter- 
on- quarter real US GDP remains as volatile 
as hitherto, it is likely to slip below zero 
more frequently than in the past.5 This will 
not necessarily imply a cyclical turning 
point.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the 
current economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, 
pp 15-37.Estimated and actual real GDP growth and contributions to growth in the USA
1 Bundesbank estimates based on data from Haver Analytics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2101234
––++++Quarter on quarter, seasonally adjusted, annualised rate, % or percentage points
GDP Private
consumptionPrivate gross
fixed capital
formationPublic demand Net exports Changes in
inventoriesWeather effects1
Expansion effects1Actual results
 Estimated total 12014
Q1
2014
Q2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
24

United Kingdom
The UK economy expanded its output with un -
diminished strength in the spring. According to 
a second estimate, seasonally and price-  
adjusted GDP rose for the fifth time in a row by 
¾% quarter- on- quarter. It thus also surpassed 
its previous high from the winter of 2008 for 
the first time. The services sector remained the 
most important growth driver; its real gross 
value added grew by 1% in the spring, exceed -
ing the pre- crisis level by 3%. Industry output 
(excluding construction), however, added just 
¼% compared with the preceding three- month 
period. This was primarily because manufactur -
ing output was only raised a little after robust 
growth in the previous quarter. Construction 
output remained at the fairly high level of the 
start of the year. The year- on- year change in 
production, which is still considerably positive, 
highlights the underlying upward trend in this 
sector, however. Reflecting the overall eco -
nomic upswing, the unemployment rate slipped 
from 6.8% in the winter to 6.4% in the second 
quarter, according to data released by the UK 
Office for National Statistics. Inflation as meas -
ured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) climbed from 1.6% in March to 
1.9% in June, while the inflation rate excluding 
energy and unprocessed food rose in lockstep 
to 2.1%.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-7)2 as a 
whole, economic output grew more moder -
ately in the spring following a quarter- on- quar-
ter rise of ¾% after seasonal adjustment in the 
first quarter. Initial flash estimates show that 
GDP growth was strongest in Hungary and 
Lithuania (+¾% each). Aggregate output in 
Poland grew by ½%. The slower pace of 
growth in many countries, especially in indus -
try, is likely to trace back to negative effects in 
connection with the Ukraine crisis and waning 
impetus from the euro area. Aggregate HICP 
inflation, which had already reached a multi-  year low in the winter, fell to 0.3% in the 
second quarter, not least because of decreas -
ing food prices. The figures ranged from -1.6% 
in Bulgaria and +0.3% in Poland to +1.3% in 
Romania.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the second quarter of 2014, the already 
weak upward trend in the euro- area economy 
started to falter. Real GDP stagnated at the pre -
vious period’s level in seasonally adjusted 
terms.3 The result therefore remained distinctly 
down on the spring forecast made by the Euro -
pean Commission, which publishes quarterly 
profiles of its estimates. The figure exceeded 
that of one year previously by ¾%, but still fell 
short of the pre- crisis level of real GDP from the 
start of 2008 by 2½% at the end of the period 
under review. The slowdown in economic ac -
tivity in the second quarter was broad- based in 
the sense that notable positive contributions to 
growth are unlikely to have come from either 
domestic demand or foreign trade.
The poor result for the euro area as a whole 
masks a fairly mixed and, compared with the 
first quarter, heavily changed picture from 
country to country. On the one hand, real GDP 
in Germany fell slightly in the spring, partly as a 
reaction to the previous sharp growth in aggre -
gate output caused in part by the weather. On 
the other hand, the Dutch economy saw re -
newed growth of ½% following the decline in 
the previous period, which was primarily con -Persistently 
strong upswing
Economic  
upward trend 
continuesAggregate  output stag-
nates in the 
spring
2 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004.
3 When interpreting Eurostat’s flash estimate for the 
second quarter of 2014, it should be taken into account 
that some of the member states, including France and 
 Germany (see box on pages  58 and 59), have already 
switched to the new method given in the European System 
of  Accounts (ESA 2010) to calculate GDP , while the other 
countries will take this step by the end of September. The 
GDP series for the euro area as a whole are still based 
 exclusively on the ESA 95 data until the end of 2013, but 
the GDP growth rates for the first and second quarter of 
2014 are already affected by the new figures from the 
countries that have made the switch.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
25

nected with low gas production due to mild 
temperatures. Aggregate output in France 
stagnated again. In Italy, real GDP fell once 
more, this time by ¼% as against the first quar -
ter, whereby the country slid into recession 
again according to the common interpretation. 
Spain’s recovery, by contrast, continued at 
quite a lively pace (+½%). Of the eight remain -
ing euro- area member states that have so far 
published initial seasonally adjusted figures for 
GDP growth, seven reported an increase, while 
the downturn persisted only in Cyprus. In 
Greece, for which no official seasonally ad -
justed data will be published until further no -
tice, estimates by other institutions point to a 
slight recovery. Its real GDP saw a year- on- year 
drop of just ¼%, after -1% in the winter of 
2014.
Current indicators suggest that the muted eco -
nomic upswing, which had been interrupted in 
the spring, regained momentum from the mid -
dle of the year onwards. Whether or not it 
lasts, however, is also contingent on the newly 
resolved EU sanctions against Russia and Rus -
sia’s retaliatory measures not having a further 
impact on enterprises’ willingness to invest. In 
the April- May period, the manufacturing sector 
as a whole recorded a ¾% increase in orders 
compared with the previous quarter, which 
benefited producers of capital goods and con -
sumer goods in particular. In the same period, 
however, order intake – excluding new orders 
for other transport equipment, which is domin -
ated by major orders – was no higher than the 
average for the first quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms. Survey- based indicators are sig -
nalling a solid start to the second half of the 
year. The composite Purchasing Managers’ 
Index for the euro area, for example, went up 
again in July, due to the unchanged level of the 
manufacturing index and a major rise in the fig -
ures for the services sector. Industrial confi -
dence stabilised somewhat in July, putting it 
even further ahead of the long- term average.
No growth stimuli emanated from the produc -
tion sector in the spring. On the one hand, Leading indica-
tors point to subdued eco-nomic recovery from mid- year onAggregate output in the euro area
Sources:  Eurostat  and  INSEE.  1 According  to  ESA  2010,  re-
based so that 2005 = 100. 2 Source of unadjusted figures: Fed-
eral Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20141021041061082005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
102104106108110112114
949698100102104
100102104106108110102104106108
Italy
SpainFrance 1of which
Germany 1,2Euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
26

construction output declined by a seasonally 
adjusted ¾% in April- May 2014 as against the 
first quarter, when the result had been boosted 
by weather- related effects. On the other hand, 
industrial output stagnated at the level of the 
winter quarter, in which it had risen moderately 
(+¼%). Energy producers reported growth of 
2½% and manufacturers of consumer goods 
added 1¾%. In contrast to this, output by 
manufacturers of consumer durables and cap -
ital goods dropped by ¾% in each case, while 
output of intermediate goods was down by 
1%. The underlying pace of economic growth 
in industry could nevertheless have been slightly 
higher in the spring, as the timing of public 
holidays in some member states, particularly in 
France and Italy, offered an above- average 
number of opportunities for employees to take 
advantage of long weekends. In any case, cap -
acity utilisation in the manufacturing sector 
rose slightly from April to July, but is still signal -
ling moderate underutilisation.
Looking at the demand side, foreign trade is 
unlikely to have made any contribution to 
growth in the spring, as reported at the begin -
ning of this article. In April- May, nominal goods 
exports – as measured by the balance of pay -
ments statistics – were 2¾% lower after sea -
sonal adjustment than in the first quarter, 
amongst other things because trade with Rus -
sia, which received 4.7% of exports to non-  
euro- area countries last year and was thus the 
sixth most important sales market, is dwindling 
(and has been for some time now). Import fig -
ures decreased on a similar scale. Modest 
growth stimuli are likely to have come from pri -
vate consumption. Real retail sales (excluding 
motor vehicles and fuels) only inched upwards 
marginally after seasonal adjustment in the 
second quarter, but new car registrations in -
creased markedly on the winter months 
(+1¾%), surpassing their previous year’s level 
by 4%. With regard to gross fixed capital for -
mation, the trend in construction output and 
production of machinery and equipment sug -
gests a decline.The slight tendencies towards an improvement 
in the labour market continued in the spring. 
The number of unemployed persons was 
around 435,000 lower in June than at the be -
ginning of the year, and 932,000 lower than 
one year previously. The standardised un -
employment rate in the euro area stood at 
11.5% at the end of the period under review, 
compared with 12.0% one year ago. A notable 
decrease could be seen in most member states; 
only in France, Italy and Slovenia did the rate 
remain at a high level. Youth unemployment in 
the euro area also dropped, falling by 240,000 
to around 3.3 million persons since mid-2013. 
The corresponding rate declined by 0.7 per -
centage point to 23.2% in this period. In line 
with the gradual decline in unemployment in 
the euro area, employment bottomed out in 
the second half of 2013. The number of per -
sons in work trended slightly up again after 
seasonal adjustment in the first three months 
of this year –  no more up- to- date data are 
available – and exceeded the prior- year level by 
0.2%.
Consumer price inflation, measured in terms of 
the HICP , largely came to a standstill in the euro 
area in the second quarter of 2014. Prices only 
rose again slightly after seasonal adjustment 
around the middle of the year. The HICP’s side -
ways movement in the second quarter resulted 
from countervailing movements of the sub-  
components. The prices of unprocessed food 
were subject to considerable downward cor -
rections from a fairly high level. Energy prices 
also decreased slightly. The price of crude oil 
did rise at times, particularly towards the end 
of the quarter, but the inflation in fuel prices 
that this caused was more than offset by lower 
tariffs for gas and electricity. In addition, retail 
prices of commercial goods sank slightly, which 
was likely to have been helped by falling prices 
at the import level in the past few months. By 
contrast, prices for services, which have a 
weighting of around 40% in the HICP , con -
tinued the marked rise already observed in the 
first quarter.Industry and 
construction lack momentum in spring
Broadly based 
weak demandContinued slight improvement  
in the labour market
Euro- area 
 consumer prices move sideways in second  quarterDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
27

Owing to the overall weak price trend in the 
last three quarters, year- on- year HICP inflation 
continued to fall, dropping to 0.6% in the 
second quarter and even to 0.4% in July. How -
ever, in the two months around the middle of 
the year, consumer prices rose again slightly on 
the period in seasonally adjusted terms, mainly due to rising services prices and a stabilisation 
of industrial goods prices. This can be ex -
plained, amongst other things, by the fact that 
prices at upstream stages of the economy seem 
to have gradually stopped falling, in part be -
cause the euro has depreciated.Inflation rate still 
at low level for nowDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
28

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and 
money market developments
Against the backdrop of the persistently weak 
inflation outlook, on 5 June 2014 the Govern -
ing Council of the ECB adopted a package of 
monetary policy measures designed to help the 
inflation rate return to levels closer to 2% in the 
medium term. As part of this package of deci -
sions, the Governing Council reduced both the 
interest rate on main refinancing operations 
and the rate on the deposit facility by 10 basis 
points. The main refinancing rate is now only 
0.15% and the deposit rate -0.10%. At the 
same time, the interest rate on the marginal 
lending facility was lowered by 35 basis points 
to 0.40%. This means that the interest rate cor -
ridor set by the marginal lending rate and the 
deposit rate became symmetrical again, with a 
width of ±25 basis points around the main 
 refinancing rate.1
The ECB Governing Council’s interest rate deci -
sion was based on the view that annual HICP 
inflation was again lower than expected in May 
2014 and that it would remain at low levels 
over the coming months, before increasing 
only gradually until the end of 2016. This is also 
indicated by the persistently subdued under -
lying monetary growth and the weak loan 
 dynamics. At the same time, the Governing 
Council reiterated that ECB key interest rates 
would remain at present levels for an extended 
period of time. Accordingly, the Governing 
Council maintained the key interest rates in July 
and August that had been agreed in June.At -0.10%, the rate on the deposit facility be -
came negative for the first time when key inter -
est rates were lowered on 5 June. This interest 
rate also applies to banks’ reserve holdings in 
excess of the minimum reserve requirements 
and certain other deposits held with the Euro -
system. The decision to forego a further reduc -
tion in the interest rate spread between the 
main refinancing rate and the deposit rate was 
intended to uphold the remaining incentives 
for money market activity, which have already 
been significantly reduced over the last few 
years through a gradual narrowing of the inter -
est rate corridor.2
In addition to the interest rate cut, the ECB 
Governing Council agreed on a range of un -
conventional measures in June. In order to 
maintain a highly accommodative monetary 
policy stance and to keep possible fluctuations ECB Governing 
Council cuts key interest rates to new all- time lowNegative rate on 
deposit facility 
for the first time
ECB Governing 
Council agrees on further  unconventional measures
Money market interest ratesin the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month Eurepo. • Average 1 to 13 August 2014.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.0
050100150Difference between unsecured and secured
three-month interbank lending rates 1 ,  2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Minimum bid rate or fixed interest rate
for main refinancing operations
Deposit rate
1 Traditionally, the width of the interest rate corridor in the 
euro area mostly stood at ±100 basis points around the 
main refinancing rate.
2 The width of the interest rate corridor determines the 
incentives for a horizontal distribution of liquidity among 
banks via the interbank money market; see also Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Implications of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
operations during the financial crisis, Monthly Report, April 
2014, pp 42-43.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
29

Money market risk premia: 
indicators for the state of the interbank market
During the fi  nancial crisis, money market risk 
premia – measured as the spread between inter-
est rates on risky, unsecured money market 
transactions between banks (“unsecured money 
market rates”) and largely risk- free interest 
rates – came to be widely regarded as a barom-
eter for the extremely tense atmosphere at times 
in the interbank money market. This article aims 
to shed greater light on both the different deter-
minants behind risk premia and their dynamics 
over the course of different crises.
Money market risk premia: 
calculation and determinants
Normally, the three- month Euribor (Euro Inter-
bank Offered Rate), a benchmark rate derived 
from survey responses from a panel of banks, is 
used as the unsecured money market rate for 
calculating money market risk premia in the euro area. Unsecured money market rates such as the 
Euribor include a credit risk component – if the 
borrowing institution is unable to repay the money market loan at the end of the agreed 
term, the creditor bank suffers a loss initially and 
can only hope to recoup at least some of the principal and interest payments in protracted  insolvency proceedings. To aid panel banks in gauging the credit risk component involved in 
unsecured money market transactions, the Euro-
pean Money Markets Institute (EMMI; formerly 
Euribor- EBF), the body responsible for comput-ing the Euribor, has specifi  ed that the quotes 
which panel banks submit in the daily survey of 
interbank deposit rates should be based on 
transactions between credit institutions of high 
creditworthiness (prime banks) for short- term 
 liabilities.1 So the Euribor is not a weighted aver-
age rate based on actual transactions but an average of assessments of the rates for typical 
transactions that the panel banks need not 
 necessarily have entered into.
Usually, the money market risk premium is sim-
ply the difference between the three- month 
Euribor and an interest rate2 that is largely risk- 
free (and thus considered safe) for the same 
term. This risk- free interest rate can be set in two different ways. The fi  rst is to use interest rates on 
secured money market transactions (“secured 
money market rates”, or “repo rates”), with the 
Eurepo rate (which, like the Euribor, is survey- 
based and computed by EMMI) being a particu-
larly common benchmark. The risk premium cal-
culated using this particular reference rate is often referred to as the “depo- repo spread”. 
Generally speaking, other available repo rates 
such as the Eurex Repo GC Pooling rate, which 
was introduced in October 2013, are equally 
suitable benchmarks for calculating risk premia. 
The second way to approximate the risk- free 
interest rate in the euro area is to use the EONIA 
swap rate3 as the reference rate. Since the 
EONIA swap, by its very nature, can also be 
 regarded as an overnight index swap (OIS), the 
risk premium thus calculated is often simply 
 referred to as the “Euribor- OIS spread”.
In a secured money market loan, the creditor has 
the option of realising the collateral provided if 
the debtor defaults. Should a default occur, the 
creditor only needs to assert its right of recourse against the debtor’s insolvency estate if the pro-
ceeds from realising the collateral fall short of the interest and repayment. Credit risk is thus largely eliminated in transactions that are ad-equately collateralised. This explains why un-
secured money market rates such as the Euribor 
are almost always higher than their secured 
counterparts.
Besides credit risk, money market risk premia also contain a liquidity risk component. The 
lending institution is exposed to liquidity risk in 
1 See http://www.emmi- benchmarks.eu.
2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Interest rates in the 
repo market: approximation of short- term risk- free interest rates, Monthly Report, February 2014, 
pp 34-35.
3 EONIA swaps are hedging transactions in which a 
fi  xed interest rate (the swap rate) is “exchanged” for 
the unsecured interbank overnight rate EONIA for the term of the contract. No funds change hands, so credit 
risk is virtually non- existent. While it is true, in prin-
ciple, that the EONIA rate used as the reference rate 
for the swap includes credit risk, this component can 
be disregarded for the most part.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
30

as far as unexpected outfl  ows of funds might 
force it to raise liquidity itself in the interbank 
money market and such liquidity might only be 
available at unfavourable conditions or not at all. 
This is why it makes sense for banks to add an 
interest rate premium to their loans if their own 
liquidity risk increases as a result. The liquidity 
risk component of secured money market trans-actions is likewise lower than it is for unsecured 
transactions because the lender has the option 
of using the collateral it receives as security when raising liquidity for its own purposes. In 
practice, it is virtually impossible to split the cal-
culated money market risk premia into the two 
determinants credit risk and liquidity risk.
Money market risk premia over time
Before the onset of the liquidity crisis, money 
market risk premia normally amounted to just a 
handful of basis points. During this period, mar-
ket players considered credit and liquidity risk in 
the interbank money market to be negligible. 
The outbreak of the liquidity crisis in August 
2007 sent money market risk premia rocketing 
from their previous low levels, and they reached 
new highs when the fi  nancial crisis came to a head in autumn 2008. The raft of measures taken by central banks and governments 
throughout 2009 to tackle the crisis restored a 
degree of calm, but the spectre of renewed ten-sion came back to haunt the money markets in 
2010 when the sovereign debt crisis began to unfold. As it turned out, risk premia resumed their steep upward trajectory when the sover-
eign debt crisis fl  ared up at the end of 2011 but fell short of the record levels posted in late 2008.
The decisions taken throughout this period by 
the ECB Governing Council to roll out additional monetary policy measures, the restructuring and 
recapitalisation of banks, most notably in the periphery of the euro area, the agreements of the European governments, and the fi  rst steps 
towards consolidating public fi  nances in a num-ber of euro- area member states are likely to have 
played a major role in the subsequent decline in 
money market risk premia, a process which con-tinues to this day.
Even though a return to pre- summer 2007 levels 
appears unlikely at the current juncture, money 
market risk premia have been rather low of late 
compared with recent crisis years. Risk percep-
tions among market players still tend to vary, but 
the consensus view is that risk is much less pro-
nounced, all the more so when the potential 
borrowing institutions of unsecured three- month 
funds conform with the EMMI’s defi  nition of prime banks. However, unsecured transactions 
with a term of three months or more are still not quite as common as they were before the onset 
of the liquidity crisis. Those entered into at low 
rates comparable to the Euribor can be seen as 
indicating that the lender regards the borrower 
as highly creditworthy.Money market risk premia in the euro area
Sources: European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), Bloomberg, Eurex Repo; Bundesbank calculations. 1 Spread between the three-
month Euribor and the three-month Eurepo. 2 Spread between the three-month Euribor and the three-month EONIA Swap Index (until 
30 June 2014; from 1 July 2014: EONIA swap rate). 3 Spread between the three-month Euribor and the three-month repo rate.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.0Percentage points, weekly averages
Depo-repo spread 1
Euribor-OIS spread 2
Euribor-GC Pooling spread 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
31

in the money markets in check, the ECB Gov -
erning Council extended full allotment in its 
monetary policy refinancing operations at least 
until the end of 2016. The latter objective is 
also served by the ECB Governing Council’s 
 decision to suspend the fine- tuning operations 
sterilising the liquidity injected under the Secur -
ities Markets Programme (SMP). The suspen -
sion of these operations will help to reduce 
fluctuations in the liquidity situation and 
thereby also in short- term money market rates.3
In view of the continuously weak develop -
ments in loans to the private sector, the ECB 
Governing Council also decided to conduct a 
total of eight targeted longer- term refinancing 
operations (TLTROs). As banks used a large part 
of the funds they had borrowed at the end of 
2011 and the beginning of 2012 in the two 
three- year longer- term refinancing operations 
(LTROs) to purchase government bonds,4 the 
new operations are partly conditional on banks’ 
past and future lending to the private sector.
In the first two auctions in September and 
 December 2014, the participating banks will be 
entitled to borrow an amount equivalent to up 
to 7% of their outstanding volume of loans to 
the euro- area non- financial private sector as at 
30 April 2014 (excluding loans to households 
for house purchase). Additional operations will 
be conducted between March 2015 and June 
2016 on a quarterly basis, allowing counterpar -
ties to borrow up to three times the amount of 
their eligible net lending exceeding a bench -
mark. Different benchmarks apply depending 
on whether a bank exhibited positive or nega -
tive eligible net lending in the 12-month period 
to 30 April 2014.5 As a result of this design, the 
refinancing volume obtained by banks in the 
TLTROs may exceed their positive eligible net 
lending. All TLTROs will mature in September 
2018 and the interest rate for each operation 
lies ten basis points above the main refinancing 
rate applicable at the time of take- up.
To strengthen the incentive to expand lending 
activities, banks will be obliged to repay all bor -rowed funds in September 2016 if their total 
eligible net lending lies below the bank- specific 
benchmark in the period from 1 May 2014 to 
30 April 2016. In effect, this mechanism sets 
certain incentives for banks to avoid negative 
net lending or lend in excess of their bank-  
specific benchmarks. However, it cannot en -
tirely prevent the institutions from using some 
of the central bank liquidity that they have 
 obtained to roll over market financing that is 
approaching maturity or purchase interest-  
bearing securities (including domestic govern -
ment bonds), even though there are now fewer 
incentives to do so owing to the lower interest 
rates on such securities. The effects of the 
TLTROs must therefore be closely monitored so 
as to be able to counter unsound develop -
ments at an early stage and achieve the ECB 
Governing Council’s objective of strengthening 
lending.
The ECB Governing Council also announced 
that it would preventively intensify preparatory 
work related to potential outright purchases of 
asset- backed securities (ABS). Under this initia -
tive, the Eurosystem will consider purchasing 
simple and transparent ABS which are backed 
by claims on the euro- area non- financial pri -
vate sector. The Eurosystem must ensure that 
such securities purchases do not mean that 
profits from lending business remain with the 
banks while risks and expected losses are 
shifted to the central banks, ultimately leaving 
the general public to shoulder the costs.
Given that the medium- run inflation outlook is 
currently appreciably below the Eurosystem’s 
inflation target, the adopted package of meas -
ures is justifiable, on the whole. At the same 
time, there is a danger that the expansionary Targeted longer- 
term refinancing operations to strengthen  lending to the 
private sectorMandatory early repayments to strengthen lend-ing incentives
Preparatory 
work for  potential ABS  purchases  intensifying
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary policy and banking 
business, Monthly Report, February 2014, pp 32-33.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Substantial government bond 
purchases by Eurosystem and commercial banks, Monthly 
Report, May 2012, p 32; and Deutsche Bundesbank, Changes 
in bank holdings of domestic government bonds in the 
euro area, Monthly Report, November 2013, pp 31 -32.
5 Additional details can be found in the ECB’s press release 
of 3 July 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
32

Money market management and liquidity needs
The three reserve maintenance periods 
from 9 April to 8 July 2014 saw a marked increase in euro- area liquidity needs stem-
ming from autonomous factors. Compared with the average fi  gure for the March- April 
2014 reserve period (€468.2 billion), the 
 latter went up by €47.3 billion, to reach an 
average of €515.6 billion in the June- July 
2014 reserve period. The autonomous fac-
tors were once again very volatile, ranging 
between €462 billion and €553 billion. The 
rise was attributable to higher general  government deposits (on balance: +€36.2 billion) and an increased volume of bank-
notes in circulation in the euro area (on bal-ance: +€19.7 billion). By contrast, the other 
 autonomous factors (including net foreign 
assets) had a liquidity- providing effect over-all (on balance: -€8.6 billion). The minimum 
reserve requirement had a slight liquidity- 
absorbing impact, increasing by €0.8 billion over the three reserve maintenance periods 
to €104.4 billion in the June- July reserve 
period (see table below).
The ECB Governing Council’s monetary pol-
icy decisions of 5 June 2014 (see pages 29 to 48) had a marked impact on credit insti-
tutions’ demand behaviour in the tender 
operations. In the June- July reserve period, 
during which the lowering of the key inter-est rates and suspension of the SMP liquid-
ity- absorbing tender (Securities Markets Programme) became effective for the fi  rst 
time, a change in bidding behaviour could 
be observed. The maturity of the last SMP 
liquidity- absorbing operation resulted in in-fl  ows of funds to the banking system total-ling around €109 billion (gross) on 18 June. This caused the banks to perceptibly reduce their demand in the main refi  nancing oper-ations as well as their bids in the refi  nancing 
Factors determining bank liquidity1
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2014
9 Apr to
13 May14 May to10 June11 June to8 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  9.5 –  3.1 –  7.1
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 13.9 – 23.9 +  1.6
3 Net foreign assets
2 + 17.5 +  0.4 +  3.2
4 Other factors 2 – 22.9 –  1.6 + 12.0
Total – 28.8 – 28.2 +  9.7
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations + 22.7 + 20.0 – 36.4
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 15.0 – 11.8 – 47.7
(c) Other operations + 18.2 + 19.7 + 91.9
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.5 –  0.1 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  0.5 +  1.4 +  4.4
Total + 24.9 + 29.2 + 12.2
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) –  4.0 +  1.1 + 22.0
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.1 –  0.4 –  0.5
1 For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 2 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
33

operation with a maturity of one mainten-
ance period which was conducted for the 
last time. Consequently, the net supply of liquidity was signifi  cantly lower, especially 
as, parallel to this, liquidity needs stemming 
from autonomous factors increased. Over-
all, the outstanding tender volume (exclud-
ing liquidity- absorbing fi  ne- tuning oper-
ations) fell during the period under review, 
from an average of €640 billion in the March- April reserve period to €572 billion in the June- July reserve period, mainly on account of the early repayments of the 
 liquidity provided in the three- year tenders 
(amounting to €81.7 billion). Following the 
general trend seen in previous reserve 
periods, the demand in the respective main refi  nancing operations increased just before the end of the month (reaching as much as €174 billion at the end of May), in order to prevent potential liquidity bottlenecks in the 
euro money market, which are associated 
with high funding costs. The propensity to lend to other banks at the end of each 
month seems to have tended to decline fur-
ther owing to the greater priority attached 
to balance sheet policy.
The balance sheet holdings of securities 
 acquired through the purchase programmes 
fell further during the period under review 
in light of maturities and taking into ac-count end- of- quarter revaluations. In the case of the two Covered Bond Purchase Programmes, CBPP1 and CBPP2, balance 
sheet holdings fell by €3.0 billion to €34.7 
billion and by €0.4 billion to €14.1 billion, 
respectively. The balance sheet holdings of 
securities purchased under the SMP fell by 
€16.2 billion to €156.3 billion. The SMP 
 liquidity- absorbing operations – which were conducted on a weekly basis until their sus-
pension on 18  June 2014, and were in-tended to neutralise the impact of these purchase programmes on liquidity  – con-sistently recorded underbidding from mid- April onwards. In addition to varying their 
demand in the main refi  nancing operations, 
credit institutions in the Eurosystem also used their level of participation in these fi  ne- tuning operations to respond to the (expected) liquidity situation and manage 
their liquidity needs.
This behaviour was refl  ected in the level of 
excess liquidity. In the three reserve main-
tenance periods under review, the level of 
excess liquidity fl  uctuated greatly, ranging 
between €70 billion (end of May) and €180 
billion (start of May), even though the re-
spective averages for each reserve period 
(€117.4 billion, €116.6 billion and €133.7 
billion) were relatively constant. Alongside 
the bidding behaviour in the tenders, major fl  uctuations in autonomous factors also im-
pacted on the respective level of excess 
 liquidity. The volatility of general govern-
ment deposits played a particularly large 
role in this regard.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20140.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
–+++++++++Daily data
€ bn%
050100150200Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight
Weighted allotment 
rate for SMP liquidity-absorbing tenders
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
34

The correlation between overnight rates 
and the level of excess liquidity varied dur-
ing the period under review. Although a 
distinct reduction in excess liquidity or a 
drop below €100 billion often resulted in an 
increase in the overnight rates, this phe-nomenon was less profound above all at 
the end of a reserve period. At the end of 
each month, the overnight rate was gener-
ally signifi  cantly higher than the main refi  -
nancing rate and increased by as much as 
31 basis points (EONIA) or 20 basis points 
(GC Pooling Overnight, ECB Basket) com-
pared with the previous day, even though 
credit institutions had in each case ensured 
that there would be substantially higher 
 excess liquidity ex ante through their bid-
ding behaviour in the tenders (see the chart 
on page  34). In the period prior to the 
lowering of the key interest rates, there had  already been signs of a slight pick- up in the money market, such as a greater volume of 
longer- term repo transactions, which were 
also used to avoid negative interest rates. 
That the spread between the key policy rate 
and the secured money market rate has 
 increased since 11 June, while the width of 
the corridor has remained unchanged (see 
adjacent chart), is also likely to be a conse-
quence of the suspension of the SMP  liquidity- absorbing tender. The average al-
lotment rates of the latter (which in recent months have largely been close to the main 
refi  nancing rate) were a factor behind 
higher interest rates on overnight money.
In the maintenance period July- August 
2014, which followed the period under 
 review, the money market rates were rather 
stable, with the exception of the month- 
end rate. While EONIA generally stood just 
a few basis points over 0.00%, the secured overnight money rate (GC Pooling, ECB Bas-ket) was initially just above the zero percent 
mark, but dipped into negative territory 
 towards the end of the reserve period. Thus excess liquidity –  which also fl  uctuated 
greatly at times during this period, between 
€104 billion and €160 billion  – hardly 
 affected the overnight rates. It is also strik-
ing that daily use of the deposit facility 
 almost never fell below €20 billion, despite these fl  uctuations in liquidity. Credit institu-
tions’ behaviour in terms of depositing money with the central bank followed a similar pattern during the three previous 
periods, too. Overall, the outstanding ten-
der volume fell further to €521 billion on 
average (down by €50 billion on the previ-
ous period). In nominal terms, this was  attributable not only to the early repay-
ments of the liquidity provided in the three- 
year tenders (totalling €35.4 billion) and 
somewhat lower demand in the main refi  -
nancing operations, but also, inter alia, to 
the discontinuation of the maintenance 
period tender.Spread between Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight and the main refinancing rate, and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 High 
spread on 31 March 2014 owing to end of quarter and quite 
low level of excess liquidity. 2 Current account holdings minus 
the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankFeb Mar Apr May June July Aug
2014+50+100+150+200+250%
0.200.20.40.60.8
–++++
€ bn
Excess liquidity 2Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight less 
main refinancing rate
MeanDaily data
1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
35

monetary policy will encourage excesses in the 
financial and real estate markets and reduce 
the pressure on fiscal policymakers to take ac -
tion, which could cause euro- area member 
states’ consolidation and reform efforts to flag.
The ECB Governing Council decided in July that 
its monetary policy meetings would be held in 
a new six- week cycle from January 2015. The 
reserve maintenance periods will also be ex -
tended to six weeks to match this new sched -
ule. Starting with the January 2015 meeting, 
the ECB also intends to publish accounts of its 
monetary policy meetings. Meetings on topics 
other than monetary policy will continue to be 
held at least once a month.
From the beginning of the second quarter, the 
overall outstanding refinancing volume de -
clined by just over €130 billion on balance to 
just over €500 billion at the current end. The 
reduction in the refinancing volume reflects, 
among other things, the above- mentioned de -
cision to suspend the fine- tuning operations to 
sterilise the liquidity injected under the SMP . On 
balance, this decision enabled banks to scale 
back their demand for liquidity from the Euro -
system without this causing a strong decline in 
excess liquidity and an increase in money mar -
ket rates. The falling demand for central bank 
loans was also reflected in continued repay -
ments of the funds provided in the three- year 
LTROs in the amount of €120 billion. Through 
early repayments, institutions have thus already 
managed to redeem almost two- thirds of the 
just over €1 trillion which they originally bor -
rowed in the two three- year LTROs a good few 
months before these operations mature.
The fluctuations in short- term money market 
rates – which were already observed in the pre -
ceding months – due to the sometimes rela -
tively  volatile liquidity situation initially con -
tinued in May but eased considerably in June 
following the decisions of the ECB Governing 
Council. In particular, the decision to maintain 
the spread between the interest rates on the 
main refinancing operations and the deposit facility and to suspend the fine- tuning oper -
ations to sterilise liquidity injected under the 
SMP is likely to have played a major role in the 
fact that the key interest rate cut of ten basis 
points was reflected –  in some cases to a 
slightly disproportionately large extent  – in 
short- term money market rates. Whereas the 
EONIA – the overnight reference rate for un -
secured lending transactions in the interbank 
market – has generally only just remained in 
positive territory since mid-  June due to the rate 
on the Eurosystem deposit facility being nega -
tive for the first time, interest rates on secured 
overnight interbank transactions were slightly 
negative at times, depending on the individual 
banks’  liquidity positions. On the whole, short- 
term money market rates have fallen back to 
levels further below the main refinancing rate 
since the measures were introduced.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The slight macroeconomic recovery in the euro 
area, which first took hold in the middle of last 
year, seems to be gradually having an effect on 
lending, although heterogeneity in the euro 
area remains high. One indication of this is that 
net lending to the euro- area private sector was  
slightly positive in the spring quarter for the 
first time in two years, with lending to non-  
financial corporations – while still negative – 
gaining some upward momentum compared 
with preceding quarters. Securitised lending to 
the private sector was also up somewhat, fol -
lowing sometimes strong outflows in the previ -
ous quarters. Against this backdrop, the slight 
upward trend in monetary and credit growth 
that could already be seen in the previous 
three- month period continued in the reporting 
quarter. However, it is too early to speak of a 
broad- based recovery in lending activities.
Supported by continuing inflows of funds from 
abroad and the upward trend in lending to the 
private sector, the pace of monetary growth 
accelerated markedly in the spring months. ECB Governing 
Council decides to change  monetary policy meeting  schedule
Refinancing 
 volume initially still trending downwards
Short- term 
money market rates show clear reaction to ECB Governing Council  decisionsMacroeconomic setting
M3 growth still 
driven by over-night depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
36

This expansion again primarily affected over -
night deposits, which benefited from the on -
going fall in interest rates on other deposits. 
However, unlike in the previous quarters, the 
other components of M3 also recorded slight 
inflows on balance in the reporting quarter.
Against this backdrop, the slight upward trend 
in monetary growth that could already be ob -
served in the previous three- month period con -
tinued in the reporting quarter. Annual M3 
growth rose perceptibly from 1.0% at the end 
of March to 1.5% at the end of June, influ -
enced in part by a base effect. At the same 
time, the annual growth rate (adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation) for loans to the euro-  
area private sector, which had stood at -2.0% 
at the end of the previous quarter, increased 
clearly to -1.1%. Although the gap between 
monetary and loan growth has thus narrowed 
discernibly, it remains large by historical stand -
ards. Despite the tentative signs of recovery, 
underlying monetary dynamics continue to be 
very subdued.
After their volumes had declined for two years, 
loans to the euro- area private sector were 
slightly up again for the first time on balance in 
the spring months. The improvement on the 
previous quarter was essentially attributable to 
the non- financial corporate sector, where the decline once again weakened considerably in 
the second quarter. The recovery in lending, 
which began in summer 2013, led to an in -
crease in the annual growth rate for loans to 
non- financial corporations from -3.1% in March 
to -2.3% in June.
The bank lending survey (BLS) conducted in the 
second quarter likewise provided indications of 
a gradual stabilisation in the non- financial cor -
porate sector. As in the preceding quarter, the 
surveyed euro- area banks reported a virtually 
unchanged demand for loans to non- financial 
corporations. This meant that the decline in 
non- financial corporations’ demand for bank 
loans recorded since the third quarter of 2011 
had come to a halt. At the same time, the par -
ticipating institutions largely kept credit stand -
ards for loans to enterprises at the level of the 
previous quarter in net terms.
Whereas heterogeneity in the development of 
loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area remained high at country level, all four 
large member states recorded a slight upward 
trend in credit growth (see the chart on page 39). 
French and for the first time also German banks 
reported discernibly positive quarterly inflows. 
Although lending to non- financial corporations 
continued to decline on balance in Italy and, 
above all, Spain, the pace of reduction slowed Slight upward 
trend in monet -
ary and credit growth
Decline in loans 
to non- financial corporations slowed furtherAccording to BLS, standards for loans to  enterprises largely  unchanged; the same applies to the demand for loans
Slight upward 
trend in credit growth despite heterogeneity in all four large euro- area  countriesConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2014 Q2 2014 Q1
Central government deposits 16.1 1.1
Monetary aggregate M3 72.9 43.3
of which: Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 54.9 89.3
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) 15.7 – 23.9
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 2.3 – 22.1
Monetary capital – 68.9 9.2
of which
Capital and reserves 7.1 54.7
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 76.0 – 45.5Assets 2014 Q2 2014 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area – 34.9 – 28.2
Loans – 41.4 – 10.0
Loans, adjusted 1 10.5 –  7.3
Securities 6.5 – 18.2
Credit to general government in the euro area – 34.4 17.2
Loans – 13.1 20.4
Securities – 21.4 –  3.2
Net external assets 90.6 79.6
Other counterparts of M3 – 53.1 – 17.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
37

in the last four quarters. In the case of Ger -
many and Spain – less so for France and Italy – 
this is attributable to the economic recovery, 
which – with a typical lag of a few quarters – 
ought to boost lending to non- financial corpor -
ations. The fact that Italy has slipped back into 
 recession could represent a risk for its future 
loan growth; by contrast, in Spain the positive 
influence of the business cycle is tending to be 
overshadowed by the persistently high need 
for deleveraging in the non- financial corporate 
sector. In the four large member states (as in 
the euro area as a whole), the demand for 
loans may also have been dampened, as in the 
previous quarters, by the fact that non- financial 
corporations partially replaced bank loans by 
making greater use of internal financing or – in 
light of the favourable financing conditions for 
enterprises at present – by raising funding dir -
ectly on the capital markets.
Loan growth in the second quarter was mainly 
supported by loans to financial corporations, 
which continued the moderate rise registered 
in the previous quarter. Loans to households in 
the euro area continued to increase at a weak 
annual growth rate of 0.5%; the main drivers 
of growth in the second quarter were once 
again loans for house purchase.6 Here, too, 
there was persistent heterogeneity across 
countries. The moderate increase in the euro-  
area aggregate masked a more pronounced 
 increase in loans for house purchase in the 
euro- area core countries, while the periphery 
countries saw a further decline on account of 
the existing need for household deleveraging. 
For the euro area as a whole, the banks sur -
veyed as part of the BLS reported a slight eas -
ing of credit standards for housing loans, which 
is likely to have supported lending across the 
euro area. At the same time, the surveyed Slight increase 
in loans to householdsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 4 De-
noted with a negative sign because, taken in isolation, an in-
crease curbs M3 growth. 5 Adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 4
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 3
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1
6 Unlike the aggregate of loans to households, the time 
series for housing loans to households is not adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. This explains why a large-  
volume securitisation operation in France in May created a 
downward bias in the figures on loans for house purchase 
in the euro area for the second quarter of the year, while 
the aggregate of loans to households exhibited no irregu -
larities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
38

banks recorded a noticeable increase in the de -
mand for loans to households for house pur -
chase, which they perceived to be as strong as 
it last was at the end of 2010.
In keeping with the moderate increase in nom -
inal private consumption expenses, consumer 
credit has been moving gradually upwards 
since the end of 2012, and this continued in 
the reporting quarter despite slight net out -
flows. The upward trend in this credit segment 
is reflected in the BLS. The surveyed banks 
 reported that demand for consumer credit in 
the euro area had risen markedly in the second 
quarter for the first time since the beginning of 
2007, while credit standards remained virtually 
unchanged.
Besides the upward trend in loans to the pri -
vate sector, monetary growth in the reporting 
quarter was again supported, above all, by the 
inflow of funds from abroad, which was re -
flected in a significant expansion in the MFI 
sector’s net external asset position.7 The avail -
able data suggest that this was attributable in 
equal measure to the persistent current ac -
count surpluses in the euro area and inflows 
from portfolio transactions with non- residents. 
As in the previous quarters, the latter are likely 
to have been driven primarily by foreign invest -
ors’ strong demand for euro- area securities. The resulting inflow of deposits into the euro 
area was only partially counterbalanced by 
 domestic non- MFIs’ continued purchases of 
foreign securities.
Monetary growth in the reporting quarter was 
also supported by the decline in monetary cap -
ital. This was largely attributable to strong out -
flows from long- term time deposits. Given that 
these outflows were, to a large extent, the 
 result of securitisation transactions in France 
being liquidated and that such transactions 
simultaneously lead to a corresponding decline 
in securitised lending to the private sector, they 
had no net impact on M3, however. Besides 
the liquidation of time deposits, the reduction 
in long- term bank debt securities with a matur -
ity of over two years continued as well. Despite 
the – in some cases distinct – improvements in 
placing longer- term bank debt securities re -
ported by institutions participating in the BLS, 
outflows were recorded in this area by Ger -Marked expan-
sion in net  external asset positionMonetary  capital down considerably, but with only a partial influence on the monetary aggregateLoans to non-financial corporations
€ billion; three-month changes at the end of the quarter, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 1425201510505101520
–––––++++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2011 12 13 145040302010010203040
–––––++++
7 The reporting quarter was characterised by two large-  
scale special factors, which did not have an impact on M3 
on balance and are therefore disregarded when interpret -
ing M3 developments. In April, long- term time deposits 
and securitised lending to the domestic private sector (see 
also the next paragraph) experienced extensive declines as 
a result of the liquidation of credit securitisation transac -
tions in France. In May, a securitisation transaction in 
France led to a sharp decline in loans to households for 
house purchase, while securitised lending to the domestic 
private sector posted an increase (see footnote 6).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
39

man, Spanish and Italian banks in particular. 
This suggests that bank- side factors continue 
to play a role in this context, too. In addition to 
some credit institutions requiring little funding 
on account of  deleveraging, a key bank- side 
factor is that banks have been substituting 
bank debt securities with alternative sources of 
financing, such as Eurosystem liquidity pro -
vided on favourable terms as well as deposits, 
which are continuing to grow. This is consistent 
with the fact that the banks surveyed in the BLS 
reported improved access to funding in the 
form of deposits and via the money market.
The net decline in asset items on bank balance 
sheets observed in 2013 weakened significantly 
(measured in terms of 12-month changes) for 
the first time in the reporting quarter. This is 
generally consistent with the results of the lat -
est BLS, in which the surveyed banks indicated 
that the reduction in risk- weighted assets 
owing to the new regulatory and supervisory 
actions had come to a halt in the first half 
of  2014. By contrast, banks continued to 
strengthen their capital position. The slow -
down in deleveraging was mainly attributable 
to items which have little or no influence on 
monetary developments (see the chart above). 
In particular, the strong reduction in financial 
derivatives in the trading portfolio – which had 
emerged in 2013, notably because of the tight -ening of regulatory banking standards – weak -
ened in all four large euro- area countries. Fur -
thermore, there was a slowdown (with the ex -
ception of Italy) in the reduction in claims on 
other euro- area MFIs, which is likely to be 
linked to the improved level of confidence now 
placed in the periphery countries and the euro 
area as a whole again. Focusing only on the 
counterparts of M3 contained in the asset 
items, balance sheet reduction continued in 
Spain and Italy. In these two countries, claims 
on the rest of the world and the euro- area pri -
vate sector decreased by a smaller margin than 
in the previous quarter, yet banks intensified 
their reduction of securitised lending to the 
public sector. By contrast, the counterparts of 
M3 contained in the asset items increased 
slightly in Germany and France towards the 
end of the second quarter, which was  essentially 
attributable to claims on the rest of the world.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
 domestic customers
The increase in German banks’ deposit busi -
ness amidst a simultaneous shift towards 
shorter-  term deposit types continued in the 
second quarter of 2014. As in the euro area, it 
is likely that the renewed overall decline in the Net decline in 
asset items weakened  considerablyBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
* Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20143 000 3 0002 000 2 0001 000 1 00001 000 1 0002 000 2 0003 000 3 0004 000 4 000
–––++++12-month changes1 at the end of the quarter, in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
40

interest rate spread between deposits of differ -
ent maturities combined with the marked pref -
erence of investors for liquid assets contributed 
to this. The decline in longer- term deposits 
mainly affected long- term time deposits, while 
increases in the shorter- term segment were pri -
marily driven by an increase in households’ 
overnight deposits. Besides the low interest 
rates on alternative secure deposit types, the 
continued attractiveness of overnight deposits 
in the reporting quarter may have been en -
couraged by discussions about potential ex -
cesses in the stock markets and about the level 
of guaranteed returns in insurance policies. 
Compared with the increase in households’ 
overnight deposits, the other movements in 
shorter- term deposits were almost negligible. 
Non- financial corporations increased their over -
night deposits to a far lesser extent in the 
second quarter of 2014; short- term time de -
posits and savings  deposits across all sectors 
rose only slightly at most.
The main factor behind the reduction in the 
longer-  term maturity segment of domestic 
banks’ deposit business in the reporting quar -
ter was the renewed distinct decline in the 
long- term time deposits of financial corpor -
ations, especially insurance companies and 
pension funds. As in the previous quarters, 
these professional investors are likely to have 
shifted the freed- up funds towards less liquid 
and riskier assets outside M3 in search of higher 
yield. Moreover, households likewise continued 
to reduce their long- term deposits.
Compared with previous quarters, German 
banks’ lending business expanded significantly 
in the second quarter of 2014, although this 
was solely the result of an increase in loans to 
private non- banks. Banks in Germany upped 
their holdings of securities issued by private 
 domestic entities and increased their private-  
sector lending, particularly to the non- financial 
private sector.
As regards loans to households, the positive 
development seen in the previous quarter con -tinued. Loans for house purchase were once 
again the main driver of growth, with their rate 
of increase continuing to accelerate somewhat. 
This development is broadly consistent with the 
information provided by the institutions sur -
veyed in the BLS, which indicates that demand 
for loans to households for house purchase 
again rose moderately in the second quarter of 
2014, even though the rise in demand was per -
ceptibly weaker than in the preceding quarter. 
According to the bank managers surveyed, this 
development was fuelled by both optimism on 
the part of borrowers regarding housing mar -
ket prospects and consumer confidence, which 
had risen again slightly.
The credit standards for housing loans re -
mained unchanged according to the banks 
which participated in the BLS. The banks did 
not identify any specific factor that had a note -
worthy impact on credit standards. In particu -
lar, banks again did not regard housing market 
prospects as having an easing effect on the Deposit business 
continues grow-ing and is  almost entirely attributable to overnight  deposits of households
Longer- term 
 deposits again reduced mainly 
by financial 
 corporations
Bank loans to 
domestic non- banks clearly on the rise and 
driven by the 
non- financial private sectorGrowth in loans to households 
continues to be 
driven by loans for house  purchase
Credit standards 
for housing 
loans 
 unchangedLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2014
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 20.4 22.2
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years 9.6 0.4
of over 2 years – 7.6 – 9.1
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months – 3.2 1.6
of over 3 months – 0.3 – 0.8
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 1.2 – 6.5
Securitised lending – 2.0 4.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 2.9 9.3
of which to households 3 5.6 5.8
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 – 4.8 4.0
Securitised lending – 1.1 10.4
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
41

 development of credit standards, whereas they 
perceived this factor to have an expansionary 
influence on demand- side developments. The 
banks adjusted their margins primarily on loans 
for house purchase carrying an average risk; 
the margins in this credit segment were nar -
rowed markedly. However, the margins on risk -
ier loans remained largely unchanged.
The margins on average loans were also nar -
rowed somewhat for consumer credit in the 
reporting quarter, whereas they remained prac -
tically unchanged for riskier loans. In addition, 
the banks surveyed in the BLS perceived a slight 
easing of standards for consumer credit in the 
second quarter and reported a slight increase 
in demand for this credit category. The statistics 
for the month of June, which are based not 
only on information from the MFIs surveyed in 
the BLS but on data from all MFIs in Germany, 
do indeed show a significant increase in con -
sumer credit. Given that this category of lend -
ing was still on the decline at the beginning of the three- month period, consumer loans stag -
nated across the second quarter as a whole. 
On the whole, loans to domestic households 
remained moderate in mid-2014. The 12-month 
rate of loans to households rose to 1.4% at the 
end of the quarter compared with 1.3% at the 
end of March, continuing the slight upward 
trend observed for some time now.
There was also an upturn in lending to domes -
tic non- financial corporations, with marked 
growth in loans with short and intermediate 
maturities being recorded in the reporting 
quarter for the first time since summer 2012. 
However, this development came to a halt 
 towards the end of the quarter as net inflows 
into short- term loans were somewhat lower 
than net outflows from longer maturities in 
June. This could be one of the reasons why, 
according to the German banks participating in 
the BLS, demand for loans to enterprises re -
mained virtually unchanged on balance in the 
second quarter of 2014. As in the preceding 
quarters, BLS data suggest that demand was 
dampened by enterprises accessing alternative 
sources of funding, particularly internal finan -
cing. However, viewed over the 12-month 
period up to the end of the second quarter, the 
increase in the second quarter did not fully off -
set the net redemptions made in the preceding 
quarters. Although the annual growth rate rose 
by 1.1 percentage points, it remained in nega -
tive territory at -0.7%.
Surveys do not currently offer any indications 
of substantial supply- side impediments to lend -
ing, although in the previous BLS survey the 
German banks considered their credit stand -
ards for lending to enterprises to be relatively 
tight (see the box entitled The level of credit 
standards in the Bank Lending Survey on 
pages  44 to 47). According to the German 
 results of the  latest BLS for the second quarter, 
the surveyed institutions did not change their 
credit standards for loans to enterprises. This 
applies to loans to all firm sizes and of all 
 maturities. None of the factors relevant to 
credit standards contained in the BLS questions Consumer 
credit stalledMarked increase in loans to  
non- financial  corporations
German banks’ 
credit standards 
for enterprises 
unchangedLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201421012345
––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
42

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: dif-
ference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respond-
ents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “nar-
rowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2014 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20142.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–60–300+30+60
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
2.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
43

The level of credit standards in the Bank Lending Survey
For the fi  rst time since the euro- area Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) was launched in 2003, 
the respondent banks were asked in this 
year’s April survey not only about the changes in their credit standards in the 
quarter ended but also, and explicitly, about 
the levels of their credit standards. To this 
end, the surveyed institutions were asked to assess the current level of their credit stand-
ards relative to the levels prevailing since the beginning of 2003 and the second 
quarter of 2010 respectively.1
In the past, levels of credit standards could 
only be approximated by cumulating the 
changes reported on a quarterly basis. For 
the longer period (since the beginning of 2003) this cumulation of the values re-ported by the surveyed banks indicates, for the euro area as a whole, a tendency  towards more restrictive credit standards in 
all loan segments (amid fl  uctuations). 
Periods in which standards were tightened 
alternate with periods in which tightenings 
remained constant or were reduced, but 
were not (wholly) reversed. In Germany, this trend is less pronounced and is evident only with regard to credit standards for loans to 
large enterprises. By contrast, the cumula-
tive credit standards for loans to small and medium- sized enterprises (SMEs) as well as for loans to households for house purchase fl  uctuate more or less around the 2003 ini-
tial value. For the period since the second quarter of 2010, the cumulative changes 
currently indicate that, in the euro area as a 
whole, banks have tightened their credit 
standards for both loans to enterprises and 
loans for house purchase. In Germany, by contrast, a tightening of standards is dis-
cernible only for loans to large enterprises 
and housing loans.
This cumulation method has one major 
drawback in that there is no information as 
to the point in time when credit standards 
were at a “neutral” level – the only truly 
suitable reference point for such a cumula-
tion.2 What is more, the reasons for the 
 essentially euro- area trend towards more 
restrictive credit standards across the entire 
observation period cannot be unambigu-
ously identifi  ed. This trend is probably due 
chiefl  y to the fi  nancial crisis, which largely 
overlaps the observation periods and led to 
1 The period since the beginning of 2003 represents 
the longest possible observation period, as the BLS has 
been in existence since then. The second, shorter 
period was included in order to obtain an appraisal of 
the current level of credit standards compared with the period since the euro- area sovereign debt crisis intensi-fi  ed.
2 Moreover, this point in time is likely to vary across 
the different banks and countries of the euro area, 
thereby further impairing comparability.Cumulative changes of credit standards
1 Difference  between  the  number  of  respondents  reporting 
“tightened  considerably”  and  “tightened  slightly”  and  the 
number  of  respondents  reporting  “eased  somewhat”  and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given, 
cumulated from 2003 Q1 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank2003 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141000100200300400500600700
–+++++++Cumulative net percentages1
All enterprises
Small and medium-sized enterprises
Large enterprises
Loans for house purchaseEuro
area Germany
Escalation of the 
sovereign debt crisisDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
44

more restrictive lending in most countries. 
However, it cannot be ruled out that the 
banks’ response behaviour is fundamentally 
biased towards a “tightened” assessment.3 
A bias of this kind could be attributed to an 
overly stringent response behaviour, either 
for strategic reasons or subconsciously.4
Because of these shortcomings, the banks 
participating in the latest April round of the 
BLS were asked directly and separately for 
each loan category how restrictive or ex-
pansive they considered their current credit 
standards to be compared with two refer-
ence periods, one from the launch of the 
BLS in 2003 to the fi  rst quarter of 2014 and the other from the escalation of the sover-
eign debt crisis in the second quarter of 
2010 to the fi  rst quarter of 2014. Each bank 
was to use as its reference level the mid-point of the range of its responses, ie the 
midpoint between the tightest and loosest 
level of its credit standards in the respective periods.
5 The individual banks’ responses to 
this ad hoc question were aggregated using 
the calculation method for net percentages, 
3 The Senior Loan Offi   cer Opinion Survey on Bank 
Lending Practices (SLOOS), which the US Federal 
 Reserve System has used since 1967 to collect data on 
banks’ lending behaviour, likewise indicates that, over 
time, banks have reported a tightening of their credit 
standards signifi  cantly more often than an easing of 
lending standards.
4 The results of the cumulation method may be dis-
torted for other reasons, too. For instance, the re-spondents at many banks have changed over the 
years, meaning that a continuity of response behaviour 
was not always assured. Moreover, the net percent-
ages ignore the gradations of the possible responses 
(“considerably” versus “slightly”) in the changes to 
credit standards. In addition, a slight easing followed 
by a slight tightening does not necessarily mean a re-turn to exactly the same level as before.5 The banks were given eight possible answers to ap-
praise the current level of their credit standards com-
pared with the reference level. In addition to the fi  ve 
gradations (from “considerably tighter than the mid-point of the range” to “considerably looser than the 
midpoint of the range”) modelled on the standard BLS 
questions, three further possible answers were pro-vided which were designed to capture particularly 
noteworthy levels (“at the tightest/loosest level during 
this period”) or developments (“levels have remained 
constant during this period”).Comparison of responses regarding the level
* and of the current deviation from 
the mean value of the cumulative changes
* Assessment of the current level of credit standards in relation 
to the midpoint of the range of standards implemented in two 
different time periods.  1 Difference between the number of re-
spondents  reporting  “at  the  tightest  level/considerably  tight-er/moderately tighter than the midpoint of the range” and “at the  loosest  level/moderately  looser/considerably  looser  than 
the midpoint of the range” as a percentage of the responses 
given.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 20 40 60 80 100As a percentage of the responses given
– 50 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350All enterprisesNet percentages1 of level assessment
Deviation from the respective midpoint
Small and medium-
sized enterprisesGermany
Large enterprises
Euro areaHouse purchase
All enterprises
All enterprisesSmall and medium-
sized enterprises
Small and medium-
sized enterprisesLarge enterprises
Large enterprisesHouse purchase
House purchase
All enterprises
Small and medium-
sized enterprises
Large enterprises
House purchaseCumulative net percentages of credit standards
Deviation from the respective mean
value of the cumulative changes
Germany
Euro area2003 Q1 to 2014 Q12003 Q1 to 2014 Q1
2010 Q2 to 2014 Q12010 Q2 to 2014 Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
45

which is also used to aggregate the re-
sponses to the standard questions in the BLS.
6 Given the way the ad hoc  question 
was framed, it is not possible to reach any 
conclusions about the absolute levels of current credit standards when interpreting these net percentages. However, it is pos-
sible to gauge how great the deviations are currently estimated to be from the respect-
ive “historical” reference value in the indi-vidual countries or in the euro area as a whole. The aforementioned problem re-
garding the cumulation method, ie the fact that the “neutral” benchmark level of credit 
standards is unknown, cannot be entirely eliminated in respect of the ad hoc ques-
tion either. However, the fact that the cur-
rent level is compared with the range of the 
levels over an extended period rather than 
with the level at a fi  xed point in time (the 
beginning of 2003) signifi  cantly reduces the 
problem of working with a reference level 
that may be unsuitable.
The survey results show that the present 
level of credit standards for loans for enter-
prises and loans for house purchase, both 
in the euro area as a whole and in Germany, are signifi  cantly more restrictive on balance than the reference value for the longer ob-
servation period (since 2003). Differences 
relating to fi  rm size are scarcely discernible. The extent of the restrictive deviations from the reference value is somewhat greater in the euro area as a whole than in Germany, 
and in addition is very heterogeneous across the individual countries of the euro area. It should be pointed out that large  restrictive deviations from the midpoint of 
the range for this time period do not neces-sarily result (only) from a currently extremely restrictive level; they can also stem from the 
fact that the pre- crisis level was by no 
means “neutral”, for example because 
credit standards were loose in some cases 
prior to the crisis. In that case, the large  deviations evident at present may (inter 
alia) indicate a correction.
Compared with the reference value for the 
shorter time period (since the second quarter 
of 2010), the credit standards for loans to 
 enterprises are also tighter at present. How-
ever, they exceed the reference value far less 
than do the results for the longer reference 
period. This is not surprising, as massive crisis- 
induced tightenings of credit standards oc-
curred for the most part before 2010, mean-
ing that the standards in most countries and 
loan segments were probably already at a 
fairly high level by the second quarter of 2010. The responses to the standard ques-
tions suggest that banks subsequently tight-
ened their credit standards only slightly or left them unchanged. For the period beginning in 
the second quarter of 2010, the deviations from the reference value in loans to enter-
prises in the euro area as a whole and in Ger-
many do not differ greatly. In the case of 
loans for house purchase, by contrast, credit 
standards in Germany are currently only slightly tighter than their reference value since the sovereign debt crisis intensifi  ed, while in the euro area as a whole they are 
considerably more restrictive than the corres-ponding reference value.
The responses to the ad hoc question re-garding the levels can be compared with 
the deviations of the current levels from the 
mean values in each of the two reference periods as derived from the cumulative 
changes. In theory, the two methods could 
produce different results for various rea-
sons. It may be, for example, that the time 
6 The difference between the total number of re-
spondents reporting “at the tightest level/considerably 
tighter/moderately tighter than the midpoint of the 
range” and “at the loosest level/moderately looser/considerably looser than the midpoint of the range” 
was calculated for each country and for the euro area as a whole, and then the percentage share of this dif-ference in all responses was computed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
46

series of the historical values was not avail-
able as a yardstick to the bank respondent 
who answered the question regarding the 
current level. If, on the other hand, the 
 respondent had been able to consult this 
time series, he or she may have identifi  ed a 
distorted response pattern in the past and 
tried to correct it ex post when answering 
the question. Given these possible distort-ing factors, it is surprising that the results obtained using the two methods largely match. However, it is equally conceivable that respondents’ answers regarding the level were coloured by a similar degree of tightening bias as that presumed in the 
 cumulative changes; this could explain the 
high degree of consistency.
The two methods show that, both in Ger-
many and in the euro area as a whole, the 
most pronounced changes in the credit standard level occurred before the sover-eign debt crisis escalated, and that only comparatively minor adjustments were made thereafter. In addition, the same qualitative differences between the results 
for the euro area as a whole and Germany are revealed by both methods. The tighten-ing is more pronounced in the euro area as 
a whole than in Germany. By contrast, the 
two methods come to different conclusions with regard to credit standards for loans to 
SMEs in Germany. Thus, the level of credit 
standards measured by cumulative changes is currently somewhat looser than the mean values of both comparable periods. Yet ac-
cording to the responses to the ad hoc  
question regarding the level, German banks 
see the present level of their credit stand-
ards for loans to SMEs – like those for loans 
to large enterprises  – as being markedly 
tighter than the respective reference value 
for the two observation periods.7
However, differences in the results obtained 
using the two methods with regard to the credit standards for loans to SMEs in Ger-
many do not necessarily point to a contra-
diction. On the one hand, the cumulative changes imply that these standards were changed only relatively slightly over the 
 entire time period. On the other hand, the 
response to the ad hoc  question provided 
by many banks, to the effect that lending 
standards are at present moderately or con-
siderably tighter than the midpoint of the 
range or that they are even at their tightest 
level, might also be true, namely within a 
narrow range.
The differences in the results obtained using 
the two methods with regard to credit 
standards for loans to SMEs in Germany 
also highlight the importance of the ques-
tion regarding the level of credit standards. 
Only by comparing the results obtained 
using the two methods regarding the per-
ceived level of credit standards is it possible 
to detect possible deviations between the 
levels as calculated using the cumulative net percentages and as reported by the banks. 
Since neither approach is clearly superior, divergences have to be evaluated against 
the backdrop of the advantages and disad-vantages specifi  c to each. In future, the ad 
hoc question regarding the level of credit standards is to be posed annually in the 
April BLS.
7 The discrepancy in the results obtained using the 
two methods could be attributable, amongst other 
things, to the differences in how the respondents ap-
praise their credit standards for loans to large enter-
prises and loans to SMEs. Thus, in response to the ad 
hoc question regarding the level, banks appraised the 
current differences in credit standards for loans to 
 enterprises of different sizes as being slight. However, 
occasional differentiations by fi  rm size which were made in the course of credit standard changes may 
accumulate over time to become considerable, a phe-
nomenon of which the respondent banks may have 
been unaware until they considered their reply to the 
ad hoc question regarding the level. Moreover, there 
were distinct discrepancies for a few banks between the results obtained using the two methods, which 
signifi  cantly magnify the differences at the aggregate 
level.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
47

had a noteworthy impact when viewed in isol -
ation. The surveyed banks moderately tight -
ened their margins on loans to enterprises. 
However, this only benefited large enterprises; 
the margins on loans to small and medium-  
sized enterprises remained unchanged.
The BLS in the second quarter contained a 
number of ad hoc  questions on banks’ funding 
conditions, the impact of the sovereign debt 
crisis and on the new regulatory and supervis -
ory actions, which include the ECB’s asset qual -
ity review. According to the institutions, the 
funding situation improved slightly in the 
second quarter of 2014. The institutions also 
stated that the sovereign debt crisis had not 
 affected their lending policy and had only very 
marginal effects on their funding conditions in 
the period under review. In the wake of the 
new regulatory and supervisory actions, the 
banks reduced their risk- weighted assets in the 
first half of 2014, albeit to a lesser extent than 
in the second half of 2013. They also managed 
to strengthen their capital position through re -
tained earnings and capital issuance. The insti -
tutions stated that the new regulatory require -
ments – taken in isolation – did not have any 
notable effects on their funding conditions. 
The changed regulatory and supervisory setting 
per se  had an impact on lending business merely in the form of somewhat tighter credit 
standards for loans to enterprises.
As the interest rate level was still very low, the 
development of bank lending rates in new 
business probably tended to support domestic 
lending to the private sector. The interest rate 
statistics suggest that bank interest rates in the 
second quarter largely followed the moderate 
interest rate decline in the money and capital 
markets across all reported segments, matur -
ities and volumes. For example, the interest 
rates for small- scale loans to enterprises de -
creased slightly, whereas they fell discernibly 
for large- scale loans. For short- term funds, the 
reporting institutions were charging interest of 
3.0% for small- scale and 1.7% for large- scale 
loans at the end of June. Interest rates on long- 
term loans to domestic non- financial corpor -
ations stood at 2.6% and 2.4% respectively at 
the end of the period under review.
Interest rates on loans for house purchase were 
also discernibly on the decline in the second 
quarter. At the end of June, the interest rate on 
long- term loans stood at 2.8%. Deposits of 
households and non- financial corporations 
again predominantly earned somewhat less 
interest than in the previous quarter.Risk- weighted 
assets reduced and capital  position strengthenedBank lending rates follow interest rate  decline in the 
capital marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
48

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the spring months of 2014, events in the 
international financial markets were dictated 
largely by the very expansionary monetary pol -
icy in the major currency areas. For instance, 
the Governing Council of the ECB adopted fur -
ther monetary policy stimulus measures in 
June. This led to a considerable reduction in 
bond market yields, especially in the euro area. 
At the same time, market participants still had 
a strong appetite for risk, which meant that 
risky assets were trading at extremely narrow 
yield spreads up to and into June. The high 
prices of equities and corporate bonds were 
supported by market participants’ positive 
 assessment of economic activity. However, the 
market valuations of European enterprises in 
particular were subsequently dragged down by 
heightened geopolitical tensions as well as – in 
a probably related development  – some 
weaker- than-  expected business indicators re -
cently, notably for the euro area. As a case in 
point, European equity markets have sustained 
net equity price losses of around 5% since the 
end of March, while the US equity market has 
fared more favourably. Foreign exchange mar -
ket price developments were largely driven by 
current monetary policy decisions and expect -
ations regarding the future monetary policy 
path on both sides of the Atlantic. On balance, 
the euro has lost about 2½% of its trade-  
weighted value since the end of March.
Exchange rates
In the foreign exchange markets, the easing of 
monetary policy in the euro area had a mark -
edly negative effect on the euro exchange rate. 
Compared with the end of March 2014, the 
euro has depreciated against the US dollar by 
around 3% on balance.Up to the beginning of May, however, the euro 
initially gained in value, even temporarily peak -
ing at just under US$1.40, its highest recorded 
level since autumn 2011. On the one hand, this 
occurrence was attributable to favourable eco -
nomic data in a number of euro- area countries 
and the positive market response to Greece’s 
first issuance of sovereign bonds. On the other 
hand, the euro- dollar rate benefited from the 
publication of the minutes to the Federal 
 Reserve’s meeting, which prompted most mar -
ket participants to assume that the prospect of 
a swift hike in the US policy rate had become 
more remote.
The upward trend in the euro’s fortunes was 
not interrupted until ECB President Mario 
Draghi hinted at a further loosening of monet -
ary policy in June. During this spell, the euro 
was additionally weakened by deteriorating 
economic expectations. Then, at the beginning 
of June, the pressure on the currency was 
upped when the reduction in the main refinan -
cing rate in the euro area, to a record low of 
0.15%, was indeed implemented and further 
measures to ease monetary policy were an -
nounced.
After stabilising temporarily, the euro came 
under renewed downward pressure when 
better- than- expected US labour market figures 
were published at the beginning of July. The 
upbeat economic data led market participants 
to believe that the Fed was more likely to hike 
rates sooner. On top of this, the euro was bur -
dened by the political tensions brewing over 
the Ukraine conflict. As this report went to 
press, the euro stood at just under US$1.34, 
close to its hitherto lowest point this year.
In late spring and the summer months of this 
year, the euro also depreciated against the yen, 
after chalking up gains of more than 25% last 
year. For one thing, this fall in value was due to 
higher- than- expected growth in the Japanese Financial 
 markets  influenced by geopolitical risk and  monetary 
policy easing
Euro falls 
against the US dollar on balance, …… having 
 initially risen to 
its highest rate 
in more than 
two years
Euro weakened 
by further mon-etary policy  easing in the 
euro area …
… and the 
growing expect -
ations of an interest- rate  reversal in the 
United States
Euro also loses 
ground against the yen …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
49

economy during the first quarter. For another, 
the yen is also likely to have benefited from the 
heightened uncertainty prevailing in inter -
national financial markets which, in the past, 
has frequently helped the Japanese currency to 
gain ground. Latterly, the euro was trading at 
¥137, which was down by around 4% on its 
level at the end of March.
The single currency also made losses against 
the pound sterling. These were triggered largely 
by repeated signals on the part of the Bank of 
England that it might raise its policy rates earl -
ier than the market expected. The UK labour 
market’s surprisingly rapid recovery, which brought the national unemployment rate down 
to its lowest level since November 2008, like -
wise contributed to a revision of market ex -
pectations, thus eroding the euro- pound rate. 
Most recently, the euro was trading at £0.80, 
around 3% down on its level at the end of 
March.
Vis- à- vis the currencies of the 20 most import -
ant trading partners of the euro area, the euro 
recorded a loss in value of around 2½% com -
pared with the end of the first quarter. As a 
result, the single currency was latterly trading 
around 1% below its level at the launch of 
monetary union. In real terms, too, ie taking 
account of the inflation differentials between 
the euro area and its major trading partners, 
the effective euro exchange rate fell in the 
period under review. The price competitiveness 
of euro- area exporters improved as a result but 
is still somewhat worse than the long- term 
average.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
During the period under review, bond markets 
in the euro area were anticipating measures to 
ease monetary policy and feeling the pressure 
of intensified geopolitical tensions; this envir -
onment fostered an additional boost in de -
mand for low- risk bonds. These safe haven in -
flows, combined with lower policy rates and 
the announcement of non- standard measures 
by the Eurosystem helped to feed the ongoing 
decline in capital market yields across Europe. 
Latterly, yields on European government bonds 
in many euro- area countries, including Ger -
many, hit new lows (see the chart on page 51). 
Overall, since the end of March, the GDP-  
weighted yield on ten- year bonds issued by 
euro- area countries (excluding Germany) has 
shrunk from 2.7% to 2.1%, compared with a 
yield decline of 54 basis points to slightly above 
0.9% for Bunds with the same maturity.… and against 
the pound  sterlingEffective  exchange rate of the euro  likewise weaker
European bond 
markets charac-terised by low interest ratesExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 20 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankA MJ JASON D JF M A MJ JAS
2013 20141.201.301.40
120130140150
0.700.750.800.850.90
100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789 1
... yen
¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
£0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.13 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
50

The fall in yields on sovereign bonds issued by 
euro-  area periphery countries was stronger 
than average. Even so, heterogeneous devel -
opments were evident within this group of 
countries. For instance, the interest rate level 
fell more sharply in Spain than in Italy, not least 
because Spain’s GDP growth expectations (ac -
cording to the Consensus Forecast) developed 
more favourably in comparative terms. In both 
countries, credit default swaps (CDSs) simultan -
eously declined. Overall, with the exception of 
Portugal and Greece, the sovereign spreads of 
long- term bonds issued by euro- area periphery 
countries narrowed against Bunds with com -
parable maturity.1 Market participants’ upfront 
confidence in future reform progress has there -
fore tended to grow stronger.
Given the geopolitical risks at hand, interest 
rates in the US bond market were likewise 
 affected by safe haven flows. On balance, 
yields on ten- year US Treasuries receded from 
2.75% to 2.4% in the course of the reporting 
period. At the same time, the US Federal 
 Reserve maintained its stance of gradually scal -
ing back its monthly purchases of Treasuries 
and mortgage- backed securities in steps total -
ling US$10 billion. Since yields on US sovereign 
bonds fell less substantially than those on Ger -
man Bunds, the interest rate spread between 
ten- year US Treasuries and German Bunds with 
the same maturity stood at 147 basis points at 
the end of the period under  review, compared 
with 125 basis points in March. The spread has 
therefore been hovering close to its highest 
 recorded level since the launch of monetary 
union.
Since the end of March, the slope of the Ger -
man yield curve derived from the yields on Fed -
eral securities has become flatter by 40 basis 
points, slipping to a level of 111 basis points, as 
measured by the yield differential between ten- 
year and two- year bonds. This represents a fur -
ther narrowing of the interest rate differential, 
which started out at 187 basis points at the be -
ginning of the year. The flatter yield curve is 
primarily a reflection of expectations that the short- run interest rate will remain low for a 
prolonged period, a sentiment largely fuelled 
by the monetary policy measures of the ECB’s 
Governing Council. By contrast, changes to 
term premiums were of lesser importance.
The five- year forward inflation rate in five years 
derived from inflation swaps remained virtually 
unchanged, at 2.1% per annum on balance. 
Against this background, longer- term inflation Sovereign bonds 
of euro- area periphery coun-tries see sharp interest rate  decline
United States 
also marked by falling interest rates
Yield curve for 
German Federal securities flat -
tens once againInflation expect -
ations firmly  anchoredBond yields in Germany, the euro area ex Germany and the USA
Source: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20141.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
0.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Monthly data%
Percentage points
Percentage pointsSpread between yields
on euro-area government bonds ex Germany and on German government bonds
Spread between US and German 
government bond yieldsYield on ten-year government 
bonds outstanding
USAEuro area ex Germany
Germany
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5+3.0+3.5+4.0
1 In Portugal, the difficulties experienced by a private bank 
that had to be propped up by the state served to cushion 
this yield decline.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
51

expectations are to be regarded as firmly an -
chored in the current interest rate environment.
Funding conditions for European enterprises in 
capital markets have continued to improve 
since the end of the first quarter. In July, cor -
porate bond yields reached their lowest ever levels since the launch of monetary union, with 
the effect that for euro- area enterprises, bond 
financing had never been that cheap. On bal -
ance, European financials saw their spreads on 
corporate bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years and a BBB rating fall from 
3.8% at the end of March to 3.5% latterly.2 The 
corresponding bond yields for European non-  
financial corporations also dropped, from 2.7% 
to 2.1%. An initial downward movement in 
yield spreads over Bunds gave way to a coun -
termovement in June when expectations that 
monetary policy would remain expansionary 
and the flight to safe haven bonds impacted on 
the Federal securities market in the form of a 
sharp dip in yields. Yield spreads on European 
corporate bonds have consequently widened a 
little in the intervening period, although they 
still fall somewhat short (by 5 basis points) of 
their levels at the end of March.
Premiums on credit default swaps for enter -
prises also experienced a decline. In the light of 
the continued low- interest- rate environment 
across the globe, this indicates that the level of 
investor compensation for implicitly expected 
credit default losses remains quite low.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €358½ billion in the second quarter of 
2014 and was therefore well below its previous- 
quarter level (€395½ billion). After deducting 
redemptions and taking account of changes 
in  issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net 
 redemptions of domestic debt securities came 
to €1 billion. Foreign borrowers placed debt 
 securities worth €28 billion on the German 
market. Thus, funds totalling a net €27 billion 
were raised in the German bond market in the 
reporting period.
The public sector raised €14½ billion on the 
bond market in the spring quarter, compared 
with €4 billion in the preceding three-  month 
Capital market- 
based corporate funding costs at historical lowCDS spreads 
narrower
Net sales in the 
bond market down
Higher 
 public sector  borrowingCorporate bond yields in the euro area*
Source: Markit. * BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014036912151821242730%, weekly averages
iBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
Corporates
Yield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.1 Day before the 
most recent interest rate cut by the ECB Governing Council.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 00.300.30.60.91.21.51.8
–
Residual maturity in years13 August 201431 March 2014 
4 June 20141%
2 These calculations are based on corporate bond yields 
included in the various iBoxx bond indices for different rat -
ing grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
52

period. The figures also include issues from 
resolution agencies of German banks, which 
are ascribed to the public sector for statistical 
purposes. For its part, the Federal government 
mainly issued ten- year and 30-year bonds (for 
€13 billion and €2½ billion respectively). In 
addition, it issued a long- term inflation- indexed 
bond worth €2 billion. By contrast, central gov -
ernment redeemed Federal notes (BobIs) and 
Federal Treasury discount paper (Bubills) each 
totalling €3½ billion net. In the quarter under 
review, state governments issued their own 
bonds to the value of €5½ billion in net terms.
Domestic enterprises, which cover much of 
their funding requirements using internal 
sources, redeemed debt securities in the 
amount of €5 billion net during the second 
quarter of 2014. On balance, these were solely 
debt instruments with maturities of up to one 
year. Financial enterprises increased their cap -
ital market debt while non- financial corpor -
ations initiated net redemptions to the tune of 
€6½ billion.
As in the previous quarter, domestic credit insti -
tutions pared back their capital market debt 
– by €10 billion – compared with €17½ billion 
in the first quarter. In particular, they redeemed 
public Pfandbriefe (€8 billion) and, to a lesser 
extent, other bank debt securities that can be 
structured flexibly (€3½ billion) and mortgage 
Pfandbriefe (€2 billion). Specialised credit insti -
tutions, meanwhile, issued debt securities to -
talling €3½ billion net.
Between April and June, German non-  banks 
were the main buyers in the domestic bond 
market, adding paper worth €20 billion to their 
portfolios. These investors focused primarily on 
foreign debt instruments (€30 billion) which 
typically generate higher yields than, say, 
Bunds. Non- resident investors bought German 
debt securities for €10½ billion. On balance, 
this was mainly paper issued by the private sec -
tor. German credit institutions likewise invested 
in interest- bearing paper, purchasing instru -
ments of this kind worth €1 billion.During the spring months, developments in the 
international equity markets were still predom -
inantly positive (see the chart on page 54), with 
stock prices rising up to and into July and cer -
tain indices such as the US S&P 500 and the 
German DAX, the latter admittedly a perform -
ance index, reaching record levels. This up -
swing in European stock prices was driven not 
only by expectations that interest rates would 
stay low for a prolonged period on account of 
the cut in policy rates and the Eurosystem’s 
non- standard measures, but also by the favour -
able economic environment and an improve -
ment in long- term profit expectations. How -
ever, July then saw a deterioration in economic 
conditions and the earnings outlook. The quar -
terly results of US public limited companies 
were mostly better than analysts’ expectations; 
however, the same cannot be said for those of 
German enterprises. Geopolitical risks also 
started to become a more pressing topic, with 
market participants in Europe and Germany 
being particularly concerned that the economic Net redemptions 
of corporate bonds
Net redemptions 
by credit institu-tions
Domestic non- 
banks main buyers of debt securitiesDevelopments in equity markets mixedInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 27.3 1.2 16.6
Credit institutions –  2.5 –  5.4 1.2
of which
Foreign debt securities 8.9 5.0 2.3
Deutsche Bundesbank –  3.7 –  2.3 – 4.4
Other sectors 33.6 8.9 19.8
of which
Domestic debt securities 7.7 – 15.3 – 9.8
Non-residents – 14.9 14.7 10.3
Shares
Residents 11.5 10.7 15.7
Credit institutions –  1.1 7.2 2.8
of which
Domestic shares –  1.3 5.7 0.5
Non-banks 12.6 3.5 12.9
of which
Domestic shares 7.0 1.2 1.8
Non-residents 1.6 –  6.0 7.7
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 13.0 20.9 11.7
Investment in retail funds 1.5 2.7 2.5
of which
Equity funds –  1.0 –  0.6 0.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
53

sanctions imposed on Russia as a result of the 
Ukraine conflict could weigh on enterprises. 
Overall, equity market developments have been 
somewhat heterogeneous since the end of the 
first quarter, with prices of US shares appreciat -
ing by 4% (as measured by the S&P 500), while 
European shares fell by 5% (as measured by the 
Euro Stoxx) and German stocks lost 6% (as 
measured by the CDAX price index).
Events in the European equity market were 
 impacted, in no small measure, by the negative 
developments in European bank stock prices, 
which, with a fall of 11%, suffered considerably 
greater losses than the market as a whole. Be -
sides the acute crisis at a Portuguese bank in 
July, this might have owed something to the 
uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the 
asset quality review currently being carried out 
ahead of the introduction of the Single Super -
visory Mechanism. Rating agencies also ex -
plained the deterioration in rating outlooks 
with the fact that once the Single Resolution Mechanism had been set up it was less likely 
that governments would bail out failing institu -
tions. Capital increases implemented in the 
banking sector in order to meet the future cap -
ital adequacy standards intensified the pressure 
on bank stocks. Only Spanish banks recorded a 
slight appreciation in their share prices, reflect -
ing the optimistic market assessment of the 
 reforms that had been implemented.
The implied equity risk premiums for the Euro 
Stoxx and the S&P 500, which were calcu -
lated using a dividend discount model, re -
mained static at 8.5% and 5.8% respectively. 
This means that the level of compensation 
being sought by investors buying European 
shares is higher than the long- term average, 
while that in the case of US shares is slightly 
lower.  Reflecting the fall in prices and the 
largely unchanged profit expectations, the 
price-  earnings ratio, based on 12-month 
earnings growth  expectations, fell to 13.8 at 
last count for the Euro Stoxx while the figure 
for the S&P 500  improved further on its end-  
March level. Both valuation indicators remain 
above their respective five- year averages, 
which continues to point to relatively high 
share valuations.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
picked up somewhat in the second quarter. 
Domestic enterprises issued new shares total -
ling €10 billion, the majority of which were 
listed equities. A large proportion was associ -
ated with a capital increase by a DAX- listed 
 enterprise. The volume of foreign equities out -
standing in the German market climbed by 
€13½ billion. Equities were purchased primarily 
by domestic non- banks (€13 billion) and for -
eign investors (€7½  billion). Domestic credit 
 institutions purchased equities in the sum of 
€3 billion. Both categories of domestic buyer 
invested predominantly in foreign shares.3
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €14 bil -European bank 
stocks record considerable lossesPrice- earnings ratio remains high
Slight pick- up in 
stock market 
funding and stock purchasesStock prices in major markets*
Sources: Deutsche Börse AG, Thomson Reuters and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Price indices (taking no account of divi-
dends or reinvested profit distributions). 1 Expected volatility in 
the next 30 days, calculated from option prices on the DAX.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 201480100120140160180Weekly averages
%
0204060 Memo item: lin scale
Implicit DAX volatility (VDAX NEW) 1S&P 500
Dow Jones
Euro StoxxCDAX
price indexEnd-2009 = 100; log scale
3 See below for further details on direct investment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
54

lion, after raising funds totalling €23½ billion in 
the previous three- month period. The fresh 
funds mainly accrued to specialised funds 
 reserved for institutional investors (€11½ bil -
lion). With regard to the individual asset classes, 
equity funds were the main recipient of new 
flows (€5 billion), but mixed funds and mixed 
security- based funds also recorded inflows of 
€3½ billion each. Foreign funds traded in the 
German market attracted inflows totalling €8½ 
billion net in the second quarter of 2014. Resi -
dent non- banks were the main buyers, adding 
mutual fund shares worth €21½ billion to their 
portfolios. These were domestic shares for the 
most part. Foreign investors and domestic 
credit institutions each acquired mutual fund 
shares worth €½ billion.
Direct investment
As in cross-  border portfolio transactions, 
which recorded a net outflow of funds total -
ling €22½ billion, net capital exports amount -
ing to €16 billion were registered in the form 
of direct investment in the second quarter of 
2014.
The largest contributing factor was the com -
paratively high level of funding provided by 
German enterprises to their subsidiaries abroad, 
which amounted to €23 billion in the second 
quarter. German enterprises primarily increased 
their equity capital in the narrower sense 
(€10½ billion), reinvested profits (€8½ billion) 
and stepped up their direct investment loans 
(€4½ billion).4 In the case of the latter, the in -
crease in financial credits (€5 billion) – in par -Buoyant sales 
and purchases of mutual fund shares
Capital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroadMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q2p Q1p Q2p
I Current account + 46.8 + 49.4 + 44.1
1 Goods 1 + 56.0 + 53.1 + 53.1
2 Services 2 – 11.7 –  7.1 –  8.7
3 Primary income +  9.9 + 18.2 +  6.6
4 Secondary income –  7.4 – 14.8 –  6.9
II Capital account +  0.8 +  1.7 +  0.6
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 67.2 + 66.7 + 64.2
1 Direct investment + 15.0 + 25.3 + 15.8
Domestic investment 
abroad + 30.7 + 27.1 + 23.2
Foreign investment in the reporting country + 15.7 +  1.7 +  7.3
2 Portfolio investment + 52.3 + 31.2 + 22.7
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 39.1 + 40.5 + 41.3
Shares
3 +  3.3 +  3.4 +  4.9
Investment fund shares 4+  4.1 +  9.7 +  8.6
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  1.1 +  1.1 –  2.0
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 32.0 + 22.5 + 27.6
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 24.9 + 22.3 + 23.9
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  0.2 +  4.9 +  0.2
Foreign investment in 
 domestic debt securities – 13.2 +  9.3 + 18.6
Shares 3 +  2.5 –  5.3 +  7.7
Investment fund shares –  0.8 –  0.1 +  0.7
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 18.5 +  7.9 + 11.0
of which
Public bonds and 
notes 8 +  3.8 + 19.7 +  9.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  3.6 +  6.8 –  0.6
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  4.7 +  5.0 +  9.0
4 Other investment 10 –  4.9 +  5.8 + 17.3
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions + 13.3 –  0.8 + 41.8
Enterprises and 
 households
11 – 10.2 + 18.4 –  4.0
General government –  6.0 +  6.0 –  3.5
Bundesbank –  2.1 – 17.9 – 17.1
5 Reserve assets 12 +  0.1 –  0.6 –  0.6
IV Errors and omissions 13 + 19.5 + 15.7 + 19.5
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4 Including reinvestment of earnings. 
5 Up to and including 2012, adjusted for accrued interest. Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10 Includes in particular loans and trade credits 
as well as currency and deposits. 11 Includes the following sec-
tors: fi  nancial corporations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and 
non- profi  t institutions serving households. 12 Excluding alloca-
tion of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 13 Statistical errors and omissions resulting 
from the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial ac-count and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank4 With the implementation of the sixth edition of the IMF’s 
Balance of Payments and International Investment Position 
Manual (BPM6) in Germany, the credit operations of affili -
ated companies are shown in accordance with the asset/
liability principle. This means that direct investment loans 
abroad include loans made by domestic parent companies 
as well as loans made by branches domiciled in Germany to 
their owners located abroad. The same applies to incoming 
direct investment loans from abroad. See also Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Changes in the methodology and classifica -
tions of the balance of payments and the international in -
vestment position, Monthly Report, June 2014, pp 57-68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
55

ticular to foreign subsidiaries – contrasted with 
a cutback in trade credits (€½ billion). During 
the period under review, Germany’s relations 
with Sweden, Switzerland, Luxembourg and 
the United Kingdom were particularly note -
worthy. While German direct investment mainly 
took the form of equity capital increases in 
Sweden (€7 billion) –  particularly in vehicle 
manufacturing – and Luxembourg (€3 billion), 
it was increased by way of direct investment 
loans in Switzerland (€3 billion) and the United 
Kingdom (€2 billion).Foreign investors stepped up their activity 
slightly in Germany in the second quarter 
(€7½ billion), with capital mainly being accu -
mulated by means of intra- group loans (€7 bil -
lion), predominantly from the Netherlands 
(€5 billion), which is a popular location for Ger -
man financing institutions. The foreign subsid -
iaries of German enterprises domiciled there 
provided their parent companies in Germany 
primarily with funds they had previously raised 
through the issuance of securities in the inter -
national capital market.Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
56

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, aggregate output in Germany in 
the second quarter of 2014 was down 0.2% on 
the level of the previous quarter after seasonal 
and calendar adjustment. This was attributable 
in part to a significantly stronger rise in output 
in a number of weather- dependent economic 
sectors in the first quarter than is usual for that 
time of year, owing to the exceptionally mild 
temperatures. In statistical terms, this dented 
the quarter- on- quarter growth rate in the 
 reporting period.1 But it was compounded by 
the fact that cyclical developments fell short of 
expectations. For one thing, the ongoing slow 
pace of recovery in the euro area and the con -
tinued muted growth in non- euro- area markets 
had a dampening effect on the German econ -
omy. For another, the escalating geopolitical 
tensions proved to be an increasing burden. 
While these did not yet have a noticeable direct 
impact on the real economy via the trade 
 channel in the second quarter, business senti -
ment was, however, undoubtedly depressed by 
heightened tensions in the crisis-  stricken re -
gions. This is likely to have prompted firms to 
plan and operate more cautiously.
Looking at the course of economic develop -
ment over the first six months of the year so as 
to eliminate weather- related effects, the 
growth of gross domestic product (GDP) aver -
aged ¼% per quarter. This means that actual 
output expanded more slowly than in the 
second half of 2013, and potential output was 
not quite fully realised either. Overall produc -tion capacity utilisation therefore declined 
somewhat from its level at the turn of 2013-14, 
but remained within the range of normal cap -
acity utilisation. This is because the domestic 
expansionary forces have essentially remained 
intact.
A major revision of the national accounts data 
was carried out prior to the publication of this 
Monthly Report.  The most striking adjustment 
concerns the upward revision of nominal GDP 
over the entire recalculation period (see the 
box on pages 58 and 59). This has an impact 
on key macroeconomic ratios which are also of 
economic policy relevance, for instance in the 
context of surveillance procedures. The balance 
of payment statistics were likewise comprehen -
sively revised around mid- year.2 As a result of 
the conceptual changes in the two statistical 
accounting systems, the German economy’s Unexpected 
drop in eco-nomic output in 2014 Q2
Growth poten-
tial not quite realised in H1Marked fall in 
current account 
surplus relative 
to GDP follow-
ing major 
 revision of 
 statistics
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014949698100102104106
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1
1 This effect is estimated at around 0.3 percentage point. 
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of weather condi -
tions on gross domestic product in the latter part of 2013 
and early part of 2014, Monthly Report, May 2014, 
pp 54 -55.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Changes in the methodology 
and classifications of the balance of payments and the 
international investment position, Monthly Report, June 
2014, pp 57-68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
57

Impact on GDP of the 2014 major revision
of national accounts
In its fl  ash estimate of gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP) for the second quarter of 2014, 
the Federal Statistical Offi   ce released the fi  rst national accounts fi  gures computed on  the basis of the European System of 
 National and Regional Accounts 2010 (ESA 2010). The new accounting rules are based on the currently valid internationally agreed 
standards for macroeconomic accounting 
set out in the System of National Accounts 
2008 (SNA 2008). ESA 1995, which was 
derived from SNA 1993, has thereby been 
superseded. The Federal Statistical Offi   ce 
plans to completely recalculate the national 
accounts right back to 1991.1 Over and 
above these methodological changes, the 
usual mid- year revisions were made to the 
national accounts data of the past three 
and a half years. These revisions factored in information from lagged base statistics, in 
particular from the annual surveys for 2012.
With regard to GDP , the most signifi  cant methodological change in quantitative 
terms is the recording of research and de-
velopment (R&D) and expenditure on mili-
tary weapon systems as capital formation.2 
Hitherto, spending on research and devel-opment was treated as intermediate con-sumption, which is deducted from output when determining gross value added. The reclassifi  cation of fi  rms’ R&D spending as 
gross fi  xed capital formation results in a dir-ect increase in GDP . By contrast, the reclas-
sifi  cation of government R&D spending does not result per se in any increase in 
GDP , as in the old national accounts it was 
assigned to (government) consumption ex-
penditure via intermediate consumption. 
However, the value added in the public sec-tor is largely calculated via the cost side, so 
that the depreciation on R&D investment 
that has to be additionally recognised does 
push up GDP indirectly. The same effect 
 occurs in spending on military weapon sys-tems, which until now was included under (government) consumption and, under ESA 2010, is likewise recorded as capital forma-tion.
The major revision of the annual accounts 
mainly results in an upward shift in the level 
of (nominal) GDP . On an average of the period 1991 to 2013, it increased by just 
1 The Federal Statistical Offi   ce will publish detailed 
 results of the 2014 major revision of national accounts 
on 1 September 2014.2 See A Braakmann, Revidierte Konzepte für Volkswirt-
schaftliche Gesamtrechnungen, Wirtschaft und Statis-
tik, August 2013, pp 521-527; and Federal Statistical Offi   ce, Major revision of national  accounts in 2014: 
First results and background, background paper on the press release of 14 August 2014.Real GDP growth rates
Source: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201365432101234
––––––++++%
According to
ESA 1995
According toESA 2010Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
58

current account surplus has, since 2006, ex -
ceeded the threshold value of 6% of GDP only 
in around half of these years on balance and 
not virtually every year, as was previously re -
ported.3 In the first half of 2014, the current 
account surplus stood at a seasonally adjusted 
6.9%.
German enterprises’ foreign business rose only 
moderately again in the second quarter of 
2014. Exports of goods rose ¾% in price- and 
seasonally adjusted terms on the previous quar -
ter, when growth had stood at ½%. In the 
 reporting quarter, exports to euro- area partner 
countries fared better than average, while 
 exports to countries outside the euro area barely showed any increase on balance. Ex -
ports to the United States and China picked up 
momentum, whereas foreign sales to Japan 
suffered a further significant set back. Sales of 
goods to central and eastern European EU 
countries and to the United Kingdom weak -
Goods exports 
showing  renewed  moderate riseover 3% compared with the previous ESA 
1995 calculation and is thus in line with  expectations. By contrast, the German economy’s growth momentum is virtually 
unchanged following the recalculation. The annual average rate of change of real GDP 
remains unchanged at 1.3% in the period 
1991-2013. There is likewise basically noth-ing new to be discerned in the cyclical pat-
tern, although cyclical movements are somewhat more pronounced than in the 
previous calculation. In particular, the severe 
slump in economic activity in 2009 (-5.6%) 
is even greater than before the revision 
(-5.1%). This also applies to the upturn in 
2010 and 2011, which is just over 0.3 per-
centage point stronger in cumulative terms. 
Aggregate growth weakened signifi  cantly in the course of 2012 according to the  recalculation, while the downturn in the 
fourth quarter of 2012 and fi  rst quarter of 
2013 was somewhat steeper. The fi  nding that the German economy returned to a 
growth path in the further course of 2013 
remains robust. However, GDP growth for the past two years is weaker than previ-
ously reported. When interpreting the revi-
sions for the past two years, it should be noted that the usual data revisions at the 
current end have probably played a signifi  -
cantly greater role than the methodological changes.
Current account surplus
1 Current account balance according to Balance of Payments 
and  International  Investment  Position  Manual,  Sixth  Edition 
(BPM6), GDP according to European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010. 2 Current account balance according to BPM5, GDP ac-
cording to ESA 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 201302468As a percentage of GDP
New calculation basis 1
Old calculation basis 2
3 The threshold value is of relevance within the context of 
the European Union’s Macroeconomic Imbalance Proced -
ure (MIP). See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
German economy’s current account surplus, Annual Report 
2013, pp  39-60, and Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany’s 
 external position against the background of increasing 
 economic policy surveillance, Monthly Report, October 
2011, pp 41-58.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
59

ened slightly in the first two months of the 
second quarter, after the demand for German 
products in these countries had expanded con -
siderably since the second half of 2013. Ger -
many’s trade with Russia has been trending 
downwards since the beginning of 2013. By 
May 2014, the overall value of goods had fallen 
by almost one- fifth. Clearly, the trading envir -
onment vis- à- vis Russia had  already begun to 
worsen some time before the Ukraine crisis es -
calated.
Motor vehicles once again proved to be the 
mainstay of Germany’s export business in the 
second quarter. Furthermore, there was a slight price- adjusted increase in exports of other cap -
ital goods, such as computers, electronic and 
optical products as well as electrical equip -
ment, following a sharp rise in the first quarter. 
By contrast, exports of machinery and inter -
mediate goods were up only marginally on the 
prior- quarter level. Exports of consumer goods 
increased slightly.
The upswing in goods imports that had been 
apparent since the beginning of 2013 abated in 
the second quarter of 2014. At ½%, real im -
ports of goods were down slightly on the quar -
ter after adjustment for seasonal variations. 
The weaker demand for foreign products 
 affected suppliers from the euro area to a 
somewhat greater extent than those from non- 
euro- area countries. Capital goods purchases 
fell particularly strongly. This was primarily at -
tributable to a marked decline in imports of 
other transport equipment, which is to be seen 
in connection with the slacker demand for 
products of the European aviation industry. This 
contrasted with a perceptible rise in imports of 
motor vehicles, trailers and semi- trailers. More -
over, imports of ICT products and electrical 
equipment went up again. Purchases of ma -
chinery from other countries declined markedly 
in line with the subdued domestic investment 
dynamics after increasing significantly in the 
preceding quarter. The fact that imports of 
intermediate goods decreased appreciably, 
after imports of inputs and intermediate goods 
had shown strong growth in the first quarter, 
could be due to growing cautiousness in the 
corporate sector. Consumer goods imports also 
declined, whereas energy imports remained 
largely unchanged in price- adjusted terms.
Seasonally adjusted corporate investment in 
new machinery and equipment in the second 
quarter probably did not quite match the level 
recorded in the first three months of the year. 
This means that the recovery in investment that 
had started to take hold one year ago faltered. 
Up to the middle of the year, high capacity util -
isation levels in many industries pointed to an 
at least satisfactory sales outlook and to con -Motor vehicle 
exports still mainstay of  export businessModerate fall in imports
Investment in 
machinery and equipment  faltering90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Apr-
May 8090100110120
Apr-
May
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
60

tainable geopolitical risks. In the meantime, 
however, there is reason to fear that the invest -
ment climate might suffer collateral damage as 
a result of the growing tensions in a number of 
crisis- stricken regions.
Seasonally adjusted construction investment in 
the second quarter fell well below the figure of 
the first quarter. This sharp drop is due primarily 
to a technical countermovement to the highly 
elevated production levels in the first quarter 
owing to the mild winter weather. Aggregating 
the figures for the first two quarters so as to 
largely neutralise the weather effects yields a 
slight increase vis- à- vis the second half of 2013.
Private consumption is likely to have registered 
a further increase in the reporting period. This 
is suggested by the surveys conducted by the 
consumer research institution, Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK), which indicate that 
consumer confidence has improved further. 
Households’ very buoyant mood was partly 
fuelled by the positive labour market situation 
plus significant wage increases. Their propen -
sity to purchase consequently remained at an 
exceptionally high level. Retailers assessed their 
business situation in the reporting period 
equally as favourably as in the first quarter. This 
sector was, however, not quite able to match 
the turnover level achieved in the first quarter 
following a steep jump. Households took ad -
vantage of the relatively low heating oil prices, 
which have been favourable for quite some 
time now, to stock up their reserves. By con -
trast, fewer new passenger cars were regis -
tered between April and June for personal use.
Sectoral trends
In the second quarter of 2014, industrial output 
contracted by a seasonally adjusted 1% com -
pared with the previous quarter. Half of this 
marked decline can be attributed to bridge day 
and holiday effects.4 The remaining decline in 
output does not, however, match the picture 
painted by the current indicators. Both new orders and production expectations were 
pointing upwards into the second quarter, and 
no reductions in capacity utilisation were re -
ported.
The production of capital goods outperformed 
that of inputs and intermediate goods in the 
reporting period. This can be seen in the sea -
sonally adjusted quarter- on- quarter data (-¾% 
and -1½%, respectively) published in the pro -
duction statistics. Moreover, if it is assumed 
that bridge day and holiday effects play a rela -
tively significant role in the capital goods-  pro-
ducing sectors owing to the way in which the 
production processes are organised, the cyc -
lical trend remained relatively stable. The auto -
motive industry managed to maintain the out -
put level, which had surged in the first quarter, 
in seasonally adjusted terms. This was also the 
case for the manufacture of computer, elec -
tronic and optical products. Manufacturers of 
machinery and equipment cut back their pro -
duction again despite an abundant inflow of 
new orders. Output in the chemicals industry 
also decreased for the second quarter in suc -
cession, shrinking by a steep 4¾%. The pro -
duction of consumer goods between April and 
June fell only marginally on the previous three- 
month period.
Manufacturing firms reported that their plant 
was operating at 84% of capacity in July. Cap -
acity utilisation has therefore held up at the 
level of its longer- term average since the begin -
ning of 2014, which can be interpreted as 
being at a normal level. Capacity utilisation in 
the intermediate goods industry contracted Construction 
 investment very volatile in H1 owing to  weather effect
Private con-
sumption still pointing  upwards
Unexpected 
drop in indus-trial outputProduction of intermediate goods worse  affected than that of capital goods
Industrial cap-
acity utilisation largely normal
4 First, the fact that the May Day public holiday fell on a 
Thursday this year meant that many employees made use 
of the change to take off the Friday, too. This is likely to 
have dampened output in the second quarter. Second, the 
very late occurrence of Easter this year meant that there 
were fewer public holidays in the first three months of the 
year than in any other first quarter since 1991. As a result, 
output was at a comparatively high level between January 
and March 2014. As the public holiday calendar in the 
second quarter corresponded to the seasonal norm, the 
seasonally adjusted quarter- on- quarter rate of change was 
depressed accordingly. Aggregating the two effects gives a 
decline of almost ½ percentage point in the quarter-  on- 
quarter change in industrial output.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
61

slightly in keeping with the lower output, but 
remained above the long-  term sectoral aver -
age. By contrast, the degree of capacity utilisa -
tion in the capital goods sector reached the 
normal sector- specific level.
The substantial 5¾% quarter- on- quarter de -
cline in seasonally adjusted construction output 
can be attributed largely to weather effects. 
The exceptionally mild weather during the win -
ter months resulted in a well below- average 
decline in output in the first quarter, which, 
statistically, drove up construction output in 
seasonally adjusted terms. As in the industrial 
sector, bridge day and holiday effects are also 
likely to have played a part in this. Output in 
the main construction subsector, which is gen -
erally susceptible to substantial weather- related 
fluctuations, fell by a seasonally adjusted 6% in 
the reporting period compared with the previ -
ous quarter. Within this subsector, the decline 
in building construction was somewhat more 
pronounced than in civil engineering. Output in the finishing trades fell by 5¾%, although the 
reported figures should be regarded as very 
provisional. Energy production went up slightly 
in the second quarter by ¼%.
The rising trend in the services sector appears 
to have continued in the reporting period. 
 According to surveys conducted by the Ifo 
 Institute, the business situation in major indus -
try and consumption- related sectors remained 
very positive or even improved slightly on the 
first quarter. Nevertheless, some service indus -
tries felt the effects of the fact that the produ -
cing sector was showing signs of flagging in 
the second quarter following the positive start 
to the year. The drop in the mileage of domes -
tic heavy goods vehicles passing through 
motorway tolls suggests that the transport 
 sector was one of those affected. Furthermore, 
wholesalers’ turnover weakened following a 
substantial rise in sales in the first quarter. 
Motor vehicle traders suffered losses in sales 
after posting a good start to the year. This, 
however, was due to a decline in trade with 
households, whereas sales to commercial cus -
tomers picked up again slightly. Consumption- 
related service providers benefited from the 
 favourable consumer climate. Retail sales in the 
second quarter were down only marginally on 
the high level of the previous quarter. The hotel 
and restaurant sector recorded a decline in 
turnover.
Employment and  
labour market
Job growth continued in the second quarter of 
2014. Given that the usual spring rebound in 
employment was weaker this year, mainly on 
account of the mild winter, the seasonally 
 adjusted number of persons in work in Ger -
many went up less sharply than in the first 
quarter (+126,000), expanding by 89,000, or 
0.2%. The rise in the number of people in em -
ployment was once again chiefly attributable 
to additional jobs subject to social security con -
tributions. In the first two months of the second Sharp contrac-
tion in season-ally adjusted construction output owing to weather effect, slight increase in energy  productionPositive cyclical trend in the  services sector
As anticipated, 
weaker growth in employment after mild winterOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
62

quarter alone – more recent data are not yet 
available  – the number of additional regular 
jobs exceeded the average level of the first 
quarter by 112,000 (+0.4%). At the same time, 
there was a further fall in the number of self-  
employed persons, although not quite to the 
same degree as in the previous quarter. One 
possible reason for this is that some of the im -
migrant workers from Romania and Bulgaria 
might have switched to employee status after 
full labour mobility within the EU was intro -
duced for this group of persons at the begin -
ning of this year.
Following increased recruitment in the indus -
trial sector at the beginning of the year, only a 
small number of additional regular jobs subject 
to social security contributions were filled in 
the sector in April and May on a seasonally ad -
justed basis. This pattern was even more pro -
nounced in the construction sector owing to its 
high sensitivity to weather conditions. The 
greatest increase in employment, at +1%, was 
recorded in business- related services (excluding 
temporary agency employment), a sector which 
has been strongly expanding for quite some 
time, as well as in hotels and restaurants and in 
the health and social work sector (+¾% in 
each case). Moreover, continued above-  
average growth in employment was recorded 
in the transport and storage sector as well as in 
education, with both sectors posting an in -
crease of ½%.
On an average of the second quarter, the sea -
sonally adjusted official number of unemployed 
persons fell by 19,000, after declining by 
47,000 in the first quarter owing, not least, to 
the mild winter temperatures. The unemploy -
ment total stood at 2.90 million in the period 
under review. The unemployment rate fell by 
0.1 percentage point to 6.7%. The fact that 
there was a temporary rise in seasonally ad -
justed unemployment in May and June is pre -
sumably due to a normalisation following the 
weather- related low level of unemployment in 
the preceding months. In any case, the season -
ally adjusted jobless total declined again slightly Job growth 
 focused on some services sectors
Modest fall in 
unemploymentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014July40.040.541.041.542.042.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
Million
Apr-
MayMillion
Million200300400Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sand Year-on-year change
1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
63

in July. Unlike official unemployment, total 
underemployment (including persons taking 
part in labour market policy measures, but 
 excluding short-  time work) did not increase 
during the second quarter. This was due mainly 
to the fact that fewer job creation schemes 
were made available and fewer people took 
advantage of early- retirement schemes.
Only a small number of additional unsubsidised 
vacancies subject to social security contribu -
tions were reported during the period under 
review. There was no further quarter- on- 
quarter rise in the number of vacant positions 
in the manufacturing sector, whereas the num -
ber of construction sector vacancies declined 
again on the quarter. This contrasted with a 
rise in the number of vacant positions in several 
services sectors, such as health and social work, 
trade, as well as professional, scientific and 
technical activities. Job growth was also re -
corded in other business- related services (which 
include temporary agency employment) follow -
ing a decline over the past two years.5
On balance, enterprises are likely to take a 
more cautious approach to recruitment in the 
coming months. This was indicated by the 
Ifo  Institute’s employment barometer, which 
 already includes the results of the July surveys. 
This is likely to have only a limited impact on 
the official unemployment level as there have 
long been only few reserves in this area that 
can be mobilised in the short term. The likeli -
hood that unemployment will continue moving 
sideways over the next few months is sup -
ported by the fact that the IAB’s labour market 
barometer, which is based on surveys of the 
managers of all the regional employment agen -
cies, has now fallen just below the neutral 
threshold.
Wages and prices
At +3.4%, the year- on- year increase in negoti -
ated rates of pay in the second quarter of 2014 
was virtually as high as in the first quarter (+3.3%). Whereas the increase in the first quar -
ter was mainly attributable to the considerable 
back payments in the retail sector, while growth 
in basic rates of pay was lower (+2.8%), pay 
growth in the reporting period was chiefly 
driven by the substantial increases in scheduled 
rates of pay under the first agreements in this 
year’s pay round. The +3.5% year- on- year in -
crease in collective wages, excluding one- off 
payments and fringe benefits, in the second 
quarter, is likely to have marked a peak. One 
reason for this is that the follow- up pay incre -
ment that forms part of many current wage 
settlements is lower than the initial rise. An -
other reason is that the most recently agreed 
increases were smaller than those negotiated 
in the agreements concluded at the beginning 
of the year. For salaried employees in the pri -
vate and public banking sector as well as in the 
steel industry, for example, the latest wage 
agreements foresee a pay increase of 2¼% 
based on a notional duration of 12 months. In 
the wage agreements concluded prior to that 
(eg for the chemical industry and for central 
and local government) the wage increase had 
amounted to 3%.
At the beginning of July 2014, the Bundestag 
and the Bundesrat adopted the Act Reinforcing 
Collective Bargaining Autonomy (Tarifautono -
miestärkungsgesetz)  which inter alia  provides 
for the introduction of a general statutory min -
imum wage of normally €8.50 per hour from 
January 2015. In addition to the transition 
periods and exceptions already contained in 
the Federal Government’s draft legislation, it 
was decided that in the newspaper industry the 
minimum wage is to be introduced gradually Slight rise in 
 vacant positions
More cautious 
recruitment  approach  expected from firms in coming months
Growth in nego-
tiated pay rates peaked in Q2Minimum wage law adopted
5 The statistics on vacancies reported to the Federal Labour 
Agency were extended in July (retroactively from January 
2013) to include vacancies from an automated cooperation 
procedure of participating employers. These data show a 
leap in the level in January 2013. Secondly, the comparison 
between the new and old time series shows that increasing 
use has been made of the newly integrated procedure for 
the automatic transmission of vacancies, especially in the 
area of temporary agency employment. It is not possible to 
tell, however, whether this resulted in shifts within the 
 reporting types or whether there were a greater number of 
reports to the Federal Labour Agency.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
64

between 2015 and 2017. It was further clarified 
that the minimum wage of €8.50 per hour will 
also apply to seasonal workers from 2015 
 onwards; however, the number of days for 
which they are exempt from making social 
 security contributions will be increased from 
50 to 70 (limited to four years), and board and 
lodgings may be counted towards the min -
imum wage. Moreover, contrary to the original 
timeframe set forth in the Federal Govern -
ment’s draft  legislation, the independent Min -
imum Wage Commission will now review the 
minimum wage rate as early as mid-2016. On 
the basis of the Commission’s recommenda -
tion, the minimum wage level could be ad -
justed for the first time in January 2017 and 
after that every two years.
Transitional periods up until the end of 2017 
apply to sector-  specific minimum wage levels, 
although a minimum wage of at least €8.50 
will also have to be paid in these sectors from 
January 2017. Thus, the industrial trade union 
IG BAU and the representatives of the employ -
ers’ associations for workers in agriculture and 
forestry as well as in horticulture recently came 
to an agreement on a collective minimum 
wage, which aims, not least, to stagger the 
higher payroll costs resulting from the introduc -
tion of a minimum wage over a longer period 
of time. The agreement foresees a minimum 
wage of €7.40 per hour in western Germany 
and €7.20 in eastern Germany from January 
2015 along with a phased increase to €9.10 per 
hour Germany- wide from November 2017. By 
contrast, the social partners in the hotel and 
restaurant sector have been unable to reach an 
agreement so far. Discussions regarding a simi -
lar ruling for taxi firms are still ongoing.
In the second quarter, prices at the upstream 
stages of the German economy eased further 
in seasonally adjusted terms. This was due 
mainly to a decline in energy prices, especially 
sharp reductions in prices for gas and electri -
city, while petroleum products became dearer 
in line with quotations in the international mar -
kets. Other industrial goods prices, too, moder -ated somewhat at both the import and the do -
mestic producer level. The fall in import prices 
came to a halt over the course of the quarter, 
probably owing in part to the euro’s depreci -
ation against major partner currencies. Despite 
the further price reductions, the year- on- year 
decline in prices narrowed slightly to -0.8% in 
the case of domestic sales and perceptibly in 
the case of imports to -1.9%. Foreign sales 
prices declined at a more moderate rate over 
12 months, which led to an improvement in 
the terms of trade.
Despite the continued high level of utilisation 
of equipment in the main construction sector, 
the increase in construction prices eased during 
the second quarter. The year- on- year rate of 
price inflation went down from 2.0% to 1.7%. 
The weaker price dynamics are probably due 
primarily to the favourable development in ma -
terial costs, which rose at a much slower rate in 
the second quarter. According to vdp, house 
prices rose again moderately in the second 
quarter by an annual rate of 2.5%.
Consumer price inflation slowed somewhat in 
the second quarter. Seasonally adjusted prices 
went up by a mere 0.2% on the quarter, after 
rising by as much as 0.4% in the first quarter. 
The slightly weaker upward trend was due, in 
particular, to a clear drop in prices for fruit and More sectors 
making use of the transitional minimum wage provisions
Further fall 
in prices at  upstream stages of the economySlower rise in construction prices
Muted rate of 
consumer price increasesNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1H1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
65

vegetables, which had risen considerably in 
2013 as a result of weather- related factors. 
Price inflation in the case of industrial goods 
largely came to a standstill, which is probably 
connected partly with the euro’s earlier appre -
ciation. The slowdown in price inflation for ser -
vices related primarily to package holidays. 
With the seasonal changeover to summer des -
tinations in the shopping basket for package 
holidays, price reductions for vacations in a 
number of southern European countries also 
became effective in the German consumer 
price index. By contrast, the prices of other ser -
vices and housing rents continued to rise. In 
the case of energy prices, fuel became signifi -
cantly more expensive on the back of rising 
crude oil prices. Hardly any of the sharp correc -
tions in the prices of gas and electricity at the 
producer and import level have, to date, been 
passed on to consumers. On balance, the an -
nual rate of inflation as measured by the na -
tional consumer price index (CPI) fell slightly to 
1.0%. The Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) held steady at 1.0%.
Consumer price inflation in Germany rose 
slightly in July. After seasonal adjustment, con -
sumer prices were up 0.2% on the month, 
compared with 0.1% in June. Only in the case 
of energy was there a slight reduction in prices. 
The year- on- year CPI and HICP inflation meas -
ures both went down to 0.8% owing to a 
baseline effect.
Orders received and outlook
A flurry of unfavourable news reports relating 
to the international crisis regions have dulled 
Germany’s economic outlook since the middle 
of the year. Current indicators cast doubt on 
the assumption on which the spring forecasts 
were based, namely that the underlying cyclical 
trend would strengthen further in the second 
half of 2014. The Ifo Institute’s business climate 
index has dropped three times in a row of late, 
with the expectations component, in particular, 
falling. The perceptible decline in industrial Slight increase in 
inflation in July
Duller economic 
outlook accord-ing to new indi-catorsExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20149095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
July95100105
JulyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
66

firms’ influx of orders over the course of the 
second quarter along with poorer export ex -
pectations suggest that the external shocks will 
harm industrial activity in particular. Added to 
this is the fact that the sharper sanctions im -
posed on Russia and the Russian government’s 
countermeasures will impinge on foreign trade, 
which is likely to dampen sentiment not just in 
the heavily export-  dependent industries. Do -
mestically oriented sectors of the economy, 
such as construction and trade, and in July for 
the first time also services providers, are feeling 
the effects, too. It should be noted, however, 
that sentiment has deteriorated from a high 
level, which, together with the fundamental 
underlying upward trend in domestic demand, 
suggests that the course of economic momen -
tum will not change direction.
Industrial orders declined by a seasonally ad -
justed ½% on balance in the second quarter of 
2014 compared with the first quarter. It should 
be borne in mind that, despite the extremely 
weak June result, the strong inflow of large-  
scale orders in April and May raised the quar -
ter- on- quarter rate per se  by just over 1 per -
centage point. The fact that this volatile com -
ponent had a dampening impact in the first 
quarter underscores the interruption of the up -
ward tendency in industrial goods orders since 
the beginning of the second quarter. Measured 
in terms of the order capacity index, the vol -
ume of new orders received up to June will 
nonetheless suffice to keep the rate of indus -
trial capacity utilisation at a normal level.
Intermediate goods producers saw a ¾% 
quarter- on- quarter decline in orders in the re -
porting period, whereby the decrease in new 
domestic orders was less pronounced. Despite 
a slight rise in the number of orders from the 
euro area in the second quarter – just like in 
the first quarter – this was largely offset by a 
very marked drop in orders from non- euro- area 
countries. Orders of capital goods, including 
the large- scale orders, fell by a seasonally ad -
justed ½% on the first quarter, when the figure 
had likewise fallen short of the prior- quarter Decline in indus-
trial orders, …
… especially in 
the capital goods sectorDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Apr-
May
Apr-
May90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year
change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
67

level. Excluding the manufacture of other trans -
port equipment, in which large- scale orders 
feature prominently, the inflow of orders in the 
capital goods sector declined significantly 
(-2¼%). The downturn in domestic orders was 
not as pronounced as in the case of orders 
from abroad. The sharp increase in trade with 
non- euro- area countries in the first three 
months of the year was cancelled out in the 
second quarter. The corresponding volume of 
orders received from the euro area has been 
flagging since the beginning of the year, after 
picking up perceptibly from a very depressed 
level in 2013. The fact that overall capital goods 
orders from the euro area still managed to post 
a significant increase during the reporting 
period was due to orders for other transport 
equipment. After such orders, which largely 
 relate to the joint European production of air -
craft and spacecraft, dipped in the first three 
months of the year, new orders received in the 
second quarter reached a new record high, 
notwithstanding the poor outturn in June.
The outlook for the construction sector remains 
favourable. Housing construction was not the 
sole driving force behind this development, 
with new impetus also being generated by 
other divisions. A greater number of new pub -
lic sector construction orders (on a seasonally 
adjusted basis) have been placed over the 
course of this year so far than in the second half of 2013. While the volume of new indus -
trial and commercial construction orders has 
sagged of late, this is due primarily to the fact 
that no major projects were received in April 
and May on a comparable scale with those 
placed in the preceding quarters. Housing con -
struction remained the major driver behind the 
buoyant construction momentum. The esti -
mated jump of 4¾% in the first half of 2014 in 
the volume of permits granted for the con -
struction of new one- family and multiple- family 
houses –  measured in terms of the gauged 
construction costs – matched the order surge 
recorded in the second half of 2013.
Along with housing construction, private con -
sumption is the mainstay of economic activity 
at present, despite growing turbulence from 
the external setting. According to the surveys 
carried out by the consumer research institu -
tion GfK, consumer confidence brightened fur -
ther going into the second half of the year. 
Households’ income expectations are very opti -
mistic, not least owing to the favourable out -
look for employment and earnings. The low 
rate of inflation is also increasing real spending 
power. So far, the gloomier economic outlook 
has not yet depressed household sentiment. 
But even if the gloomier outlook were to spill 
over to household sentiment, the recent track 
record suggests that the propensity to pur -
chase may well continue to prove to be robust.Favourable out -
look for the con-
struction sectorPrivate con-sumption a mainstay of eco-nomic activityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
68

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances are currently in com -
paratively good shape, and the very high debt 
ratio is starting to come down. Supported by 
generally favourable underlying conditions, 
small surpluses were recorded in both 2012 
and 2013. As things stand today, a roughly 
 balanced general government budget is also 
 expected for 2014 and 2015. Following a slight 
cyclical burden on average in 2013, favourable 
cyclical factors are forecast until 2015. Further -
more, interest expenditure could decrease due 
to a falling average interest rate and a possible 
debt reduction in absolute terms. By contrast, 
various fiscal policy measures are set to result in 
budgetary burdens overall. For instance, add -
itional funds are earmarked for transport infra -
structure, childcare, education and research. 
However, the most significant burdens in finan -
cial terms are the selective benefit increases in 
the statutory pension insurance scheme, which 
include pensions paid for periods spent raising 
children (mothers’ pensions) and upon early 
 retirement (full pension without actuarial de -
ductions at 63) in particular. Nevertheless, the 
legal provisions limiting the amount of reserves 
that the statutory pension insurance scheme is 
allowed to hold could lead to the pension con -
tribution rate being cut, which would acceler -
ate the already foreseeable depletion of the 
scheme’s financial reserves.
While debt, which totalled 78.4% of nominal 
gross domestic product (GDP), was still very 
high at the end of 2013, it was already consid -
erably lower compared with the year before. It 
fell further to 77.3% in the first quarter of 2014, 
with the debt ratio likely to continue to decline 
during the course of the year. With a close- to- 
balance general government budget, expected 
nominal GDP growth in the debt ratio’s de -
nominator will push it down relatively quickly. 
As things currently stand, this comes on top of 
the continued portfolio reduction at govern -ment- owned bad banks. The increases in debt 
brought about by further payments agreed as 
part of the euro- area financial assistance mech -
anisms, on the other hand, are less significant.1
The Federal Finance Ministry’s latest medium-  
term projection forecasts general government 
surpluses in the order of ½% of GDP from 2016 
onwards.2 The debt ratio is expected to be 
 reduced rapidly, albeit not enough to bring it 
below the 60% limit by the end of the current 
medium-  term forecast horizon (2018: 65%). 
The medium- term objective of a structural def -
icit ratio of no more than ½% of GDP is fore -
cast to be met with a substantial margin of 
around 1 percentage point. However, the cyc -
lical adjustment procedure used for EU budget -
ary surveillance appears to paint too rosy a pic -
ture of the structural budgetary position, and 
with it the safety margin for the medium- term 
objective.3
The comparatively stable structural fiscal bal -
ance can be attributed in part to the slight 
 easing of the fiscal stance being accompanied 
by further reductions in interest expenditure. It 
is sometimes recommended that Germany pur -
sue a more expansionary fiscal policy, particu -
larly by means of increasing government invest -
ment on an unfunded basis, and that it should 
further reduce the safety margins vis- à- vis 
the  deficit ceilings. This should, inter alia,  
strengthen growth potential. However, such a Fiscal balance 
broadly stable and …
… debt ratio 
decliningMedium- term surpluses 
 projected  
for general  government
Slight easing of 
fiscal stance planned, …
* The section entitled “General government budget” refers 
to data contained in the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht ratios pursuant to the European System of Accounts 
(ESA) 1995. For all aggregates, this will be replaced by the 
revised ESA 2010 from September 2014. The subsequent 
reporting on the budgets of the various levels of govern -
ment and the social security funds is based on the figures 
as defined in the government’s financial statistics (which 
are generally in line with the budget accounts).
1 General budgetary risks remain, not least as a result of 
uncertainty in the global and European arenas.
2 See Federal Ministry of Finance, Press Release No 32 of 
10 July 2014.
3 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
Report, May 2014, pp 66-81, particularly p 67.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
69

laudable objective could well be achieved by 
initiating structural shifts or changing policy pri -
orities, without further easing the fiscal stance.
With regard to its pattern of expenditure, the 
Federal Government has, to date, clearly fo -
cused additional spending on extending pen -
sion benefits, while devoting considerably 
fewer additional funds to government invest -
ment. This appears counterproductive in terms 
of strengthening growth potential. Given the 
extremely favourable conditions for public 
 finances in Germany and the ongoing budget -
ary risks, it would, in fact, be advisable to pur -
sue a more ambitious budgetary policy rather 
than easing the fiscal stance. This would allow 
the debt ratio to be brought below the 60% 
threshold more quickly, helping to lessen the 
impact, in particular, of the demographic chal -
lenges that lie ahead. Furthermore, it would 
appear advisable to make the most of the cur -
rently generally favourable auspices and push 
ahead more energetically with the budget con -
solidation still required in many cases at various 
levels of government. Factoring in very tight 
safety margins vis- à- vis the strict national def -
icit ceilings would be problematic, as it carries 
the risk that procyclical corrections may be -
come necessary if the situation takes a turn for 
the worse. This is also indicated by information 
supplied by the recently established Independ -ent Advisory Board of the Stability Council 
(Beirat   des Stabilitätsrates),  which regularly 
takes a stand on the outlook for public finances 
and compliance with European requirements.4 
Experience shows the importance of prudent 
budgetary policy in good times in order to have 
scope for manoeuvre if the environment deteri -
orates. This is especially true of Germany as the 
euro area’s stability anchor.
Budgetary development of 
central, state and local 
 government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue5 in the second quarter of 2014 was 
up by a mere 1½% on the year (see chart above 
and the table on page 71). Primarily responsible 
for this slowdown were court orders, which 
were issued by Hamburg Fiscal Court after a 
complaint was lodged by nuclear power plant 
operators. These ruled that the operators 
should be provisionally refunded for nuclear 
fuel tax payments made since 2011.6 Without 
these repayments, revenue would have risen by 
3%. Gross wage tax receipts saw an increase of 
4%, while the stagnation of child benefit 
(which is deducted from receipts) resulted in 
wage tax revenue rising even more steeply in 
terms of actual cash inflow. The slight reduc -
tion in refunds to employees also strengthened 
the continued dynamic growth in receipts from 
assessed income tax. By contrast, revenue from 
corporation tax and investment income tax fell. 
However, revenue from these taxes tends to be 
highly volatile and, therefore, as things cur -
rently stand, the overall growth expected for 
these types of tax in the official tax estimate … but not 
 advisableSubdued tax revenue growth in 2014 Q2 …
… primarily 
due to one- off  effectsTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014012345678
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 See Independent Advisory Board of the Stability Council, 
First statement on compliance with the upper limit for the 
structural general government fiscal deficit pursuant to 
 section 51 (2) of the Budget Principles Act (Haushaltsgrund -
sätzegesetz) , 21 May 2014.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
6 Court orders issued by Hamburg Fiscal Court on 11 April 
2014 (case number 4 V 154/ 13).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
70

still appears to be within reach. Revenue from 
consumption- related taxes increased consider -
ably (+4%), but these are also subject to large 
intra- year fluctuations.7
According to the official tax estimate from May, 
tax receipts for 2014 as a whole are expected 
to rise by 3½% (including local government 
taxes). This growth primarily reflects underlying 
economic conditions. Fiscal drag will also lead 
to additional receipts in net terms, while legis -
lative changes (most notably the increase in the 
basic income tax allowance and the gradual 
changeover to downstream taxation of pen -
sions) will slightly reduce revenue overall. Tax 
refunds due under the ruling by the European 
Court of Justice on the taxation of dividends 
paid to EU/EEA companies are slowing antici -
pated revenue growth.8 Overall, revenue devel -
opments have so far been somewhat less 
 favourable than originally forecast. This is 
mainly attributable to the aforementioned 
 nuclear fuel tax refunds, which have not yet been included in the official tax estimate and 
will dampen revenue growth for the year as a 
whole by around ½ percentage point.9 At the 
same time, there is a high degree of uncer -
tainty, not least due to the sometimes sharp 
fluctuations in receipts from profit- related 
taxes.Robust growth 
for year as a wholeTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2014 1,2Q2
2013 2014 2013 2014
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 277.5 284.5 + 7.0 +  2.5 + 3.4 142.5 144.4 + 2.0 +  1.4
of which
Wage tax 75.3 79.8 + 4.5 +  6.0 + 6.0 38.8 40.8 + 1.9 +  5.0
Profi  t-related taxes 3 49.0 48.4 – 0.6 –  1.3 + 0.2 25.6 24.5 – 1.2 –  4.5
Assessed income tax 21.8 23.8 + 1.9 +  8.9 + 7.5 11.1 12.0 + 0.9 +  7.9
Corporation tax 11.4 10.7 – 0.8 –  6.7 – 7.5 5.4 5.1 – 0.4 –  6.6
Investment income 
tax4 15.7 13.9 – 1.8 – 11.4 – 5.9 9.1 7.4 – 1.7 – 18.4
Turnover taxes 5 96.3 99.7 + 3.4 +  3.5 + 3.3 47.1 49.2 + 2.0 +  4.3
Energy tax 14.1 14.5 + 0.4 +  2.8 + 0.2 9.5 9.9 + 0.4 +  4.2
Tobacco tax 5.6 6.2 + 0.5 +  9.6 + 3.5 3.5 3.7 + 0.2 +  5.8
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2014. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and 
import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 Fluctuations in turnover tax revenue can stem, in particu -
lar, from the sometimes large refunds or supplementary 
payments that are due when advance payments made dur -
ing the course of the year deviate from the final amount of 
tax payable. Various one- off factors relating to payment 
shifts in the course of the year were likewise recorded for 
other excise taxes in the second quarter, eg the transfer of 
responsibility for collecting motor vehicle tax from the state 
government to the central government customs authority.
8 Ruling of 20 October 2011 on case C-284/ 09.
9 Overall, revenue from nuclear fuel tax charged from 2011 
to the end of 2014 would have likely totalled around €5 
billion. If a supreme court decision is issued in 2014 and it 
subsequently becomes necessary to also refund payments 
made by nuclear power plant operators who were not in -
volved in the complaint lodged at Hamburg Fiscal Court, 
the risk to revenue growth will be 1 percentage point.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
71

Central government budget
Central government recorded a surplus of €1 
billion in the second quarter of 2014, as it had 
done one year previously. Revenue and ex -
penditure were each down by 1% (-€¾ billion) 
compared with spring 2013. As a result, tax 
revenue fell by 1% (-€½ billion). This was pri -
marily due to the repayment of nuclear fuel tax 
revenue totalling €2 billion. However, deduc -
tions from tax revenue for transfers to the EU 
budget were also up on the year again (+€½ 
billion). Revenue from asset sales, which was 
most notably affected by declining privatisation 
proceeds, fell by €½ billion. Interest payments, 
in particular, had an alleviating effect on ex -
penditure once again, as they were €2 billion 
down on the year – not least due to lower 
transfers of provisions to the special fund for 
the redemption of inflation- indexed Federal 
 securities. By contrast, a rise was recorded for 
payments to the social security funds (+€1 bil -lion). Had the further (and greater) cut in pay -
ments to the health insurance fund − which 
entered into force retroactively in the sum -
mer − been factored in, these transfers would 
have risen only slightly.
Parliamentary deliberations on the central gov -
ernment budget for 2014 were concluded in 
June. Compared with the draft submitted by 
the new Federal Government in March, net 
new borrowing remained unchanged at €6½ 
billion. Expenses resulting from the aforemen -
tioned court ruling regarding nuclear fuel tax 
appear to have been recorded as a global rev -
enue shortfall. However, the estimated burdens 
in this regard only went up by €1½ billion com -
pared with the government’s draft budget, 
meaning that the burden increase is smaller 
than the level of refunds. Consequently, an 
 unexplained revenue-  enhancing item was in -
cluded, with it being reported that expected 
higher tax revenue vis- à- vis the official tax esti -
mate10 played a crucial role here. In particular, 
budgeted figures for interest expenditure were 
cut by just over €1 billion, while those for calls 
on guarantees, unemployment welfare bene -
fit (II) and defence expenditure were each cut 
by just under €½ billion in order to offset the 
new  expenses – including those associated 
with the planned increase in civil servant salar -
ies. The previously envisaged global additional 
expenditure of €½ billion on plans relating to 
childcare, education and research that had not 
yet been specified in March was also factored 
out, with specific budget increases for the min -
istries affected falling short of this value. Des -
pite the fact that interest rates, which are cur -
rently very low, could still provide some relief 
vis- à- vis the budget plans, the 2014 budget 
 appears much tighter overall than the budgets 
adopted in previous years. In the event of sig -
nificant further shortfalls, eg pertaining to the 
nuclear fuel tax, or failure to achieve estimated 
cost savings (as may well be the case for un -Surplus 
 unchanged in 2014 Q2  despite  nuclear 
fuel tax  repayments2014 budget tighter than in 
previous yearsCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q420151050510
––––++
–25–20–15–10–5
20132012Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122014
20142013€ billion
10 The tax estimate, which generally serves as the basis for 
budget plans, had initially still led to a reduction of just 
over €½ billion in budgeted tax receipts during final delib -
erations.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
72

employment welfare benefit (II), for instance), it 
is possible that the planned deficit target will 
not be met.
At the beginning of July, the Federal Cabinet 
approved the draft central government budget 
for 2015. In line with the benchmark figures 
adopted in March, the central government 
budget envisages no net borrowing for the first 
time since 1970. Compared with the bench -
mark figures, the budgeted amount for educa -
tion was raised by just over €1 billion and, in 
return, the corresponding provisional funds 
were deducted from the departmental budget 
“General financial administration”. In particular, 
the higher amounts budgeted for personnel 
 expenditure (in line with the increase in civil 
servants’ remuneration, which has now been 
definitively set forth) are offset by a downward 
revision of the interest expenditure estimate.
Compared with the budget plans for 2014, the 
deficit will shrink by €6½ billion. A major factor contributing to this is the absence of the 
€4½  billion in capital injected into the Euro -
pean Stability Mechanism (ESM) in 2014. In 
light of underlying favourable economic devel -
opments, a significant rise in tax revenue is 
 expected for 2015. Taking into account the 
global revenue shortfall in the 2014 budget 
 relating to the nuclear fuel tax refunds, the in -
crease comes to just over €11½ billion. How -
ever, this coincides with numerous expenses. 
For example, the implementation of parts of 
the coalition agreement alone will lead to add -
itional spending of €3 billion, primarily on edu -
cation and research, supporting local author -
ities with integration assistance and on invest -
ment in transport infrastructure. Additionally, 
several relief measures that were still reflected 
in the 2014 budget (eg reclaiming flood assis -
tance fund resources and cutting transfers to 
the health insurance fund) were either no 
longer budgeted for or were budgeted for on a 
reduced scale. Furthermore, the total grant to 
the statutory pension insurance scheme is In line with 
benchmark  figures, 2015 draft budget  envisages no net  borrowingSignificant  increase in tax 
revenue almost entirely  cancelled out by additional  expenditureCentral government’s medium-term fi  scal planning from 2014 to 2018 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2012Actual2013Target2014Draft2015Fiscal plan
2016 2017 2018
Expenditure
1 306.8 307.8 296.5 299.5 310.6 319.9 329.3
of which
Investment 2 27.6 24.8 25.5 26.1 27.2 27.9 27.2
Revenue 1, 3 284.3 285.7 290.0 299.5 310.6 319.9 329.3
of which
Tax revenue 1 256.1 259.8 268.2 278.5 292.9 300.7 311.8
Net borrowing 22.5 22.1 6.5 – – – –
plus cyclical component 4 – 6.4 – 3.9 – 4.9 – 1.7 – 1.4 – 0.6 –
plus balance of fi  nancial transactions 5 – 7.4 – 4.6 – 2.9 1.4 0.5 0.5 – 0.5 
Fiscal balance of relevant off- budget entities
Energy and Climate Fund 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – . . .
Reconstruction Assistance Fund 
(2013 fl  ood) – 7.4 – – . . .
Structural net borrowing 8.5 6.2 – 1.2 – 0.2 . . .
as a percentage of GDP 6 0.3 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 
Memo itemStructural net borrowing
7
Upper limit according to Federal Ministry of Finance 39.4 33.2 26.6 18.1 9.9 10.3 10.6
1 After deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 motor vehicle tax reform and consolidation assistance from 2011 onwards, which are all remitted to state government. 2 Excluding participating inter-ests in the ESM. 3 Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. 4 Figures for 2012 and 2013 are taken from the 2013 budgetary accounts. For 2014 to 2018, as stated in central government’s 2014 spring forecast. 5 As defi  ned for the respective fi  scal year. 6 Nominal GDP in 
the year preceding the drafting of the budget (data for fi  scal plan years as stated in 2014 spring forecast). 7 The defi  cit reduction path from 2011 to 2015 is based on the June 2010 estimate of the starting structural defi  cit value for 2010 (2.2% of GDP) and a reduction of 0.31% of GDP per year.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
73

€2 billion higher (in line with the adjustment 
rules), while appropriations for personnel ex -
penditure have been increased by €1 billion. 
Finally, the figures budgeted for certain social 
benefits, eg the basic allowance for the elderly 
and the childcare supplement, were also raised 
significantly. On balance, the additional bur -
dens amount to just over €10 billion, thus 
largely offsetting the increase in tax revenue.
The improvement in the budget balance is 
largely attributable to the absence of the ESM 
capital injection, which is classified as a finan -
cial transaction. At the same time, the cyclical 
burden included in the calculations is set to fall 
by €3 billion. Overall, compared with the 2014 
budget plans, this will result in a €1 billion de -
terioration in the structural balance pursuant to 
the debt brake, with the structural surplus sink -
ing to €¼ billion. With respect to this surplus, 
however, it must be noted that the govern -
ment is still using a calculated cyclical burden 
of just over €1½ billion while,  inter alia, im-
portant indicators such as capacity utilisation 
and unemployment already appear to point 
 towards a fairly normal economic situation 
today; this is likely to have already been ex -
ceeded by a considerable margin in light of the 
underlying favourable macroeconomic devel -
opments in 2015.11 Thus, in structural terms, 
cyclical factors should actually provide relief for 
the central government budget. Furthermore, 
the zero- deficit budget once again envisaged 
for the flood assistance fund (an off-  budget 
 entity), which is to be included in the calcula -
tions under the debt brake, does not appear 
likely, as significant outflows are expected in 
2015. While a balanced core budget will thus 
be achieved overall, the budget plans indicate 
another deficit in structural terms when taking 
into account off- budget entities. Even so, sev -
eral budgeted figures appear to have been cal -
culated cautiously, which means that a better 
result cannot be ruled out.
The financial plan up to 2018, which was 
adopted alongside the 2015 draft budget, aims 
for a balanced budget with no net new bor -rowing throughout the entire period as set out 
in the coalition agreement. However, com -
pared with the financial plans adopted by the 
previous government in summer 2013, which 
saw growing surpluses culminate in a surplus 
of €9½ billion in 2017, what has now been 
 announced constitutes a significant loosening 
of fiscal policy. Structural consolidation is no 
longer planned. Should the economic situation 
deviate from central government’s estimation 
and be classified as increasingly favourable over 
the forecast period, the safety margin vis- à- vis 
the borrowing limit will gradually erode, while 
risks, in connection with the debt crisis, for 
 example, will continue to loom. This and the 
significant impending burden of demographic 
change also make it appear appropriate to 
focus more on scaling back central govern -
ment’s high level of debt.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks) recorded a surplus of 
€½ billion in the second quarter of 2014, com -
pared with a figure of €2 billion in the same 
period last year. At that time, the Financial 
 Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) had posted a 
surplus of €1½ billion following repayment of 
the final portion of its silent participation in 
Commerzbank. On the other hand, unlike in 
2013, there were no inflation- indexed central 
government debts to pay off. However, as the 
central government transfers to the special 
fund established to settle these redemption 
burdens were considerably smaller due to the 
lower rate of inflation, an improvement of only 
€½ billion was recorded on balance. Further -
more, outflows from the assistance fund set up 
in summer 2013 to tackle flood damage were 
still very modest. However, the fund is expected 
to record considerably higher outflows during 
the latter six months of 2014, not least because 
of central government plans to reclaim €1 bil -
lion from the fund for its budget. Nevertheless, 
surpluses in the precautionary reserves and the Structural 
 deterioration of budget balance envisagedPlanned loosen-ing of fiscal  policy up to 
2018 not 
 advisable
Renewed 
 moderate  surplus for off- 
budget entities in 2014 Q2
11 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for the Ger -
man economy – macroeconomic projections for 2014 and 
2015 and an outlook for 2016, Monthly Report, June 2014, 
p 11ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
74

Investment and Repayment Fund (as a result of 
the high transfer of Bundesbank profit) for the 
year as a whole should lead to central govern -
ment’s off- budget entities posting a surplus at 
the end of 2014. This is likely to be significantly 
lower than in 2013, when a positive balance of 
almost €11 billion was recorded on account of 
the advance payments to the flood assistance 
fund and the repayment of capital assistance to 
SoFFin.
State government budgets12
In the second quarter of 2014, as was the case 
at the start of the year, state government core 
budgets deteriorated in year- on- year terms. 
Consequently, the surplus fell substantially by 
€2 billion to €1 billion. Revenue increased only 
slightly (+½%, or +€½ billion). A 2% rise in tax 
revenue (€1½ billion) contrasted with an over -
all decline in other receipts. Despite a further 
significant drop in the interest burden (-€½ bil -
lion), overall expenditure was up by 3½% 
(+€2½ billion). Transfers to public administra -
tions (especially local government), meanwhile, 
grew sharply by €2 billion. Despite the consid -
erable hike in pension benefits, the increase in 
personnel expenditure was more subdued 
(+2½%, or +€½ billion).
Given the slightly weaker intermediate results, 
the Federal Ministry of Finance expects the 
overall deficit of the state government core 
budgets to remain largely unchanged at €2 bil -
lion for 2014.13 The further significant increase 
in tax revenue, coupled with lower interest 
 expenditure, is forecast to be offset by growing 
expenditure on staff and local authorities. Sur -
pluses are then expected to rise gradually to 
€3  billion in subsequent years up to 2018. 
While the somewhat accelerated growth in tax 
revenue is accompanied not least by a tempor -
arily lower increase in transfers to local author -
ities, this also coincides with a substantial 
 renewed rise in the interest burden. Given the 
assumed smooth development of the economy 
and in light of the further relief for state gov -ernments announced by central government 
(particularly in the education sector), the rela -
tively rosy picture that has been painted 
 appears by all means achievable, even if greater 
improvement would be desirable overall owing 
to the stringent debt brake requirements 
 enshrined in the German Basic Law.
The relatively favourable overall situation is ob -
scuring the significant structural tensions that 
are ongoing in a number of federal states. It 
still seems necessary to promptly enshrine the 
debt brake, as laid down in the Basic Law, in 
each federal state’s legislation in order to bet -
ter assess respective needs for consolidation. In 
its meeting at the end of May, the Stability 
Council concluded that the states in receipt of 
consolidation assistance (Berlin, Bremen, Saar -
land, Saxony-  Anhalt and Schleswig-  Holstein) 
complied with the upper limits of the structural 
deficit reduction path agreed for the period up 
to 2019 last year as well. However, the interim 
evaluation of the multi- year restructuring plans 
was less favourable, particularly for Bremen 
and Saarland. Above all, the Stability Council is 
calling for the planned consolidation to be 
fleshed out further. But there is still a need for 
action in reducing structural deficits in other 
states, too. These include Hesse, Rhineland-  
Palatinate and North Rhine-  Westphalia in par -
ticular. At the start of July, the Constitutional 
Court of North Rhine-  Westphalia dismissed the 
heavily muted increases in civil servant salaries 
for the largest pay grades for 2013 and 2014 as 
unconstitutional; as such, further substantial 
budgetary burdens are on the horizon. Add -
itional pay increases may be required in Bremen 
as well, as similar rules were adopted there. 
The decoupling of civil servants’ pay from wage 
developments in the overall economy over a 
period of several years, which has been the 
case in Rhineland- Palatinate for some years 2014 Q2: 
 deterioration again due to substantial rises in expenditure
Further improve-
ment not likely for year as a whole, but sur-pluses possible in the medium termOngoing very strained finan-cial situation not exclusive to 
 federal states 
in receipt of 
 consolidation  assistance
12 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2014 was analysed in greater detail in the 
short articles in the Bundesbank’s July Monthly Report. 
These are the most recent data available.
13 See Federal Ministry of Finance, Press Release No 32 of 
10 July 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
75

now and is being planned in Hesse, is also 
fraught with legal risk. The east German states, 
by contrast, will be heavily affected by the 
phase- out of special supplementary central 
government grants by 2020. Against this back -
ground, many federal states are still faced with 
the need to subject the tasks that they perform 
to scrutiny, and to increase efficiency.
Social security funds14
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a surplus of just over €2 billion in the 
second quarter of 2014, which was €1½ billion 
higher than one year previously. The key factors 
behind this considerable improvement were 
 favourable developments in contribution re -
ceipts (up by almost 4%) on the one hand and, 
on the other, the continued moderate growth in expenditure (just under 1%) due to the only 
slight rise in pension numbers and the relatively 
low pension increase that came into effect on 
1 July 2013. At €1½ billion, the surplus for the 
first six months of 2014 as a whole constituted 
a year- on- year increase of €3 billion.
A considerable deterioration in the financial 
situation is expected in the second half of 
2014. First, the pension increase that took 
 effect on 1 July 2014 was significantly higher 
overall (+1.67% in western Germany and 
+2.53% in eastern Germany). This is com -
pounded by the fact that the benefit increases 
introduced in mid-2014, which apply to child-  
rearing periods, particularly long- term insurees 
and disabled persons in particular, are generat -
ing appreciable additional expenditure. Never -
theless, based on central government’s cost 
estimates for additional benefits, a surplus 
could still be recorded for the year as a whole. 
Overall, the reserves could continue to rise 
above the statutory upper limit of 1.5 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure. If the contribu -
tion rate were to remain unchanged, it would 
then be expected that the reserves would 
 remain above this upper limit until the end of 
2015, thus rendering it necessary to lower the 
contribution rate pursuant to the statutory 
 adjustment provision.
The benefit increases introduced by the latest 
pension reform were diluted at the end of the 
legislative process so that, in cases of un -
employment directly prior to retirement, the 
last two years spent in receipt of unemploy -
ment benefits will, as a general rule, not count 
towards the 45 years of contributions required 
to receive a full pension without actuarial 
Financial 
 improvement continues in 2014 Q2Despite  
reform- related 
expenses, 
 surplus for year 
as a whole and …
… contribution 
rate cut for 2015 feasible
Periods of 
 unemployment counted as con-tribution years for full pension at 63 recently subjected to  restrictionsFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014606264666870
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
14 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the first quarter 
of 2014 was discussed in the short articles of the Bundes -
bank’s July Monthly Report. These are the most recent data 
available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
76

 deductions.15 It will thus become more difficult 
to use receipt of unemployment benefit as a 
way of leaving employment that is subject to 
social security contributions early, as was com -
monly done in the past. Additionally, agree -
ments relating to the termination of a person’s 
employment contract upon reaching statutory 
retirement age can be deferred indefinitely by 
mutual agreement of the employer and em -
ployee. Furthermore, there are also plans for a 
parliamentary commission to develop pro -
posals on how to make retirement options 
more flexible in general. Pension legislation 
states that certain groups of insured persons 
may retire before reaching statutory retirement 
age – with actuarial deductions of 3.6%.16 In 
accordance with pension legislation, it is also 
generally possible to remain in the workforce 
indefinitely and earn a 6% increment for each 
year of additional work. However, increasing 
the flexibility of pension insurance policies will, 
in principle, be accompanied by higher costs 
overall if actuarial deductions and increments 
are calculated based on the average life expect -
ancy of insurees.17
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
surplus of almost €½ billion in the second 
quarter of 2014, following a slight deficit in the 
same period last year. While revenue grew by 
almost 4%, expenditure fell by 2½%. Contribu -
tion inflows saw continued growth of 4%, 
which reflects ongoing favourable employment 
and wage developments. On the expenditure 
side, spending on unemployment insurance Improvement 
in 2014 Q2Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014789101112
1.21.52.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue 1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits  and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 2
15 By comparison, periods of unemployment are counted 
in full during this time if they are due to the employer filing 
for bankruptcy or to business closure. Furthermore, in the 
two years prior to retirement, it is possible to take up em -
ployment that is subject to social security contributions 
but, as a general rule, does not entail more than 15 work -
ing hours per week, thereby allowing the employee to 
 receive unemployment insurance benefit  (I) at the same 
time (taking into account any net income over €165 per 
month). Such periods of employment also count towards 
years of contributions to the statutory pension insurance 
scheme (section 138(3) of Social Security Code III).
16 Long- term insurees with 35 years of insurance (includ -
ing periods of unemployment) can draw a statutory pen -
sion with actuarial deductions from the age of 63. The 
statutory retirement age is 65 for severely disabled persons, 
while early retirement with actuarial deductions can be 
taken from the age of 62.
17 If, for example, above all persons with a below- average 
life expectancy opt for early retirement, it is not sufficient 
to calculate their actuarial deductions based on the aver -
age life expectancy of all insured persons, because the add -
itional pension expenditure due to taking early retirement is 
set against lower accumulated pension cuts on balance. 
Furthermore, if above all persons with an above- average 
life expectancy postpone retirement, their increment is set 
at an excessively high level. The reduced period during 
which they are in receipt of a pension will then be more 
than offset by the total number of higher current pensions. 
These scenarios assume quite plausibly that people tend to 
assess their health risks appropriately as compared against 
the average of their cohort, and can thus make decisions 
which benefit them.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
77

benefit (I) fell by just over 1½%. Payments for 
short- time working benefits even halved on the 
year. By contrast, spending on active labour 
market policy measures rose by almost 6½%.
The Federal Employment Agency is expected to 
record a surplus if favourable conditions on the 
labour market continue; this is likely to be 
markedly higher than envisaged in the Agen -
cy’s budget plan (target: €¼ billion). However, 
payments for unemployment insurance bene -
fit (I) recently increased slightly. In its capacity as an automatic stabiliser, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency responds in an especially sensi -
tive manner to overall economic fluctuations, 
particularly on the expenditure side. In struc -
tural terms, the financial risks arising from the 
latest pension reform have recently been re -
duced by limiting the extent to which periods 
in receipt of unemployment insurance bene -
fit (I) directly before  retirement can be counted 
towards contribution years. As such, it is less 
likely that this wage substitute will be used as a 
bridge to early  retirement.Appreciable 
 surplus expected for year as a wholeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2014  
78

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve ratios  ..............................................................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998  ............................................  42•
 3 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors  ................  54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors  ......................................  55•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  56•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  56•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  57•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s 
 financial statistics)  ........................................................................................................  57•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  58•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  58•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  59•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  59•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  60•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  60•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  61•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  61•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  61•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  62•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  63•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  64•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  65•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  66•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  66•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  67•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  68•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  69•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  69•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  70•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  71•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  72•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  73•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  74•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  75•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  75•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  75•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  76•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  77•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  77•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  78•
 1 1 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  79•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  79•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  80•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2014
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2012          Oct 6.4 4.3 3.9 3.5 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.8 0.09 0.21 3.4
         Nov 6.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 0.6 − 1.2 − 1.8 0.08 0.19 3.3         Dec 6.4 4.5 3.5 3.5 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.07 0.19 3.0
2013          Jan 6.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 0.3 − 0.7 − 1.7 0.07 0.20 3.0
         Feb 7.0 4.2 3.1 3.0 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 0.07 0.22 3.1         Mar 7.0 4.1 2.5 2.9 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.2 0.07 0.21 3.0
         Apr 8.6 4.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.6 2.8 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6         June 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.4 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 3.0
         July 7.0 4.0 2.1 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.3 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0
         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 2.9
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8
         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.1 1.1 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.1 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.2 2.4 1.3 1.1 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.2 0.16 0.29 2.6
         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.0 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.5
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.7 0.9 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.0 1.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 1.2 0.25 0.32 2.2
         June 5.3 2.3 1.5 ... − 2.3 − 2.3 − 1.5 0.08 0.24 2.1
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.04 0.21 1.9
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Securities Other Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2012          Oct 
+ 14,374 + 10,199 − 25,102 − 38,621 + 67,207 − 51,032 − 2,657 1.2974 97.8 95.5
         Nov + 21,166 + 12,758 − 36,888 − 27,983 + 27,171 − 35,111 − 964 1.2828 97.2 94.9
         Dec + 27,259 + 9,287 − 43,470 + 6,340 + 12,066 − 62,497 + 620 1.3119 98.7 96.3
2013          Jan − 5,404 − 3,373 + 3,853 − 21,755 + 30,963 − 587 − 4,768 1.3288 100.4 98.0
         Feb + 9,684 + 10,815 − 11,133 + 12,126 − 12,306 − 13,388 + 2,437 1.3359 101.6 99.1
         Mar + 24,325 + 21,850 − 15,952 − 15,544 − 8,053 + 5,368 + 2,278 1.2964 100.2 97.9
         Apr + 15,682 + 15,966 − 22,109 − 7,492 − 12,040 − 2,536 − 41 1.3026 100.5 97.9
         May + 13,281 + 16,534 − 19,277 + 43,749 + 16,032 − 78,503 − 555 1.2982 100.5 98.1
         June + 31,110 + 17,359 − 30,802 − 14,289 + 38,096 − 54,018 − 591 1.3189 101.6 98.9
         July + 25,727 + 18,655 − 28,642 + 6,932 − 33,262 − 2,551 + 239 1.3080 101.5 98.9
         Aug + 10,197 + 6,737 − 6,788 − 311 + 25,517 − 30,025 − 1,969 1.3310 102.2 99.5
         Sep + 15,496 + 12,674 − 20,433 − 19,275 + 20,258 − 20,286 − 1,131 1.3348 102.0 99.1
         Oct + 26,444 + 17,447 − 19,823 + 17,937 − 1,006 − 37,608 + 855 1.3635 102.8 99.8
         Nov + 28,788 + 17,698 − 32,897 − 23,194 + 56,136 − 66,021 + 181 1.3493 102.6 99.5
         Dec + 32,480 + 12,947 − 48,851 − 11,048 + 7,261 − 43,720 − 1,344 1.3704 103.9 100.7
2014          Jan + 2,763 + 1,836 + 7,061 − 9,239 + 45,337 − 26,304 − 2,733 1.3610 103.4 100.3
         Feb + 9,280 + 15,923 − 11,990 − 521 + 37,496 − 49,479 + 513 1.3659 103.6 100.4         Mar + 19,540 + 19,157 − 26,849 − 14,616 − 18,389 + 6,493 − 336 1.3823 104.6 101.3
         Apr + 18,793 + 15,723 − 19,137 − 18,708 − 83,554 + 83,464 − 339 1.3813 104.5
p) 101.0
         May + 8,888 + 15,078 − 7,665 + 12,010 + 46,712 − 65,792 − 595 1.3732 103.8 p) 100.1
         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3592 103.0 p) 99.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.3539 102.6 p) 98.7
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.12 and 13, pp 79−80   2  Including financial derivatives. 3  Vis-à-vis the currencies
Manual in the 5th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables of The-EER-20 group. 4  Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2011 1.6 1.8 3.6 9.6 2.8 2.0 − 7.1 2.2 0.4 5.3
2012 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.4 3.9 − 1.0 0.0 − 7.0 0.2 − 2.4 5.2
2013 − 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.8 − 1.4 0.2 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 4.1
2013          Q1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.8 1.3 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 6.0 − 1.7 − 2.6 3.8
         Q2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5 1.1 − 0.8 0.7 − 4.0 − 1.6 − 2.3 4.4
         Q3 − 0.3 0.4 0.8 0.7 − 0.8 0.6 − 3.2 2.7 − 1.5 4.6
         Q4 0.5 0.8 1.0 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.0 3.6
2014          Q1 0.9 1.1 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 0.7 − 0.9 ... − 0.8 2.7
         Q2 0.7 ... 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2011 3.5 4.4 7.2 19.7 2.1 2.3 − 5.8 0.5 1.2 8.8
2012 − 2.5 − 3.3 5 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 6.5 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.8 0.2 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.4
2013          Q1 − 2.3 − 3.3 − 1.8 4.2 − 3.7 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 3.8 − 4.6 − 1.0
         Q2 − 1.1 1.3 − 0.3 3.8 − 6.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.1
         Q3 − 1.0 0.8 − 0.2 2.7 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 5.4 1.4 − 3.6 0.2
         Q4 1.6 4.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.0 0.4 − 4.8 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.6
2014          Q1 1.3 4.0 3.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 − 0.7 − 2.5 9.3 0.5 − 2.8
         Q2 e 0.8 ... 6 0.8 2.3 − 2.4 − 1.9 p − 4.0 p 21.5 0.0 − 0.2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 7
 
2011 80.7 80.5 86.1 73.3 80.5 83.4 67.9 − 72.6 67.6
2012 78.9 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1 70.8
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 70.1 72.0
2013          Q2 77.5 76.4 81.5 70.8 77.4 80.9 64.0 − 68.4 72.0
         Q3 78.3 76.4 82.5 71.5 80.3 80.8 64.9 − 71.3 71.8
         Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 77.5 79.6 65.9 − 72.2 72.2
2014          Q1 80.1 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.8 65.9 − 72.5 72.1
         Q2 79.5 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 81.3 67.7 − 71.7 72.0
         Q3 79.8 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.3 70.4 − 72.5 71.5
 
Standardised unemployment rate 8,9
 
2011 10.1 7.2 6.0 12.3 7.8 9.2 17.9 14.7 8.4 16.2
2012 11.3 7.6 5.5 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.0
2013 12.0 8.4 5.3 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.2 11.9
2014          Jan 11.8 8.4 5.1 8.2 8.4 10.2 27.2 12.1 12.6 11.4
         Feb 11.7 8.4 5.1 7.8 8.4 10.2 27.3 12.1 12.6 11.4
         Mar 11.7 8.4 5.3 7.6 8.4 10.2 27.3 12.0 12.4 11.4
         Apr 11.6 8.5 5.4 7.7 8.5 10.1 27.3 11.9 12.5 ...
         May 11.6 8.5 5.2 7.2 8.7 10.1 27.2 11.9 12.6 ...
         June 11.5 8.5 5.1 ... 8.8 10.2 ... 11.8 12.3 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2011 10 2.7 3.4 2.5 5.1 3.3 2.3 3.1 1.2 2.9 4.2
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.3
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2014          Feb 0.7 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.6 1.1 − 0.9 0.1 0.4 0.5
         Mar 0.5 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.3 0.7 − 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Apr 0.7 0.9 1.1 0.8 1.3 0.8 − 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.8
         May 0.5 0.8 0.6 0.6 1.0 0.8 − 2.1 0.4 0.4 0.8
         June 0.5 0.7 1.0 0.4 1.1 0.6 − 1.5 0.5 0.2 0.8
         July p 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 1.0 0.6 − 0.8 0.5 e 0.0 0.6
 
General government financial balance 11
 
2011 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.8 1.1 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 9.6 − 13.1 − 3.7 − 3.5
2012 − 3.7 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 3.0 − 1.3
2013 − 3.0 − 2.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 4.3 − 12.7 − 7.2 − 3.0 − 1.0
 
General government debt 11
 
2011 87.4 99.2 80.0 6.1 49.3 86.2 170.3 104.1 120.7 42.0
2012 90.7 101.1 81.0 9.8 53.6 90.6 157.2 117.4 127.0 40.8
2013 92.6 101.5 78.4 10.0 57.0 93.5 175.1 123.7 132.6 38.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. working-day variations. 5  Positively influenced by late reports. 6  Provisional;
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual percen- adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the
tage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted data. results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised
3  GDP of Germany: ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for construction industry. 7  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2014
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
1.9 1.5 0.9 2.8 − 1.2 3.0 0.7 0.1 0.4 2011
− 0.2 0.8 − 1.2 0.9 − 3.2 1.8 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 2.4 2012
2.1 2.6 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.4 1.0 − 1.1 ... − 5.4 2013
0.6 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 4.6 0.5 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 5.3 2013          Q1
2.1 4.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 2.4 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 6.1          Q2
2.8 2.5 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 5.2          Q3
3.1 2.2 0.8 1.3 3.2 1.5 2.1 − 0.1 − 5.1          Q4
3.8 3.5 − 0.5 0.3 0.6 2.4 1.9 0.8 − 4.0 2014          Q1
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production1,4
 
2.0 − − 0.7 6.8 − 1.0 5.4 2.1 − 1.7 − 8.4 2011
− 4.3 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 7.7 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.2 2012− 3.4 − 0.6 0.3 0.5 5.3 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 12.5 2013
− 8.1 − 2.2 0.5 − 1.3 2.8 − 2.2 − 4.1 − 15.4 2013          Q1
− 7.3 − 0.2 0.2 1.1 3.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 13.3          Q2
− 2.6 − − 0.4 0.3 − 1.5 4.5 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 11.0          Q3
5.0 − 0.3 0.3 3.8 10.9 1.3 1.0 − 10.4          Q4
7.6 − − 7.1 3.1 2.3 6.0 1.8 1.5 − 2.5 2014          Q1
10.0 −
p − 1.8 ... 2.1 p 5.2 p 3.6 p 2.4 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 7
 
83.2 78.7 80.3 85.4 74.4 61.6 80.4 73.3 61.4 201176.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201264.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 2013
62.3 76.2 75.9 83.5 73.9 72.3 78.4 74.6 43.7 2013          Q2
63.1 76.1 76.6 83.5 73.2 55.2 78.2 76.2 50.5          Q3
65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8          Q4
67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 46.8 79.5 74.1 54.1          Q2
65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 56.5 80.8 75.3 54.5          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 8,9
 
4.8 6.4 4.4 4.2 12.9 13.7 8.2 21.4 7.9 20115.1 6.3 5.3 4.3 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 20125.9 6.4 6.7 4.9 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 2013
6.2 6.2 7.1 5.0 15.0 13.9 10.1 25.5 15.7 2014          Jan 
6.2 6.0 7.3 4.9 14.9 13.9 10.2 25.2 15.6          Feb 
6.2 5.9 7.2 4.9 14.8 13.8 10.3 25.1 15.9          Mar 
6.2 5.7 7.2 4.8 14.6 13.9 10.3 24.9 15.4          Apr 
6.3 5.7 7.0 4.9 14.3 13.9 10.2 24.7 15.2          May
6.3 5.6 6.8 5.0 14.1 13.8 10.1 24.5 15.2          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.7 2.5 2.5 3.6 3.6 4.1 2.1 3.1 3.5 20112.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 2013
0.8 1.6 0.4 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.1 − 1.3 2014          Feb 
0.8 1.4 0.1 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.9          Mar 
0.9 0.5 0.6 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.5 0.3 − 0.4          Apr 
1.4 0.4 0.1 1.5 − 0.3 0.0 1.0 0.2 − 0.1          May
1.2 0.7 0.3 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.0 0.0 0.0          June
1.2 0.6
p 0.3 p 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.3 − 0.4 0.9          July
 
General government financial balance 11
 
0.2 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 4.3 − 4.8 − 6.4 − 9.6 − 6.3 20110.0 − 3.3 − 4.1 − 2.6 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.0 − 10.6 − 6.4 20120.1 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.8 − 14.7 − 7.1 − 5.4 2013
 
General government debt 11
 
18.7 68.8 65.7 73.1 108.2 43.6 47.1 70.5 71.5 201121.7 70.8 71.3 74.4 124.1 52.7 54.4 86.0 86.6 201223.1 73.0 73.5 74.5 129.0 55.4 71.7 93.9 111.7 2013
are collected in January, April, July and October. 8  As a percentage of the civilian ding Estonia from 2011 onwards. 11  As a percentage of GDP; Euro area aggregate:
labour force; seasonally adjusted. 9  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: European Central Bank (ESA 1995), member states: European Commission
calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 10  Inclu- (Maastricht Treaty definition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Nov 14.4 − 3.2 − 0.5 17.7 27.2 64.5 − 12.4 − 76.8 − 2.5 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 1.4 4.2
         Dec − 74.8 − 9.4 66.6 − 65.4 − 50.6 32.4 − 89.5 − 121.9 16.5 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 19.5 42.1
2013          Jan 55.4 24.8 − 2.5 30.6 26.5 32.4 60.3 28.0 − 6.6 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 5.8
         Feb 0.4 − 4.2 − 3.4 4.6 43.8 − 10.5 − 10.6 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 1.0 6.9
         Mar 53.4 18.0 24.1 35.4 29.8 11.5 − 42.1 − 53.7 − 6.0 16.7 − 1.5 − 32.4 11.2
         Apr 14.5 13.3 34.0 1.2 − 8.8 − 6.0 58.9 65.0 − 24.9 − 7.6 − 1.9 − 15.7 0.2
         May 7.2 − 19.3 0.3 26.5 52.1 77.6 − 0.0 − 77.6 − 5.5 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.5 11.5
         June − 7.3 − 35.8 − 24.8 28.5 36.5 36.0 − 56.6 − 92.5 13.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 22.4 37.9         July − 120.7 − 83.5 − 12.0 − 37.2 − 39.5 − 1.8 − 27.9 − 26.1 − 35.0 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 25.8 − 3.8
         Aug − 53.7 − 35.9 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.3 − 15.8 − 50.1 − 8.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 13.7 12.0         Sep 3.2 19.3 − 0.6 − 16.1 − 16.3 23.8 − 31.6 − 55.4 − 8.6 − 4.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 1.0
         Oct − 43.1 − 61.4 − 26.5 18.2 5.8 34.1 65.3 31.3 8.4 2.0 − 0.5 15.3 − 8.4         Nov − 18.9 7.6 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.2 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.4         Dec − 181.2 −106.4 − 38.7 − 74.8 − 73.0 79.5 − 84.8 − 164.4 − 10.9 − 8.8 − 0.5 − 9.8 8.2
2014          Jan 45.4 − 16.8 9.6 62.2 42.5 1.4 124.9 123.5 − 1.2 − 2.7 0.1 − 12.4 13.9
         Feb − 5.8 − 9.9 − 16.3 4.1 12.3 32.7 16.3 − 16.4 − 11.7 − 5.8 0.1 − 11.3 5.3
         Mar 6.5 4.9 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.7 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.3
         Apr − 1.9 − 2.0 − 17.2 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.7 64.9 74.6 − 24.9 − 31.0 − 0.3 − 1.0 7.5         May − 25.5 − 36.2 23.7 10.8 9.2 49.5 35.9 − 13.5 − 21.0 − 14.8 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.1         June 10.6 24.1 − 10.8 − 13.5 − 5.8 79.4 − 26.4 − 105.8 − 7.1 − 9.4 − 1.4 − 20.8 24.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2012          Nov − 5.2 − 4.1 0.8 − 1.2 5.0 23.7 − 7.2 − 30.9 − 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 5.4 − 0.4         Dec − 50.5 − 32.0 − 2.8 − 18.5 − 7.0 53.7 − 20.2 − 73.9 − 12.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 10.6 0.8
2013          Jan 34.9 34.0 10.6 0.9 − 1.0 − 13.7 − 2.1 11.6 − 7.9 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 4.9 0.8
         Feb − 8.7 − 2.0 − 3.5 − 6.7 − 1.8 4.4 − 3.2 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 4.4 − 1.5 1.4 1.8
         Mar − 2.4 0.7 7.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 16.7 − 3.4 − 20.1 − 7.2 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 10.8 5.3
         Apr 26.3 16.3 17.2 10.0 − 0.7 5.0 6.1 1.2 − 5.2 − 4.4 − 1.5 − 2.6 3.3
         May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4
         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.8 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.5 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.4 17.7 10.3 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.9 3.9         June − 6.2 1.5 − 0.9 − 7.7 0.6 34.4 12.3 − 22.1 5.4 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.1 12.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
40.5 33.6 − 7.3 29.6 35.4 − 0.2 35.5 − 13.9 8.1 6.4 − 1.2 − 19.6 2012          Nov 
− 60.6 − 54.2 − 55.9 95.2 82.3 12.7 69.6 − 12.3 25.2 − 44.6 − 26.9 − 6.1          Dec 
33.9 85.0 − − 24.6 − 35.3 − 53.9 − 19.8 − 34.1 − 5.4 24.1 14.1 7.2 − 6.7 2013          Jan 
5.7 − 12.5 − 1.2 9.9 5.1 − 1.2 6.2 − 3.4 8.2 26.9 6.3 − 13.4          Feb 
10.6 15.5 − 44.8 58.0 47.2 11.7 35.5 5.1 5.6 22.7 − 5.9 − 5.4          Mar 
− 50.6 26.1 − 57.9 54.1 73.8 7.2 66.7 − 26.5 6.7 − 8.8 − 0.4 1.4          Apr 
62.5 26.6 − 1.1 11.6 25.8 5.0 20.8 − 17.2 3.0 13.2 − 3.4 − 7.4          May
30.3 − 8.6 − − 6.7 25.7 45.1 6.2 38.9 − 19.2 − 0.2 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.1          June
− 26.1 − 55.1 − − 6.4 − 7.0 − 8.3 6.9 − 15.2 − 2.2 3.5 − 48.9 − 1.1 − 6.7          July
− 55.7 12.4 − 32.8 27.4 25.4 1.4 24.0 0.5 1.5 4.4 9.5 1.1          Aug 
11.2 58.1 − − 33.8 − 1.3 23.6 − 0.2 23.8 − 19.2 − 5.6 − 8.0 − 26.4 6.5          Sep 
− 28.0 − 5.3 − 15.7 22.0 38.5 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 5.5 1.3 − 12.4          Oct 
18.4 − 11.9 − 28.4 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 3.7 − 1.1 − 4.0          Nov 
− 49.3 − 25.1 − − 16.4 15.7 14.2 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.2 1.7 − 15.1 − 12.8 − 12.9          Dec 
20.4 39.6 − − 12.0 − 39.7 − 36.6 − 13.6 − 23.0 − 15.6 12.5 − 7.2 17.8 − 0.9 2014          Jan 
36.9 − 14.4 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.6 − 0.7 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.3 1.9 − 12.3 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 13.3 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 2.2 − 26.1 27.5 37.9 5.3 32.6 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 8.9 5.1 − 11.8          Apr 
33.1 − 50.4 − 62.4 57.5 54.7 7.1 47.6 0.9 1.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 8.6          May
26.1 55.1 − 15.9 21.9 43.1 6.4 36.7 − 19.4 − 1.8 28.0 − 12.5 2.6          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
1.3 12.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.5 25.9 − 9.0 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 1.1 2012          Nov 
− 2.6 71.8 3.0 2.0 − 53.4 − 7.0 − 24.2 6.3 − 26.5 0.2 − 2.2          Dec 
0.9 40.4 − 0.9 − 3.6 − 12.1 − 1.9 − 10.2 0.9 2.7 0.1 − 3.6 2013          Jan 
− 2.9 − 12.4 2.0 − 0.6 13.8 2.5 − 8.3 1.4 16.6 0.3 1.5          Feb 
− 1.7 35.1 2.4 2.5 − 11.8 − 10.3 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.7 0.1 − 1.1          Mar 
− 2.7 6.2 0.3 2.5 33.1 30.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 1.9 0.6 2.2          Apr 
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July
− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 
2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.6 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 32.0 2.8 1.9 − 8.3 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.5          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnotemonetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          May 27,826.4 16,721.8 13,449.0 11,176.3 1,520.6 752.1 3,272.8 1,161.3 2,111.5 5,205.9 5,898.7
         June 27,214.9 16,732.1 13,389.4 11,193.8 1,463.1 732.5 3,342.6 1,187.0 2,155.6 5,089.7 5,393.1
         July 27,538.2 16,703.9 13,375.1 11,222.2 1,416.1 736.8 3,328.8 1,186.4 2,142.4 5,183.4 5,651.0
         Aug 27,308.5 16,630.7 13,308.3 11,168.4 1,400.8 739.1 3,322.4 1,177.0 2,145.4 5,104.1 5,573.7
         Sep 27,168.2 16,703.9 13,333.5 11,196.6 1,386.6 750.3 3,370.4 1,180.1 2,190.3 5,045.6 5,418.6
         Oct 26,635.7 16,703.7 13,308.5 11,176.6 1,384.2 747.8 3,395.2 1,194.7 2,200.5 5,013.0 4,918.9
         Nov 26,703.9 16,727.0 13,301.5 11,169.7 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.4 4,996.6 4,980.3
         Dec 26,251.1 16,610.8 13,245.1 11,044.3 1,433.8 767.0 3,365.7 1,170.3 2,195.4 4,845.6 4,794.7
2013          Jan 26,397.8 16,646.9 13,249.6 11,053.1 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.3 1,174.2 2,223.1 4,799.6 4,951.2
         Feb 26,517.2 16,640.3 13,243.1 11,048.6 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.8
         Mar 26,567.8 16,698.5 13,262.6 11,044.6 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,025.1
         Apr 26,709.3 16,730.7 13,270.3 11,014.5 1,440.4 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.9
         May 26,371.6 16,728.1 13,249.1 10,992.1 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9
         June 25,926.2 16,691.6 13,200.4 10,975.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,675.6 16,573.2 13,113.1 10,895.5 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,649.7 16,162.3 12,803.0 10,650.3 1,360.6 792.1 3,359.3 1,097.4 2,262.0 4,488.2 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,045.4 16,244.7 12,806.2 10,643.1 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,681.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,988.5 16,224.0 12,773.7 10,637.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,672.3 4,092.1
         Mar 24,906.5 16,234.4 12,773.7 10,639.5 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,639.5 4,032.7
         Apr 25,047.0 16,238.4 12,772.4 10,652.2 1,294.7 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,698.1 4,110.5
         May 25,177.5 16,222.3 12,738.8 10,590.9 1,332.9 815.0 3,483.5 1,109.4 2,374.1 4,770.4 4,184.8
         June 25,132.1 16,214.5 12,734.9 10,610.4 1,318.4 806.0 3,479.6 1,101.4 2,378.2 4,754.1 4,163.5
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          May 6,499.3 3,745.2 3,001.6 2,594.7 178.2 228.7 743.5 395.8 347.7 1,221.4 1,532.7
         June 6,313.4 3,752.8 2,970.9 2,592.7 156.5 221.7 781.8 406.4 375.4 1,183.7 1,377.0
         July 6,448.1 3,784.2 3,006.9 2,629.3 154.0 223.6 777.3 402.5 374.8 1,205.4 1,458.5
         Aug 6,408.2 3,779.1 3,005.1 2,625.9 153.0 226.2 774.0 395.7 378.2 1,206.3 1,422.8
         Sep 6,361.1 3,785.2 3,004.1 2,620.0 153.3 230.8 781.1 395.6 385.5 1,209.7 1,366.2
         Oct 6,314.2 3,803.4 3,010.6 2,631.5 147.6 231.5 792.8 402.8 390.0 1,201.4 1,309.5
         Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,698.2 3,671.8 2,911.9 2,516.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
856.3 10,707.2 10,079.3 10,102.0 3,811.1 1,440.0 312.0 2,459.7 1,971.8 107.4 2012          May
867.7 10,754.8 10,113.1 10,103.6 3,869.9 1,411.5 304.0 2,433.6 1,978.1 106.6          June
871.5 10,686.7 10,067.8 10,064.9 3,886.4 1,405.2 302.9 2,381.5 1,983.4 105.5          July
870.2 10,643.2 10,063.2 10,071.1 3,896.1 1,391.5 301.5 2,384.1 1,993.5 104.4          Aug 866.7 10,716.2 10,109.3 10,110.9 3,940.3 1,390.3 300.8 2,381.1 1,995.3 103.1          Sep 
864.3 10,745.5 10,155.5 10,153.9 3,965.3 1,405.5 306.6 2,368.1 2,005.9 102.5          Oct 
864.1 10,807.6 10,183.5 10,170.2 3,994.2 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9          Nov 876.8 10,809.5 10,247.1 10,269.7 4,061.3 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,821.5 10,224.9 10,253.7 4,036.1 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,836.5 10,221.3 10,262.6 4,047.8 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,915.5 10,288.3 10,326.1 4,090.3 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.0 10,325.1 10,354.6 4,147.6 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.7 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,901.1 10,352.5 10,402.0 4,311.2 1,153.6 431.3 2,335.0 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.8 10,349.3 10,400.1 4,305.2 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.7 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.9 10,339.2 10,383.5 4,308.3 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.9 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,967.3 10,356.3 10,399.7 4,333.2 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.5 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.5 10,351.2 10,394.6 4,365.0 1,124.3 442.5 2,280.2 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,020.8 10,387.4 10,426.0 4,414.8 1,121.4 439.2 2,266.5 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,051.0 10,388.9 10,424.6 4,446.9 1,104.3 434.7 2,257.0 2,097.3 84.4          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
212.3 3,072.2 2,998.5 2,874.4 1,170.8 257.5 43.8 784.0 520.2 98.1 2012          May
215.2 3,094.3 3,019.5 2,863.0 1,182.2 252.1 43.4 768.1 520.1 97.1          June
216.9 3,104.4 3,034.0 2,878.4 1,205.8 249.6 43.0 763.1 520.7 96.2          July
215.9 3,111.3 3,040.9 2,888.5 1,220.9 247.7 42.4 761.2 521.5 94.8          Aug 
214.7 3,117.3 3,045.7 2,891.7 1,237.8 239.2 41.8 757.8 521.9 93.3          Sep 
214.4 3,150.2 3,077.3 2,926.3 1,291.6 229.9 41.2 749.0 522.0 92.5          Oct 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.1 1,446.5 195.5 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          May 316.1 289.1 131.3 106.4 5.9 30.0 9.0 6.6 440.6 434.6 533.6 2,983.6 2,271.8
         June 333.3 317.9 134.8 117.9 6.6 42.8 9.3 6.5 440.6 436.8 510.1 2,975.2 2,275.3
         July 300.7 321.1 136.0 119.9 6.2 43.0 9.5 6.4 444.8 438.9 508.8 2,996.9 2,275.9
         Aug 261.3 310.8 124.6 120.9 6.3 42.9 9.9 6.3 427.5 422.3 513.2 2,965.8 2,264.9
         Sep 294.5 310.8 127.4 117.8 6.2 43.0 10.3 6.2 432.3 428.3 492.5 2,938.5 2,251.6
         Oct 271.7 319.8 140.0 113.7 6.0 43.1 11.1 6.0 414.8 411.2 497.3 2,914.4 2,226.2
         Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 421.2 417.4 495.5 2,889.4 2,206.6
         Dec 251.0 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 376.4 372.4 467.9 2,853.2 2,183.1
2013          Jan 284.9 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 390.1 386.2 459.7 2,807.6 2,172.3
         Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 417.3 412.0 465.9 2,806.9 2,151.4
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 440.3 434.2 459.6 2,775.5 2,122.0
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 431.3 423.8 459.1 2,747.3 2,102.0
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 444.5 437.7 455.7 2,721.4 2,076.4
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 466.2 459.7 436.0 2,695.8 2,061.8
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 417.1 411.3 434.8 2,656.5 2,031.2
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9
         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.8 288.1 404.8 2,586.4 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.9 279.4 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 307.3 295.7 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7
         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 294.0 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.6
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.1 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.1 262.4 403.8 2,563.0 1,948.7
         June 315.8 310.6 133.6 101.5 9.4 45.4 15.6 5.2 299.1 284.8 391.2 2,534.5 1,920.5
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          May 36.4 161.4 47.2 82.8 3.9 25.1 2.0 0.4 108.3 105.0 4.2 666.3 373.8
         June 38.1 193.1 53.6 94.5 4.6 37.9 2.1 0.4 98.9 97.7 4.4 662.6 374.1
         July 32.9 193.1 50.9 97.0 4.3 38.1 2.3 0.5 106.6 103.2 4.4 668.8 371.1
         Aug 31.9 190.9 47.6 98.0 4.4 38.0 2.4 0.5 108.1 105.4 4.0 658.6 366.5
         Sep 32.6 193.0 53.8 93.9 4.4 38.1 2.4 0.5 98.0 97.3 3.8 654.1 367.7
         Oct 30.5 193.4 55.6 92.6 4.3 38.0 2.4 0.5 107.8 107.3 4.2 649.9 362.0
         Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.7 46.8 82.5 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.1 294.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2014
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
114.0 107.2 2,762.4 4,285.9 2,276.2 − 66.0 5,809.0 − 4,883.1 8,752.9 9,646.2 7,642.3 109.1 2012          May
128.5 102.1 2,744.7 4,158.6 2,312.3 − 65.2 5,260.6 − 4,958.2 8,810.9 9,683.5 7,646.4 111.0          June
136.0 96.2 2,764.7 4,201.9 2,353.7 − 63.2 5,537.2 − 4,982.7 8,834.6 9,712.7 7,654.8 113.5          July
122.7 96.4 2,746.8 4,115.7 2,361.9 − 47.0 5,458.0 − 4,979.0 8,827.3 9,688.6 7,646.4 113.0          Aug 
119.8 92.6 2,726.0 4,047.7 2,405.8 − 57.2 5,325.8 − 5,022.9 8,868.1 9,701.8 7,665.2 113.1          Sep 
113.6 93.5 2,707.3 4,020.9 2,394.4 − 73.0 4,857.2 − 5,056.5 8,930.4 9,756.9 7,621.4 112.1          Oct 
96.1 91.2 2,702.1 3,940.0 2,408.9 − 67.4 4,944.8 − 5,091.6 8,957.5 9,761.1 7,627.4 114.6          Nov 
87.4 93.8 2,672.1 3,793.4 2,396.4 − 52.1 4,729.6 − 5,168.7 9,045.7 9,809.1 7,578.1 120.0          Dec 
70.1 92.3 2,645.3 3,774.6 2,387.7 − 32.6 4,932.3 − 5,109.7 9,002.2 9,749.0 7,536.2 112.0 2013          Jan 
61.7 88.1 2,657.0 3,812.7 2,378.2 − 38.3 4,982.2 − 5,119.4 9,018.5 9,757.0 7,529.6 111.1          Feb 
59.2 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.4 2,414.3 − 58.9 4,955.7 − 5,170.4 9,081.9 9,805.9 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.5 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.7 2,390.1 − 43.1 5,122.2 − 5,239.7 9,128.2 9,855.0 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
62.9 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.3 2,377.8 − 54.6 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,856.7 7,467.3 111.9          May
66.1 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.9 2,335.9 − 63.2 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.1 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.1 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.3 2,365.2 − 59.0 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.6 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,308.9 2,340.4 − 62.3 3,954.3 − 5,445.1 9,250.0 9,852.8 7,311.0 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,473.8 2,385.1 − 42.3 4,108.4 − 5,419.2 9,224.8 9,855.2 7,355.3 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,427.9 2,405.4 − 29.9 4,039.4 − 5,428.4 9,235.6 9,867.3 7,337.9 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,391.8 2,422.1 − 29.2 3,981.0 − 5,461.6 9,274.3 9,879.7 7,344.9 106.1          Mar 
37.9 32.6 2,473.9 3,463.2 2,433.7 − 17.6 4,058.8 − 5,499.1 9,301.2 9,903.0 7,324.7 104.5          Apr 
43.8 35.1 2,484.1 3,478.0 2,426.9 − 30.2 4,115.2 − 5,556.6 9,362.7 9,969.3 7,313.9 105.4          May
44.7 35.9 2,453.9 3,372.4 2,458.2 − 45.8 4,135.8 − 5,599.3 9,384.3 9,984.0 7,304.1 105.8          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
13.4 9.9 643.0 919.2 495.5 − 796.5 2,029.9 179.3 1,218.0 2,128.2 2,264.1 2,046.1 − 2012          May
13.8 10.5 638.3 913.8 501.1 − 829.7 1,868.1 181.0 1,235.7 2,152.5 2,280.1 2,042.9 −          June
15.5 11.2 642.1 937.5 512.6 − 840.9 1,953.8 184.5 1,256.7 2,173.6 2,311.3 2,052.6 −          July
14.6 10.3 633.7 951.4 513.4 − 857.1 1,918.4 188.5 1,268.5 2,184.9 2,322.0 2,041.6 −          Aug 
16.2 10.4 627.5 900.0 521.5 − 806.5 1,872.9 191.9 1,291.6 2,195.0 2,323.4 2,038.7 −          Sep 
17.3 10.3 622.3 889.1 515.3 − 822.5 1,820.3 194.7 1,347.2 2,239.6 2,379.2 2,017.6 −          Oct 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 −          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.0 6.5 524.6 614.0 521.8 − 591.4 1,439.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.0 1,855.7 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2012          Jan 683.9 169.4 627.3 6.0 278.6 399.3 210.8 883.7 67.7 − 8.7 212.3 1 495.3
         Feb 698.3 120.6 683.6 2.3 282.4 489.0 218.5 870.1 100.1 1.6 108.1 1 467.1
         Mar 688.2 89.1 860.1 2.2 288.1 621.0 219.5 868.8 129.0 − 19.4 108.9 1 598.6
         Apr 667.6 56.4 1 093.4 3.0 280.6 771.3 215.8 871.2 146.3 − 13.3 109.6 1 752.1
         May 659.3 47.0 1 088.7 1.0 281.3 771.4 214.0 872.7 137.1 − 28.5 110.5 1 754.6
         June 656.8 58.1 1 071.0 1.6 281.1 770.8 212.8 880.8 117.8 − 24.2 110.8 1 762.3
         July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Jan 182.3 4.4 40.3 0.1 67.2 101.7 117.0 219.8 0.8 − 199.6 54.5 376.0
         Feb 183.2 1.8 46.7 0.0 69.2 141.9 130.5 216.9 0.8 − 217.6 28.3 387.1
         Mar 183.6 1.2 59.4 0.0 69.2 192.6 142.2 217.0 0.8 − 266.8 27.7 437.3
         Apr 182.0 1.2 73.8 0.1 68.8 257.2 142.7 218.1 0.7 − 321.6 28.8 504.1
         May 181.3 1.3 73.4 0.1 68.8 260.5 144.6 217.8 0.7 − 327.5 28.9 507.2
         June 180.4 3.8 74.6 0.5 68.7 276.9 150.3 219.8 0.8 − 349.1 29.3 526.0
         July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2014
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 61.8 − 68.6 + 238.3 + 1.6 + 18.3 +145.6 + 10.3 + 14.3 + 3.9 + 77.2 + 0.1 + 160.0 2012          Jan 
+ 14.4 − 48.8 + 56.3 − 3.7 + 3.8 + 89.7 + 7.7 − 13.6 + 32.4 + 10.3 − 104.2 − 28.2          Feb − 10.1 − 31.5 + 176.5 − 0.1 + 5.7 +132.0 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 28.9 − 21.0 + 0.8 + 131.5          Mar 
− 20.6 − 32.7 + 233.3 + 0.8 − 7.5 +150.3 − 3.7 + 2.4 + 17.3 + 6.1 + 0.7 + 153.5          Apr 
− 8.3 − 9.4 − 4.7 − 2.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.5 − 9.2 − 15.2 + 0.9 + 2.5          May− 2.5 + 11.1 − 17.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 8.1 − 19.3 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 7.7          June
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 13.6 + 1.4 + 22.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 41.3 − 9.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 44.8 2012          Jan 
+ 0.9 − 2.6 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 40.2 + 13.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 18.0 − 26.2 + 11.1          Feb + 0.4 − 0.6 + 12.7 + 0.0 +
 0.0 + 50.7 + 11.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 49.3 − 0.6 + 50.2          Mar 
−
1.6 + 0.0 + 14.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 64.7 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 54.7 + 1.1 + 66.8          Apr 
− 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 + 3.1          May− 0.9 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 5.7 + 2.0 + 0.1 − 21.6 + 0.4 + 18.8          June
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2          July
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2013 Nov                29 2,291.0 343.9 244.3 82.5 161.8 23.4 19.3 19.3 −
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 343.9 244.6 82.5 162.1 23.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              13 2,283.0 343.9 243.7 82.4 161.2 23.8 20.2 20.2 −
                              20 2,287.5 343.9 244.0 82.7 161.3 23.3 19.5 19.5 −
                              27 2,285.4 343.9 245.7 82.9 162.8 23.0 19.5 19.5 −
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 303.2 241.6 81.7 159.9 23.2 20.2 20.2 −
                              10 2,220.5 303.2 244.3 81.6 162.7 22.5 21.8 21.8 −
                              17 2,197.9 303.2 245.8 81.6 164.2 22.6 21.0 21.0 −
                              24 2,221.3 303.2 243.9 81.6 162.3 23.3 21.1 21.1 −
                              31 2,217.1 303.2 244.2 81.4 162.8 23.7 20.2 20.2 −
         Feb                  7 2,190.3 303.2 244.2 81.0 163.2 22.8 19.2 19.2 −
                              14 2,190.1 303.2 244.5 80.5 164.0 23.1 19.1 19.1 −
                              21 2,184.8 303.2 244.1 80.7 163.4 23.0 18.8 18.8 −
                              28 2,181.1 303.2 243.8 80.7 163.1 24.1 19.0 19.0 −
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 303.2 244.3 80.8 163.5 23.9 18.8 18.8 −
                              14 2,167.8 303.1 244.5 80.8 163.7 23.8 18.3 18.3 −
                              21 2,166.1 303.1 244.7 80.7 164.0 23.9 19.2 19.2 −
                              28 2,152.1 303.1 244.5 80.7 163.9 23.1 17.7 17.7 −
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.1 17.4 17.4 −
                              11 2,169.1 326.5 244.4 80.9 163.5 23.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              18 2,167.8 326.5 244.1 80.9 163.2 23.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              25 2,169.1 326.5 245.2 81.8 163.4 23.8 18.4 18.4 −
2014 May                  2 2,217.1 326.5 245.6 81.8 163.8 23.5 18.7 18.7 −
                                9 2,167.7 326.5 246.3 81.6 164.7 23.2 18.6 18.6 −
                              16 2,185.0 326.5 244.5 81.3 163.2 24.2 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 2,163.7 326.5 245.3 81.3 164.0 24.5 20.3 20.3 −
                              30 2,197.1 326.5 245.9 81.3 164.6 23.8 19.6 19.6 −
         June                  6 2,172.3 326.5 248.3 81.7 166.6 22.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,124.3 326.5 247.5 81.6 165.9 23.4 18.8 18.8 −
                              20 2,080.0 326.5 244.4 81.0 163.5 25.5 18.4 18.4 −
                              27 2,088.1 326.5 244.4 80.6 163.8 24.4 18.6 18.6 −
         July                  4 2,070.3 334.4 249.6 81.7 167.9 23.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              11 2,057.1 334.4 249.2 81.6 167.6 22.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              18 2,062.5 334.4 248.2 81.6 166.5 24.5 19.5 19.5 −
                              25 2,044.3 334.4 248.1 81.6 166.5 25.2 18.6 18.6 −
         Aug                  1 2,059.7 334.4 248.5 81.7 166.8 24.9 18.5 18.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Sep 1 090.9 150.4 53.0 23.3 29.7 1.5−−−
         Oct 1 110.0 150.2 53.1 23.3 29.8 1.8−−−
         Nov 1 098.6 150.2 52.8 23.0 29.8 2.3−−−
         Dec 1 026.0 137.5 51.1 22.3 28.8 3.3−−−
2013          Jan 964.1 137.5 51.6 22.5 29.1 1.6−−−
         Feb 934.9 137.5 51.3 22.2 29.0 3.2−−−
         Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
719.0 97.2 621.7 − − 0.1 0.0 77.2 592.2 241.4 350.8 28.3 243.3 2013 Nov                29
709.3 94.6 614.5 − − 0.2 0.0 75.9 591.4 241.4 350.0 28.3 243.4          Dec                  6
713.0 98.5 614.4 − − 0.1 0.0 73.2 591.9 241.3 350.7 28.3 244.9                               13723.3 118.9 604.1 − − 0.3 0.0 74.2 585.3 235.4 349.9 28.3 245.7                               20717.1 133.6 583.3 − − 0.2 − 75.0 586.1 235.4 350.6 28.3 246.8                               27
752.3 168.7 583.3 − − 0.3 0.0 73.5 591.2 235.9 355.3 28.3 245.1 2014 Jan                  3695.9 112.5 583.3 − − 0.0 0.1 72.1 590.8 235.9 354.9 28.3 241.6                               10672.6 94.7 577.7 − − 0.1 0.0 73.1 588.7 234.0 354.7 28.3 242.6                               17693.2 116.3 576.7 − − 0.2 0.0 74.7 589.3 233.5 355.7 28.3 244.5                               24691.9 115.6 576.0 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 587.4 231.3 356.1 28.3 245.3                               31
671.3 95.1 575.6 − − 0.5 0.0 70.5 586.2 230.6 355.6 28.2 244.8          Feb                  7
666.6 93.3 573.2 − − 0.1 0.0 74.7 587.2 229.9 357.3 28.2 243.4                               14665.2 92.9 572.2 − − 0.2 0.0 77.0 585.8 229.4 356.5 28.2 239.5                               21664.5 94.0 569.7 − − 0.8 0.0 74.1 586.4 229.3 357.1 28.2 237.7                               28
654.0 87.0 566.7 − − 0.3 0.0 72.9 588.0 229.3 358.7 28.2 239.0          Mar                  7
648.9 92.6 556.3 − − 0.0 0.0 76.0 587.9 228.8 359.0 28.2 237.0                               14644.1 96.9 546.2 − − 0.9 0.0 77.8 588.5 228.6 359.9 28.2 236.6                               21640.8 121.3 518.0 − − 1.4 − 66.0 590.4 228.4 362.0 28.2 238.2                               28
627.4 110.6 516.5 − − 0.2 − 66.5 588.4 224.9 363.5 28.2 239.1          Apr                  4
636.7 104.6 532.1 − − − − 64.9 588.1 224.7 363.4 28.2 239.0                               11
636.3 112.2 523.8 − − 0.3 − 63.6 588.3 224.7 363.7 28.2 239.5                               18
638.1 121.8 516.3 − − 0.0 0.0 60.1 586.7 224.7 362.0 28.2 242.0                               25
688.3 172.6 515.0 − − 0.8 0.0 61.3 581.6 219.6 362.0 27.3 244.2 2014 May                  2
642.4 129.1 513.2 − − − − 60.6 583.1 219.6 363.6 27.3 239.7                                 9
651.5 137.3 514.2 − − 0.0 0.0 68.4 583.6 219.6 364.1 27.3 239.4                               16640.0 131.9 508.0 − − 0.1 − 61.2 576.6 216.7 360.0 27.3 242.0                               23
679.7 174.0 505.7 − − 0.1 0.0 57.4 573.7 215.3 358.5 27.3 243.2                               30
653.3 149.4 503.9 − − 0.0 − 61.1 570.9 212.8 358.0 27.3 242.3          June                  6
607.6 136.8 470.8 − − 0.0 − 63.8 570.0 212.5 357.4 27.3 239.4                               13
565.0 97.9 467.1 − − 0.0 − 62.9 569.4 209.9 359.5 27.3 240.6                               20
568.4 115.0 453.3 − − 0.1 − 65.2 570.6 209.9 360.7 27.3 242.8                               27
545.9 97.1 448.8 − − − − 61.6 566.9 205.2 361.7 26.7 243.6          July                  4
529.2 94.2 434.8 − − 0.2 − 60.9 568.8 204.8 364.0 26.7 246.5                               11
531.7 99.9 431.1 − − 0.7 0.0 68.3 565.8 204.1 361.7 26.7 243.4                               18
507.8 97.9 409.6 − − 0.4 − 74.2 566.3 203.5 362.8 26.7 242.8                               25
533.5 133.3 400.2 − − 0.0 0.0 74.2 556.8 199.0 357.8 26.7 242.1          Aug                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
76.1 1.7 73.9 − − 0.5 − 8.9 68.8 68.8 − 4.4 727.8 2012          Sep 
76.6 1.6 73.9 − − 1.1 − 5.0 67.9 67.9 − 4.4 751.0          Oct 
72.4 1.9 69.7 − − 0.8 − 2.5 67.4 67.4 − 4.4 746.6          Nov 
73.1 2.9 69.7 − − 0.6 − 1.4 67.5 67.5 − 4.4 687.5          Dec 
49.5 0.3 49.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 66.2 66.2 − 4.4 648.3 2013          Jan 
25.8 0.8 24.9 − − 0.0 − 5.0 65.2 65.2 − 4.4 642.5          Feb 
21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May
12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 
10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2013 Nov                29 2,291.0 927.5 429.6 215.5 56.1 157.8 − 0.2 5.1 − 133.9 96.5 37.4
         Dec                  6 2,280.8 935.1 442.1 203.7 54.1 184.0 − 0.4 5.2 − 103.8 77.3 26.5
                              13 2,283.0 938.7 446.1 223.6 38.3 184.0 − 0.1 5.0 − 104.3 75.9 28.4
                              20 2,287.5 950.5 462.5 256.1 53.3 152.3 − 0.8 4.2 − 81.4 56.0 25.4
                              27 2,285.4 958.3 443.7 244.1 59.6 139.9 − 0.1 4.2 − 82.3 56.8 25.6
2014 Jan                  3 2,278.6 952.9 492.0 298.9 88.2 104.8 − 0.0 3.2 − 81.0 55.5 25.5
                              10 2,220.5 941.7 441.3 202.3 59.8 179.0 − 0.2 8.7 − 81.8 57.9 23.9
                              17 2,197.9 934.9 418.0 202.4 36.5 179.0 − 0.1 4.0 − 98.3 72.5 25.8
                              24 2,221.3 929.9 424.0 227.9 44.0 152.1 − 0.0 2.1 − 123.0 93.6 29.3
                              31 2,217.1 932.5 423.1 215.7 56.1 151.2 − 0.2 3.1 − 116.1 92.9 23.2
         Feb                  7 2,190.3 932.6 423.2 200.4 47.2 175.5 − 0.0 4.1 − 94.1 74.5 19.6
                              14 2,190.1 931.2 429.6 223.7 29.9 175.5 − 0.5 5.2 − 86.4 65.8 20.6
                              21 2,184.8 929.1 403.8 196.3 32.0 175.5 − 0.0 5.1 − 116.8 91.7 25.1
                              28 2,181.1 933.8 392.5 187.4 29.4 175.5 − 0.2 5.2 − 126.1 99.3 26.9
         Mar                  7 2,172.3 937.0 393.6 187.1 30.9 175.5 − 0.0 5.2 − 113.9 74.7 39.2
                              14 2,167.8 938.1 425.8 226.8 23.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.0 − 83.4 56.4 27.1
                              21 2,166.1 936.9 405.2 195.2 34.5 175.5 − 0.0 5.1 − 103.4 77.7 25.8
                              28 2,152.1 938.7 382.9 179.2 28.3 175.5 − − 9.5 − 117.1 89.9 27.2
         Apr                  4 2,161.0 942.5 382.4 181.1 25.7 175.5 − 0.0 10.3 − 95.1 69.9 25.2
                              11 2,169.1 944.2 392.0 198.2 21.2 172.5 − 0.2 4.1 − 99.9 68.9 31.0
                              18 2,167.8 951.9 386.4 202.9 30.1 153.4 − 0.0 4.1 − 98.7 63.7 35.0
                              25 2,169.1 946.4 356.9 166.1 24.0 166.8 − 0.0 4.0 − 129.2 91.1 38.1
2014 May                  2 2,217.1 950.3 383.3 240.2 39.1 103.9 − 0.1 2.8 − 147.7 105.3 42.4
                                9 2,167.7 948.9 349.5 150.0 33.8 165.5 − 0.1 2.9 − 139.6 101.4 38.2
                              16 2,185.0 947.7 363.2 201.4 17.5 144.3 − 0.0 2.5 − 142.4 102.6 39.8
                              23 2,163.7 947.2 329.8 168.5 23.8 137.5 − 0.0 2.8 − 157.7 121.1 36.5
                              30 2,197.1 953.8 352.2 209.4 39.9 102.9 − 0.0 1.7 − 163.0 119.8 43.3
         June                  6 2,172.3 957.8 343.7 187.1 37.3 119.2 − 0.1 1.8 − 141.6 100.3 41.3
                              13 2,124.3 956.5 325.8 199.8 17.2 108.7 − 0.2 2.7 − 124.1 89.2 34.9
                              20 2,080.0 955.9 237.8 211.2 26.5 − − 0.0 8.0 − 168.3 130.1 38.2
                              27 2,088.1 958.3 243.2 217.7 25.4 − − 0.0 8.6 − 171.6 131.9 39.7
         July                  4 2,070.3 963.9 241.5 214.2 27.3 − − 0.0 3.7 − 141.1 100.3 40.9
                              11 2,057.1 965.2 226.3 206.2 20.2 − − 0.0 4.2 − 144.1 107.2 36.8
                              18 2,062.5 965.6 233.9 211.1 22.7 − − 0.1 5.0 − 140.9 103.2 37.7
                              25 2,044.3 965.5 217.7 196.4 21.3 − − 0.0 4.8 − 139.9 107.1 32.8
         Aug                  1 2,059.7 971.4 263.9 219.7 44.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 105.8 70.9 34.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Sep 1 090.9 222.2 385.8 173.1 78.4 134.2 − − − − 17.3 7.0 10.2
         Oct 1 110.0 222.0 372.3 177.9 59.0 135.5 − − − − 50.7 5.1 45.7
         Nov 1 098.6 221.5 361.9 184.1 51.9 125.9 − − − − 47.2 11.4 35.9
         Dec 1 026.0 227.2 300.0 129.6 40.5 129.9 − − 0.0 − 39.9 11.9 28.1
2013          Jan 964.1 219.7 260.4 128.3 39.1 93.0 − − − − 25.9 2.3 23.6
         Feb 934.9 219.1 240.8 100.8 23.9 116.0 − − − − 22.4 0.5 21.8
         Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2014
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
114.3 2.3 5.1 5.1 − 53.6 224.6 − 304.5 90.4 2013 Nov                29
114.3 2.0 5.6 5.6 − 53.6 224.2 − 304.5 90.4          Dec                  6
110.2 2.0 5.0 5.0 − 53.6 223.2 − 304.5 90.4                               13
109.6 2.4 4.0 4.0 − 53.6 224.5 − 304.5 90.4                               20
115.2 4.4 3.2 3.2 − 53.6 225.5 − 304.5 90.4                               27
114.2 4.8 3.2 3.2 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 90.7 2014 Jan                  3
110.5 3.5 5.5 5.5 − 52.7 221.3 − 262.9 90.7                               10
106.1 2.7 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 221.6 − 262.9 90.6                               17
105.8 1.3 5.9 5.9 − 52.7 223.2 − 262.9 90.5                               24
106.1 2.9 5.1 5.1 − 52.7 222.0 − 262.9 90.6                               31
101.9 1.0 6.4 6.4 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 90.6          Feb                  7
99.4 1.4 7.2 7.2 − 52.7 223.5 − 262.9 90.6                               14
94.0 1.0 6.4 6.4 − 52.7 220.9 − 262.9 92.1                               21
93.5 2.8 4.9 4.9 − 52.7 214.2 − 262.9 92.4                               28
90.6 1.9 5.8 5.8 − 52.7 216.5 − 262.9 92.4          Mar                  7
88.1 1.2 6.5 6.5 − 52.7 211.5 − 262.9 92.5                               14
88.2 1.0 6.9 6.9 − 52.7 211.2 − 262.9 92.5                               21
81.6 1.4 5.7 5.7 − 52.7 206.8 − 262.9 92.7                               28
84.1 1.1 4.6 4.6 − 52.8 206.1 − 288.9 93.0          Apr                  4
82.9 1.1 4.9 4.9 − 52.8 205.4 − 288.9 93.0                               11
78.3 1.3 4.4 4.4 − 52.8 208.0 − 288.9 93.0                               18
80.5 1.4 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 211.4 − 288.9 93.0                               25
78.4 1.5 4.5 4.5 − 52.8 214.0 − 288.9 93.0 2014 May                  2
79.8 1.2 5.1 5.1 − 52.8 206.3 − 288.9 92.8                                 9
79.7 1.1 4.9 4.9 − 52.8 209.1 − 288.9 92.6                               16
77.1 1.2 5.8 5.8 − 52.8 207.8 − 288.9 92.6                               23
76.5 1.0 5.3 5.3 − 52.8 209.2 − 288.9 92.6                               30
78.3 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 206.3 − 288.9 93.4          June                  6
67.1 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 205.3 − 288.9 93.4                               13
61.6 1.1 6.2 6.2 − 52.8 204.0 − 288.9 95.3                               20
59.7 0.8 5.5 5.5 − 52.8 203.4 − 288.9 95.3                               27
56.9 1.0 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 206.6 − 301.4 95.3          July                  4
53.2 1.1 4.8 4.8 − 53.4 208.1 − 301.4 95.3                               11
52.2 1.3 5.0 5.0 − 53.4 208.5 − 301.4 95.3                               18
48.5 1.1 5.6 5.6 − 53.4 211.1 − 301.4 95.3                               25
44.2 1.3 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 212.8 − 301.4 95.3          Aug                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
86.3 0.0 − − − 14.4 21.6 191.9 146.5 5.0 2012          Sep 
82.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.4 22.3 194.7 146.5 5.0          Oct 
81.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.4 22.8 197.3 146.5 5.0          Nov 
83.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.1 23.6 200.3 132.6 5.0          Dec 
83.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.1 23.5 199.4 132.6 5.0 2013          Jan 
74.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.1 24.5 201.4 132.6 5.0          Feb 
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 15.3 2,276.0 1,762.5 1,148.4 614.1 513.5 356.3 157.2 3,407.6 3,085.2 2,504.6 2,226.3
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2012          Sep 8,567.6 16.0 2,463.9 1,947.5 1,481.5 466.0 516.4 346.1 170.3 3,730.1 3,322.3 2,720.6 2,458.6
         Oct 8,489.2 15.9 2,426.0 1,916.6 1,456.5 460.1 509.4 340.1 169.3 3,748.2 3,340.1 2,728.3 2,471.5
         Nov 8,440.0 15.6 2,411.8 1,904.4 1,448.5 455.9 507.4 337.2 170.2 3,741.9 3,334.9 2,722.7 2,465.5         Dec 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013          Jan 8,110.4 15.0 2,284.4 1,784.1 1,337.9 446.2 500.3 325.9 174.4 3,717.9 3,313.3 2,721.2 2,454.3
         Feb 8,094.4 15.0 2,268.2 1,755.8 1,312.0 443.8 512.4 339.6 172.8 3,711.7 3,307.1 2,718.4 2,457.6         Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7
         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,590.1 14.9 2,089.3 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,624.8 3,220.0 2,638.3 2,368.1
 Changes 3
2006 356.8 1.1 84.2 0.5 28.0 − 27.6 83.7 22.4 61.3 56.0 1.5 32.5 13.3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.6 − 0.5 −257.1 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2012          Oct − 75.9 − 0.1 − 38.7 − 31.8 − 26.6 − 5.3 − 6.8 − 5.8 − 1.0 19.2 18.6 9.1 14.3         Nov − 29.4 − 0.3 − 14.3 − 12.3 − 8.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.8 0.8 − 5.2 − 4.6 − 4.9 − 5.3         Dec −204.3 3.6 −101.8 − 90.5 − 84.2 − 6.3 − 11.3 − 14.5 3.2 − 50.5 − 43.1 − 24.8 − 27.5
2013          Jan − 97.7 − 4.2 − 21.9 − 27.6 − 24.8 − 2.8 5.7 5.0 0.7 35.4 28.8 30.4 23.3
         Feb − 27.1 0.0 − 15.6 − 26.4 − 23.7 − 2.7 10.8 12.6 − 1.8 − 8.1 − 7.4 − 4.0 2.0         Mar − 44.2 1.9 − 41.3 − 29.2 − 22.7 − 6.5 − 12.1 − 6.8 − 5.3 − 2.4 − 5.1 − 3.2 − 7.3
         Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1
         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 29.8 − 0.5 − 36.6 − 36.8 − 33.3 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 5.0 − 4.6 1.2 3.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
278.2 580.7 408.7 171.9 322.4 169.1 65.0 153.3 30.7 122.6 993.8 796.8 166.7 2005
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
262.1 601.7 359.8 241.9 407.8 283.5 161.4 124.3 31.4 92.9 1,005.3 788.1 1,352.2 2012          Sep 
256.9 611.8 366.5 245.3 408.0 282.2 160.0 125.8 31.9 93.9 1,003.5 784.8 1,295.6          Oct 
257.2 612.2 360.2 252.0 407.1 282.8 160.3 124.3 32.0 92.3 996.2 778.1 1,274.5          Nov 259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4          Dec 
266.8 592.1 352.2 239.9 404.6 277.6 157.0 127.0 30.3 96.8 955.4 728.8 1,137.7 2013          Jan 
260.8 588.7 347.3 241.4 404.6 280.2 157.0 124.4 30.3 94.1 959.5 739.4 1,140.0          Feb 264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2          Mar 
285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
Changes 3
19.3 − 31.0 − 18.6 − 12.4 54.5 59.6 20.9 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.8 205.7 165.7 9.8 2006
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 −420.8 2013
− 5.2 9.5 6.7 2.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 1.6 0.6 1.0 0.9 − 0.8 − 57.3 2012          Oct 
0.4 0.3 − 6.3 6.6 − 0.7 0.8 0.4 − 1.5 0.1 − 1.6 − 6.8 − 6.3 − 2.8          Nov 2.7 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 8.5 − 7.3 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 19.8 − 27.4 − 35.8          Dec 
7.1 − 1.6 2.0 − 3.5 6.6 3.6 0.1 3.0 − 0.1 3.1 − 3.1 − 4.8 −103.9 2013          Jan 
− 6.0 − 3.4 − 4.9 1.5 − 0.7 2.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.4 1.6 − 1.1          Feb 
4.1 − 2.0 − 2.1 0.2 2.8 3.9 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 7.1 0.6          Mar 
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.7 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 11.9 8.7 0.4          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2005 6,859.4 1,569.6 1,300.8 268.8 2,329.1 2,225.4 715.8 906.2 233.4 603.4 519.1 62.2 9.6
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2012          Sep 8,567.6 1,428.2 1,175.5 252.8 3,100.1 2,991.1 1,241.8 1,135.2 366.7 614.1 521.3 77.5 33.6
         Oct 8,489.2 1,415.4 1,161.0 254.4 3,099.5 2,993.8 1,265.7 1,114.7 355.4 613.5 521.5 76.3 32.1
         Nov 8,440.0 1,413.7 1,160.3 253.5 3,114.9 3,006.6 1,293.1 1,100.7 346.7 612.8 522.0 76.8 33.1         Dec 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013          Jan 8,110.4 1,371.5 1,127.0 244.6 3,090.1 2,983.1 1,305.1 1,061.3 310.2 616.7 529.3 77.0 32.1
         Feb 8,094.4 1,348.4 1,103.4 245.0 3,081.2 2,977.9 1,310.2 1,051.2 303.2 616.6 530.7 76.3 33.7         Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,590.1 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.7 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
 Changes 4
2006 356.8 105.6 81.5 24.1 122.9 118.6 30.4 105.0 77.1 − 16.8 − 31.7 0.4 4.4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.6 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2012          Oct − 75.9 − 15.5 − 17.2 1.7 − 0.4 3.0 24.0 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 1.5         Nov − 29.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 15.5 12.8 27.5 − 13.9 − 8.7 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 1.0         Dec −204.3 − 37.3 − 19.4 − 17.9 − 22.8 − 20.8 2.1 − 27.7 − 26.6 4.8 6.3 0.6 − 1.8
2013          Jan − 97.7 2.3 − 7.4 9.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 10.9 − 11.2 − 9.7 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0
         Feb − 27.1 − 24.8 − 24.6 − 0.2 − 9.8 − 5.9 4.5 − 10.3 − 7.2 − 0.1 1.4 − 0.9 1.5         Mar − 44.2 − 15.5 − 10.3 − 5.3 − 0.0 0.8 − 0.4 3.4 3.8 − 2.2 − 1.4 0.8 1.5
         Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2
         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 29.8 − 8.2 − 20.6 12.3 − 10.5 − 7.7 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
50.2 9.8 2.4 2.0 41.6 38.8 19.5 31.7 1,611.9 113.8 626.2 346.9 324.5 200545.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
40.0 12.5 3.9 2.9 31.5 26.7 98.0 5.1 1,277.2 61.0 726.4 487.8 1,444.8 2012          Sep 40.4 12.6 3.9 2.9 29.3 26.6 107.8 5.4 1,264.6 60.7 719.3 488.1 1,389.0          Oct 
39.9 12.3 3.8 2.9 31.5 26.6 107.0 5.4 1,255.2 60.8 685.8 490.6 1,367.4          Nov 42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7          Dec 
41.2 14.2 3.7 2.8 30.0 24.0 83.1 7.4 1,212.4 52.0 613.2 489.8 1,242.9 2013          Jan 
38.9 13.1 3.7 2.8 27.1 23.6 99.7 6.8 1,215.9 51.7 612.0 499.8 1,230.6          Feb 38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6          Mar 
38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.3 39.5 498.9 531.9 947.9          June
Changes 4
− 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 0.3 34.8 22.1 32.4 27.5 36.6 2006
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −104.9 − 17.6 −134.1 18.9 −417.1 2013
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.0 9.9 0.4 − 10.5 − 0.2 − 5.8 0.7 − 54.6 2012          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 8.4 0.2 − 33.4 2.7 − 3.6          Nov 
2.5 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 26.5 1.9 − 17.6 − 3.7 − 71.5 − 2.5 − 28.1          Dec 
− 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.0 2.7 0.1 − 12.0 − 4.6 7.3 5.0 −102.9 2013          Jan − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.4 16.6 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 5.5 8.4 − 9.4          Feb − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 19.8 − 2.3 − 16.3 1.8 8.4          Mar 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.9 2.8 − 20.9 15.2 0.3          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2014          Jan 1,840 7,685.5 89.1 2,618.0 1,990.0 619.3 3,855.9 381.7 2,732.2 0.6 732.3 133.6 989.0
         Feb 1,841 7,616.7 80.1 2,622.0 1,998.7 614.4 3,845.6 383.2 2,730.0 0.5 722.0 131.6 937.5
         Mar 1,840 7,565.3 77.5 2,582.0 1,961.1 611.8 3,852.0 378.7 2,727.6 0.5 733.9 132.0 921.7
         Apr 1,840 7,595.2 96.0 2,564.9 1,943.5 611.8 3,877.9 386.2 2,732.7 0.5 745.9 132.2 924.3
         May 1,840 7,671.8 88.9 2,614.6 1,993.7 611.2 3,877.3 385.4 2,739.9 0.5 740.2 132.6 958.4
         June 1,836 7,640.7 90.1 2,583.6 1,966.7 605.9 3,874.3 387.8 2,731.8 0.5 742.5 132.6 960.1
Commercial banks 6
2014          May 275 2,855.4 36.7 990.8 889.8 97.1 1,075.4 194.1 664.4 0.3 210.0 68.1 684.3
         June 275 2,840.0 39.8 966.3 866.6 95.7 1,079.1 197.3 663.1 0.2 211.6 67.2 687.6
   Big banks 7
2014          May 4 1,781.0 11.9 593.1 537.3 52.2 464.2 106.1 248.4 0.2 104.0 60.9 650.9
         June 4 1,787.6 8.0 599.5 545.0 51.0 466.1 109.1 246.6 0.1 104.7 59.9 654.1
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2014          May 164 836.0 17.2 233.1 189.6 43.1 552.2 68.8 382.4 0.1 100.8 6.6 27.0
         June 164 824.3 14.2 225.0 181.5 43.1 551.4 68.5 382.9 0.1 99.5 6.6 27.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2014          May 107 238.4 7.6 164.7 162.9 1.8 59.0 19.3 33.7 0.0 5.2 0.7 6.4
         June 107 228.1 17.6 141.8 140.1 1.7 61.5 19.7 33.5 − 7.5 0.7 6.5
Landesbanken
2014          May 9 1,093.0 8.0 374.1 265.4 107.3 565.1 70.4 374.8 0.1 116.3 13.7 132.1
         June 9 1,091.1 7.7 378.9 272.0 104.4 558.7 67.2 371.9 0.1 116.0 13.6 132.2
Savings banks
2014          May 417 1,107.6 15.3 219.7 84.3 134.8 840.8 55.1 656.1 0.1 129.3 14.9 16.8
         June 417 1,104.2 14.3 215.8 81.5 133.7 842.6 56.8 655.7 0.1 129.9 14.9 16.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2014          May 2 278.9 1.3 161.1 128.2 32.9 63.5 13.2 21.7 0.0 28.5 14.4 38.7
         June 2 278.4 0.1 160.3 127.2 33.1 64.0 13.2 21.7 0.0 28.8 14.5 39.5
Credit cooperatives
2014          May 1,078 767.8 10.9 174.5 57.7 116.6 550.2 32.3 436.2 0.1 81.5 12.8 19.3
         June 1,074 767.2 10.9 170.5 54.1 116.1 552.5 33.8 436.9 0.1 81.6 13.8 19.4
Mortgage banks
2014          May 17 420.4 1.0 105.1 65.7 36.3 298.4 6.5 222.3 − 69.6 0.6 15.4
         June 17 415.1 0.5 103.9 64.5 36.3 295.3 6.3 219.3 − 69.7 0.6 14.8
Building and loan associations
2014          May 22 208.4 0.2 61.7 45.0 16.7 140.3 1.6 119.9 . 18.9 0.4 5.8
         June 22 209.1 0.2 61.7 45.0 16.7 141.2 1.6 120.2 . 19.4 0.4 5.6
Special purpose banks
2014          May 20 940.3 15.5 527.6 457.6 69.5 343.6 12.2 244.5 − 86.1 7.6 45.9
         June 20 935.6 16.7 526.2 455.8 69.9 340.8 11.6 242.9 − 85.4 7.6 44.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2014          May 144 876.3 22.5 355.3 311.3 40.4 408.0 65.0 241.1 0.1 99.0 5.2 85.3
         June 144 857.2 27.1 327.8 283.6 40.6 412.1 67.3 241.1 0.1 100.3 5.2 85.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2014          May 37 637.9 15.0 190.6 148.4 38.6 349.0 45.7 207.4 0.1 93.8 4.5 78.9
         June 37 629.1 9.5 186.0 143.6 38.9 350.5 47.7 207.6 0.1 92.8 4.5 78.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,712.9 418.1 1,294.8 3,304.6 1,543.1 310.0 741.6 79.6 618.9 539.6 90.9 1,186.5 437.5 1,044.1 2014          Jan 
1,702.9 409.7 1,293.2 3,312.8 1,551.3 314.2 738.0 81.9 619.6 540.0 89.8 1,173.4 438.5 989.2          Feb 1,685.9 406.4 1,279.5 3,299.9 1,546.2 312.3 735.6 75.3 618.3 538.8 87.5 1,161.7 439.1 978.8          Mar 
1,720.7 402.8 1,318.0 3,312.6 1,565.6 312.0 733.0 78.2 616.3 537.0 85.7 1,146.9 439.2 975.8          Apr 
1,728.2 408.8 1,319.4 3,332.9 1,586.7 313.9 732.0 78.5 615.6 536.5 84.6 1,163.5 443.2 1,004.0          May1,699.3 437.5 1,261.8 3,322.7 1,587.1 309.0 728.5 79.8 614.1 536.1 84.1 1,159.5 456.5 1,002.8          June
Commercial banks 6
686.7 265.1 421.6 1,221.0 712.8 167.8 203.4 59.0 111.7 99.4 25.3 147.9 143.8 656.0 2014          May677.9 281.6 396.2 1,204.3 703.9 161.9 202.1 53.4 111.0 98.9 25.4 148.5 152.3 657.1          June
Big banks 7
451.5 198.2 253.4 535.4 298.4 81.2 76.7 58.9 70.4 68.3 8.8 109.5 81.6 602.9 2014          May458.2 209.2 249.0 524.4 293.3 76.6 75.8 53.4 69.9 67.9 8.8 110.1 90.1 604.9          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
135.8 41.5 94.2 563.0 338.4 66.6 101.5 0.1 41.1 30.9 15.3 37.8 53.7 45.8 2014          May130.5 41.1 89.3 557.6 334.5 65.9 100.7 0.0 40.9 30.9 15.5 37.7 53.7 44.7          June
Branches of foreign banks
99.4 25.4 74.0 122.6 76.0 20.0 25.2 − 0.2 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.5 7.4 2014          May89.2 31.3 57.9 122.4 76.1 19.3 25.6 − 0.2 0.1 1.2 0.6 8.5 7.5          June
Landesbanken
325.2 53.7 271.5 309.6 112.4 57.6 124.9 17.0 14.6 10.8 0.1 262.1 60.0 136.2 2014          May322.6 56.7 265.9 317.3 119.3 59.8 123.5 21.2 14.6 10.9 0.1 255.3 59.8 136.1          June
Savings banks
149.8 9.9 139.8 812.5 424.7 29.0 15.2 − 299.9 257.6 43.8 14.4 85.6 45.2 2014          May
149.2 15.3 134.0 808.5 422.3 28.5 15.0 − 299.4 258.1 43.3 14.2 88.4 44.0          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
139.1 29.6 109.5 33.2 11.2 8.9 10.9 1.7 − − 2.2 56.8 14.0 35.8 2014          May
134.5 29.2 105.2 35.6 11.9 10.6 10.9 3.2 − − 2.2 56.2 14.1 38.1          June
Credit cooperatives
101.8 5.0 96.8 565.9 306.7 36.4 21.9 − 188.9 168.1 12.2 9.8 56.8 33.4 2014          May101.9 6.6 95.3 564.9 306.8 35.9 21.7 − 188.5 167.6 12.0 9.7 59.4 31.3          June
Mortgage banks
104.7 6.8 97.9 152.8 8.3 8.1 136.2 − 0.2 0.2 . 126.9 17.0 19.1 2014          May102.8 7.4 95.4 152.4 8.0 8.0 136.2 − 0.2 0.2 . 124.6 16.5 18.8          June
Building and loan associations
24.1 2.2 21.9 157.0 0.5 0.6 154.6 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 3.1 9.2 15.0 2014          May24.3 2.6 21.6 157.3 0.5 0.6 154.9 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 3.1 9.2 15.2          June
Special purpose banks
196.8 36.5 160.4 80.9 10.3 5.6 65.0 0.8 − − . 542.5 56.8 63.3 2014          May186.2 38.0 148.2 82.3 14.2 3.7 64.3 2.1 − − . 548.0 56.9 62.2          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
234.4 74.6 159.8 474.5 302.7 63.7 74.7 12.3 21.7 21.3 11.6 27.9 47.7 91.8 2014          May213.0 77.1 135.9 477.1 304.8 64.3 74.7 12.4 21.8 21.4 11.5 27.6 47.7 91.8          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
135.0 49.2 85.8 351.9 226.6 43.7 49.5 12.3 21.6 21.2 10.4 27.3 39.3 84.4 2014          May123.8 45.8 78.0 354.7 228.7 45.0 49.1 12.4 21.6 21.3 10.3 27.0 39.3 84.3          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2004 14.9 41.2 1,676.3 1,075.8 0.0 7.4 592.9 2.1 3,001.3 2,644.0 2.7 2.6 351.0
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2013          Jan 14.4 131.5 1,629.0 1,206.0 − 2.0 421.0 2.4 3,243.1 2,806.0 0.5 2.1 434.4
         Feb 14.4 103.5 1,628.4 1,207.8 − 2.2 418.5 2.3 3,237.4 2,804.4 0.5 2.0 430.6
         Mar 16.0 112.8 1,591.0 1,176.5 − 2.0 412.5 2.3 3,234.0 2,795.7 0.5 1.9 435.9
         Apr 14.9 103.3 1,588.2 1,176.9 − 2.1 409.1 2.3 3,260.9 2,801.4 0.4 2.9 456.2
         May 15.1 89.3 1,578.5 1,168.8 − 2.1 407.6 2.3 3,232.1 2,795.8 0.4 2.9 433.0
         June 14.9 91.7 1,560.6 1,151.6 − 1.9 407.2 2.4 3,238.0 2,806.0 0.4 1.3 430.3
         July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.5 2,691.9 0.4 2.1 433.1
         Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6
         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4
         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.4 442.1
         Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9
         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.4 2,697.0 0.3 1.9 448.2
Changes *
2005 + 0.2 + 6.7 + 8.4 + 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.9 − 0.0 − 6.7 − 11.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 6.6
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2013          Jan − 4.0 − 2.8 − 26.1 − 23.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 + 22.7 + 20.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4
         Feb − 0.0 − 27.9 + 2.5 + 4.8 − + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.9
         Mar + 1.6 + 9.3 − 37.4 − 31.3 − − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.4
         Apr − 1.1 − 9.5 − 2.8 + 0.5 − + 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.0 + 26.9 + 5.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 20.3
         May + 0.3 − 14.0 − 9.8 − 8.2 − − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 28.8 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.2
         June − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.9 − 17.2 − − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.1
         July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.7
         Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.9 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
1.0 61.8 99.6 1,271.2 119.7 1,151.4 0.1 30.3 2,200.0 646.9 851.2 603.5 98.4 43.7 2004
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 34.5 90.8 1,126.1 125.9 1,000.2 0.0 35.4 3,087.3 1,326.2 1,053.6 616.8 90.7 35.0 2013          Jan 
− 34.5 90.5 1,102.3 129.5 972.8 0.0 35.6 3,097.1 1,336.2 1,055.8 616.6 88.5 34.9          Feb − 34.2 89.3 1,092.4 130.8 961.5 0.0 35.8 3,096.3 1,330.3 1,064.7 614.5 86.8 34.8          Mar 
− 33.7 89.3 1,088.3 130.5 957.8 0.0 35.4 3,100.3 1,344.5 1,058.4 612.3 85.1 34.6          Apr 
− 33.5 91.8 1,070.5 126.2 944.2 0.0 35.3 3,115.4 1,363.4 1,058.3 610.7 83.0 34.5          May− 33.2 91.0 1,059.4 124.9 934.5 0.0 34.8 3,129.7 1,369.8 1,069.2 609.7 81.0 34.4          June
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,131.6 149.1 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,143.2 164.9 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
Changes *
− 1.0 − 4.9 + 8.9 + 28.9 + 0.8 + 28.0 + 0.0 − 3.5 + 76.6 + 70.7 + 12.4 − 1.2 − 5.4 − 1.2 2005
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 0.3 + 0.9 − 9.0 − 6.8 − 2.2 − − 0.8 − 2.9 + 19.7 − 18.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 − 23.9 + 3.5 − 27.4 − + 0.2 + 9.8 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 − 1.2 − 9.6 + 1.6 − 11.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.1 + 14.6 − 6.7 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.2 + 2.5 − 17.8 − 5.1 − 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.9 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.8 − 11.4 − 1.4 − 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 14.6 + 6.4 + 11.3 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 0.1          June
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 17.1 − 4.4 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 20.5 + 12.5 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.5          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2004 0.2 889.4 760.2 606.5 153.7 2.8 126.3 1.5 629.5 362.5 136.6 225.9 10.9 256.1
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2013          Jan 0.6 1,033.1 798.8 535.3 263.5 6.3 228.0 2.5 731.5 441.4 110.5 330.9 10.0 280.0
         Feb 0.6 1,056.0 822.8 562.2 260.6 5.7 227.5 2.5 729.7 443.5 110.6 332.9 9.4 276.9
         Mar 1.0 1,045.3 810.6 548.3 262.3 5.6 229.1 2.5 739.3 450.6 116.6 334.0 8.6 280.1
         Apr 0.8 1,046.9 813.3 557.4 256.0 5.2 228.3 2.5 737.3 449.1 118.9 330.2 9.0 279.2
         May 0.8 1,046.0 811.0 552.8 258.2 5.1 229.9 2.5 741.3 444.6 118.0 326.6 10.6 286.1
         June 0.8 1,051.5 816.5 563.5 253.0 5.6 229.4 2.5 728.8 433.3 109.8 323.6 9.7 285.8
         July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9
         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
         Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4
         Dec 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6
         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
         Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3
         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
Changes *
2005 + 0.0 + 127.3 + 78.9 + 26.3 + 52.6 + 2.9 + 45.4 − 0.0 + 59.4 + 7.3 − 9.4 + 16.7 − 1.8 + 54.0
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2013          Jan − 0.2 − 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.5 + 6.5 − 2.0 + 1.0 + 3.6
         Feb + 0.1 + 16.5 + 17.8 + 23.4 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 4.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 15.9 − 16.6 − 16.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 4.7 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 2.3
         Apr − 0.2 + 6.1 + 7.2 + 11.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.1
         May + 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 4.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 4.8 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 1.6 + 6.9         June + 0.0 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 11.4 − 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 11.4 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1
         July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.2 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
         Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8
         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
         Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2
         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
9.8 39.3 603.3 87.0 516.2 403.2 113.0 0.5 311.2 36.6 274.7 123.4 151.2 0.8 2004
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
32.1 49.6 702.8 318.1 384.7 268.8 115.9 0.1 241.9 116.4 125.5 65.5 60.0 1.2 2013          Jan 
32.3 46.7 695.3 306.3 389.0 280.1 109.0 0.1 246.6 122.9 123.8 64.4 59.3 1.2          Feb 32.6 45.8 681.2 278.8 402.4 296.2 106.2 0.1 243.6 116.1 127.5 65.2 62.3 1.1          Mar 
32.5 46.3 689.5 302.2 387.2 283.1 104.1 0.1 255.6 122.4 133.3 71.9 61.4 1.1          Apr 
32.5 46.4 657.2 293.5 363.7 259.4 104.4 0.1 261.4 132.2 129.2 67.9 61.2 1.1          May32.1 46.4 649.3 269.6 379.7 275.1 104.6 0.1 255.5 126.6 128.9 67.9 61.0 1.1          June
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0          Dec 
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
Changes *
+ 0.8 − 3.5 + 28.6 + 12.6 + 16.0 + 4.9 + 11.1 + 0.1 − 4.9 + 23.9 − 28.8 − 7.7 − 21.1 + 0.4 2005− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013
− 0.5 + 3.2 + 16.2 + 30.1 − 13.9 − 14.1 + 0.1 − + 5.9 + 9.8 − 3.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 2.9 − 11.5 − 13.4 + 2.0 + 9.9 − 7.9 − + 3.4 + 5.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 0.0          Feb + 0.4 − 1.0 − 14.6 − 29.0 + 14.4 + 14.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.6 + 11.4 + 24.6 − 13.1 − 11.6 − 1.5 − + 13.2 + 6.8 + 6.4 + 7.0 − 0.6 − 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 32.5 − 9.1 − 23.5 − 23.7 + 0.2 − + 5.2 + 10.3 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 1.1 − 0.0          May− 0.4 − 0.0 − 7.0 − 23.5 + 16.5 + 16.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 5.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.9 − 51.7 − 22.2 − 19.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 8.2 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2004 3,001.3 2,646.7 320.9 283.8 283.0 0.8 37.1 35.3 1.8 2,680.4 2,114.2
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2013          Jan 3,243.1 2,806.5 399.6 338.2 337.4 0.8 61.4 60.1 1.4 2,843.4 2,314.1
         Feb 3,237.4 2,804.9 396.1 338.4 337.5 0.9 57.7 56.6 1.1 2,841.3 2,311.6
         Mar 3,234.0 2,796.2 387.5 332.7 331.7 1.0 54.8 53.9 0.9 2,846.5 2,315.9
         Apr 3,260.9 2,801.8 391.4 326.7 325.5 1.2 64.7 63.0 1.7 2,869.5 2,338.4
         May 3,232.1 2,796.2 380.3 325.9 324.9 1.1 54.3 52.5 1.9 2,851.9 2,325.8
         June 3,238.0 2,806.4 389.9 338.8 338.2 0.6 51.1 50.4 0.7 2,848.2 2,319.6
         July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5
         Sep 3,127.5 2,692.3 276.7 226.0 225.3 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
         Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0
         Dec 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7
         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.7 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
         Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5
         June 3,147.4 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
Changes *
2005 − 6.7 − 12.1 − 11.5 − 10.6 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 4.8 + 26.8
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2013          Jan + 22.7 + 20.4 + 24.4 + 22.3 + 22.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 1.7 + 2.3
         Feb − 5.7 − 1.7 − 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.5
         Mar − 3.4 − 8.7 − 8.6 − 5.7 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 5.3 + 4.4
         Apr + 26.9 + 5.7 + 3.9 − 6.0 − 6.2 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 9.1 + 0.8 + 23.0 + 22.5
         May − 28.8 − 5.6 − 11.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 10.4 − 10.5 + 0.1 − 17.6 − 12.6
         June + 5.9 + 10.2 + 10.0 + 13.2 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.1 − 6.6
         July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7
         Sep + 0.3 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.5
         Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.9 − 5.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 9.2 − 8.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,940.8 194.3 1,746.5 173.5 55.3 566.1 387.7 32.9 354.8 177.5 1.0 6.5 2004
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,116.9 249.6 1,867.3 197.2 31.0 529.4 292.1 39.7 252.4 237.3 − 3.5 2013          Jan 
2,120.1 249.3 1,870.8 191.5 31.0 529.7 290.6 39.3 251.4 239.1 − 3.4          Feb 
2,119.3 249.6 1,869.7 196.6 30.8 530.6 291.3 40.5 250.8 239.3 − 3.4          Mar 
2,121.1 249.8 1,871.3 217.3 30.4 531.1 292.2 40.8 251.4 238.9 − 3.3          Apr 
2,126.7 252.0 1,874.7 199.1 30.3 526.1 292.2 40.3 251.8 233.9 − 3.2          May2,125.9 250.5 1,875.4 193.7 30.0 528.6 292.0 40.5 251.4 236.6 − 3.2          June
2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
Changes *
+ 12.5 + 1.7 + 10.8 + 14.3 − 3.0 − 22.1 − 13.4 + 0.9 − 14.2 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 2.0 2005+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
− 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.5 + 5.7 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Jan 
+ 3.2 − 0.3 + 3.5 − 5.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Feb − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 5.1 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 20.7 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − − 0.2          Apr 
+ 5.6 + 2.2 + 3.3 − 18.2 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.0 − − 0.0          May− 0.8 − 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 − − 0.0          June
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov − 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May− 5.0 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2012 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          June 2,464.2 1,173.0 1,143.3 928.7 214.6 1,402.0 314.0 131.9 94.6 60.1 124.8 45.6 74.0 219.9
         Sep 2,352.4 1,177.9 1,152.6 933.4 219.2 1,282.8 316.6 130.3 95.7 60.1 124.9 46.2 72.0 104.5         Dec 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Mar 2,356.3 1,179.3 1,160.3 936.4 223.8 1,283.4 320.0 129.1 97.0 59.5 124.2 46.0 68.9 107.1
         June 2,367.1 1,181.3 1,166.6 940.0 226.7 1,288.3 320.9 129.1 98.1 59.9 124.3 47.0 68.7 104.7
 Short-term lending
2012 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          June 338.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 301.4 3.9 37.4 6.7 12.9 41.8 4.1 6.3 135.1
         Sep 225.3 − 8.1 − 8.1 187.8 4.0 35.9 6.5 13.0 42.2 4.0 6.2 23.9
         Dec 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Mar 219.9 − 8.6 − 8.6 183.5 4.4 35.4 5.9 12.7 41.5 3.6 6.4 23.8
         June 222.6 − 8.6 − 8.6 186.1 4.3 36.3 6.2 12.8 41.5 4.0 6.6 22.3
 Medium-term lending
2012 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          June 250.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 176.6 12.3 24.7 6.7 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.2 37.7
         Sep 247.6 − 35.7 − 35.7 173.1 12.3 24.8 6.6 9.4 16.5 4.0 11.3 34.5
         Dec 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Mar 249.1 − 35.0 − 35.0 175.0 12.3 25.3 5.9 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.4 35.8
         June 248.9 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.2 12.8 24.7 5.4 9.3 16.9 4.1 11.5 35.5
 Long-term lending
2012 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          June 1,875.4 1,173.0 1,099.7 928.7 170.9 924.0 297.8 69.9 81.2 37.8 66.1 37.6 56.5 47.1         Sep 1,879.4 1,177.9 1,108.8 933.4 175.4 922.0 300.3 69.6 82.6 37.7 66.2 38.2 54.5 46.1         Dec 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Mar 1,887.3 1,179.3 1,116.7 936.4 180.3 924.9 303.3 68.4 85.2 37.5 66.1 38.5 51.1 47.5
         June 1,895.6 1,181.3 1,122.8 940.0 182.9 926.1 303.8 68.1 86.5 37.8 66.0 38.9 50.7 46.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2013          Q2 + 13.1 − 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 7.8 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 10.9         Q3 − 18.8 + 2.4 + 9.1 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 26.5 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 22.6         Q4 + 2.0 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 2.6 + 3.5 − 1.5 + 2.1 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.6
2014          Q1 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3
         Q2 + 10.2 + 1.3 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 4.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.4
 Short-term lending
2013          Q2 + 6.5 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 9.8         Q3 − 23.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 23.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 21.4         Q4 − 6.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9
2014          Q1 + 2.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.6
 Medium-term lending
2013          Q2 + 0.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5         Q3 − 0.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1         Q4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
2014          Q1 + 1.3 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3
 Long-term lending
2013          Q2 + 5.7 − 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.3 + 2.4 + 9.0 + 4.7 + 4.4 − 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.0         Q4 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.7
2014          Q1 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Q2 + 6.1 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 2.5 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5 2012
651.2 186.7 38.5 178.1 388.0 51.1 1,048.6 825.8 222.9 147.7 12.4 13.5 3.6 2013          June
649.1 187.4 37.4 176.0 388.7 50.7 1,056.2 832.6 223.6 147.0 12.5 13.4 3.5          Sep 652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5          Dec 
651.5 192.1 37.1 175.9 387.5 49.4 1,059.4 836.8 222.6 148.0 12.0 13.5 3.5 2014          Mar 
656.5 192.8 39.1 176.4 388.0 49.6 1,065.5 842.3 223.2 148.7 11.8 13.3 3.5          June
Short-term lending
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0 2012
57.1 9.4 7.8 12.5 29.9 7.6 35.8 4.0 31.8 1.9 12.4 1.0 0.0 2013          June
56.0 9.2 7.4 12.3 28.8 7.4 36.6 4.1 32.5 1.7 12.5 1.0 0.0          Sep 54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0          Dec 
54.0 8.9 6.6 12.4 27.8 7.0 35.4 4.2 31.2 1.8 12.0 1.0 0.0 2014          Mar 
56.5 8.8 7.8 12.6 28.0 7.2 35.7 4.2 31.5 1.7 11.8 0.9 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0 2012
66.2 8.7 7.1 19.8 32.0 3.7 73.4 23.3 50.0 44.7 − 0.5 0.0 2013          June
65.9 9.1 7.0 19.5 32.2 3.6 74.0 23.4 50.7 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
66.8 9.9 6.7 20.1 32.1 3.5 73.6 22.6 51.0 45.8 − 0.4 0.0 2014          Mar 
68.8 10.4 7.2 20.5 31.7 3.6 72.2 22.5 49.7 44.6 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5 2012
527.9 168.6 23.6 145.7 326.1 39.8 939.4 798.4 141.0 101.1 − 12.0 3.5 2013          June
527.2 169.1 23.0 144.2 327.6 39.6 945.6 805.1 140.5 99.9 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5          Dec 
530.6 173.3 23.9 143.4 327.6 38.9 950.4 810.0 140.4 100.4 − 12.0 3.5 2014          Mar 
531.2 173.6 24.2 143.3 328.3 38.8 957.6 815.6 142.0 102.3 − 12.0 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 1.8 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 4.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 2013          Q2− 2.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 7.8 + 6.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3+ 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 3.3 + 4.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 5.2 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q2− 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Q3− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q2− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − − 0.0          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2013          Q2
− 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 6.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.1          Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2011 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 386.1 770.2 31.5 738.7 616.1 104.8 36.5 34.3 97.1
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2013          July 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 322.8 719.9 31.2 688.8 608.1 79.6 34.4 30.4 88.5
         Aug 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 254.9 709.5 29.2 680.3 607.5 78.8 34.4 30.4 1.2
         Sep 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 251.2 705.7 29.0 676.7 606.4 78.0 33.5 30.2 1.2
         Oct 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 247.6 703.0 29.4 673.6 606.4 77.3 33.4 30.1 3.1
         Nov 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 246.4 701.4 29.6 671.7 606.3 76.9 33.3 30.1 1.0
         Dec 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014          Jan 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 250.8 695.9 29.0 666.9 609.1 75.4 32.9 29.1 2.5
         Feb 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 255.8 694.0 29.1 664.9 609.8 74.4 32.7 29.0 3.1
         Mar 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 257.3 691.5 28.8 662.7 608.6 73.7 32.5 28.8 1.9
         Apr 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 258.2 688.8 28.4 660.4 606.7 72.0 32.4 28.7 4.3
         May 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 262.0 687.0 28.4 658.6 606.0 70.9 31.9 28.6 0.9
         June 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 263.7 684.7 28.4 656.3 604.5 70.5 31.4 28.2 1.7
Changes*
2012 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 − 47.7 − 39.0 + 0.6 − 39.6 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2013          July − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 21.9 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.5
         Aug + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 3.3 − 8.4 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.1         Sep − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 3.7 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Oct + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 + 0.5 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9
         Nov + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0         Dec + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 8.3 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 4.2 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 4.4
2014          Jan − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.9
         Feb + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.6         Mar − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.4
         May + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 + 3.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.4         June − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8
Domestic government End of year or month*
2011 168.5 46.2 118.4 69.5 48.8 3.8 45.0 2.4 1.5 34.0 5.9 3.1
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2013          July 189.8 49.2 135.7 78.5 57.2 5.1 52.1 3.6 1.3 32.0 5.8 0.3
         Aug 185.1 50.7 129.3 77.9 51.4 5.1 46.3 3.7 1.4 32.1 5.8 0.2
         Sep 184.4 49.5 129.9 78.9 51.0 5.1 45.9 3.7 1.4 31.2 5.8 0.8
         Oct 177.5 46.8 125.5 74.4 51.2 5.4 45.8 3.7 1.4 31.1 5.8 1.5
         Nov 184.7 49.6 130.0 78.6 51.3 5.4 46.0 3.7 1.5 31.1 5.8 0.5
         Dec 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014          Jan 172.1 43.4 123.7 75.3 48.4 5.6 42.8 3.5 1.4 30.7 4.8 0.8
         Feb 178.1 47.1 125.9 76.9 49.0 6.1 43.0 3.6 1.5 30.6 4.8 1.5
         Mar 180.5 47.3 128.2 79.4 48.8 6.1 42.7 3.5 1.5 30.5 4.7 0.7
         Apr 178.1 46.4 126.7 78.1 48.6 6.1 42.5 3.5 1.5 30.4 4.7 2.9
         May 183.4 49.2 129.0 80.5 48.4 6.1 42.4 3.6 1.6 29.9 4.7 0.0
         June 190.1 50.0 135.0 86.6 48.4 6.0 42.4 3.5 1.6 29.5 4.7 0.9
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 + 2.9 − 1.6 + 2.7 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.1
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2013          July − 5.0 − 4.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2         Aug − 4.0 + 1.6 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Oct − 7.0 − 2.7 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7
         Nov + 7.2 + 2.8 + 4.4 + 4.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Dec − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 4.2
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9
         Feb + 5.5 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7
         Mar + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Apr − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2
         May + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.9         June + 7.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2011 2,877.0 1,122.0 1,037.9 316.5 721.3 27.7 693.7 613.8 103.3 2.5 28.4 94.02012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.82013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2013          July 2,915.4 1,325.6 907.0 244.3 662.7 26.1 636.7 604.5 78.2 2.3 24.6 88.2
         Aug 2,838.5 1,322.2 835.1 177.0 658.1 24.1 634.0 603.8 77.5 2.3 24.6 1.1         Sep 2,836.2 1,329.9 827.0 172.3 654.7 23.9 630.7 602.7 76.6 2.3 24.5 0.4
         Oct 2,849.7 1,346.0 825.0 173.3 651.8 24.0 627.8 602.7 75.9 2.3 24.3 1.6
         Nov 2,859.7 1,363.8 817.8 167.8 650.0 24.3 625.8 602.7 75.4 2.2 24.3 0.5         Dec 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014          Jan 2,875.1 1,372.6 822.9 175.5 647.4 23.4 624.1 605.6 74.0 2.2 24.3 1.7
         Feb 2,878.5 1,375.5 823.9 178.9 644.9 23.0 621.9 606.2 72.9 2.1 24.2 1.6         Mar 2,867.4 1,369.6 820.6 177.9 642.7 22.7 620.0 605.0 72.2 2.1 24.1 1.2
         Apr 2,879.1 1,385.1 820.3 180.1 640.2 22.2 618.0 603.2 70.5 2.0 24.0 1.4
         May 2,888.8 1,397.0 820.0 181.5 638.6 22.4 616.2 602.4 69.3 2.0 23.8 0.9         June 2,876.1 1,392.8 813.4 177.1 636.2 22.4 613.9 601.1 68.9 1.9 23.5 0.8
Changes*
2012 + 40.1 + 135.8 − 85.1 − 50.4 − 34.7 − 0.1 − 34.6 + 0.8 − 11.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 16.8
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2013          July − 19.5 + 9.8 − 26.2 − 21.5 − 4.7 − 0.5 − 4.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug + 4.1 + 11.7 − 6.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0         Sep − 2.4 + 7.6 − 8.0 − 4.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 13.5 + 16.2 − 2.0 + 1.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov + 10.0 + 17.8 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1         Dec + 5.9 − 2.2 + 4.5 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 9.4 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.0
         Feb + 4.0 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Mar − 11.1 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 11.8 + 15.5 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 9.7 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5         June − 12.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2011 1,156.5 374.8 758.9 222.9 536.0 9.4 526.7 5.6 17.3 2.5 20.3 94.0
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2013          July 1,096.9 430.4 644.1 172.1 472.0 11.6 460.4 7.3 15.2 2.3 17.4 88.2
         Aug 1,013.2 417.2 573.4 106.0 467.4 10.0 457.4 7.4 15.3 2.3 17.5 1.1
         Sep 1,013.2 424.3 566.4 102.4 464.0 10.1 453.9 7.4 15.2 2.3 17.3 0.4
         Oct 1,017.9 430.3 565.0 104.3 460.8 10.2 450.5 7.5 15.1 2.2 17.2 1.6
         Nov 1,007.5 427.8 557.4 99.3 458.0 10.4 447.7 7.4 15.0 2.2 17.3 0.5
         Dec 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014          Jan 1,016.9 434.6 559.6 107.6 452.1 9.9 442.2 7.4 15.2 2.2 17.5 1.7
         Feb 1,011.5 429.4 559.6 110.8 448.8 9.7 439.1 7.4 15.0 2.1 17.4 1.6
         Mar 1,004.6 426.1 555.9 109.7 446.2 9.6 436.6 7.5 15.1 2.0 17.5 1.2
         Apr 1,008.4 430.5 555.8 112.1 443.6 9.4 434.3 7.5 14.7 2.0 17.5 1.4
         May 1,008.7 432.0 554.7 113.3 441.3 9.6 431.7 7.4 14.6 2.0 17.5 0.9
         June 996.5 427.9 546.4 108.1 438.3 9.5 428.8 7.5 14.7 1.8 17.2 0.8
Changes*
2012 − 37.3 + 42.6 − 79.6 − 39.2 − 40.4 + 1.1 − 41.5 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 16.8
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2013          July − 20.0 + 3.6 − 23.5 − 19.8 − 3.7 + 0.2 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 22.2
         Aug − 2.6 + 1.9 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.0         Sep − 0.2 + 7.0 − 7.1 − 3.5 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Oct + 4.7 + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.9 − 3.2 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.2
         Nov − 10.4 − 2.5 − 7.7 − 4.9 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.1         Dec + 3.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
2014          Jan + 5.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 1.9 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
         Feb − 4.7 − 4.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar − 6.9 − 3.3 − 3.7 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 4.2 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         May + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5         June − 12.5 − 4.0 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,720.4 747.3 724.9 131.5 490.4 103.0 22.4 278.9 261.1 23.3 218.5 19.3
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014          Jan 1,858.3 938.0 908.7 164.4 613.0 131.3 29.2 263.3 248.2 16.4 216.4 15.3
         Feb 1,867.0 946.1 916.9 165.1 619.6 132.2 29.2 264.2 249.1 16.6 217.5 15.1
         Mar 1,862.8 943.5 914.6 161.1 621.5 132.0 28.9 264.7 249.4 16.6 217.8 15.0
         Apr 1,870.7 954.6 926.0 165.0 627.6 133.4 28.6 264.6 249.1 16.8 217.3 15.0
         May 1,880.1 965.0 935.5 166.3 637.0 132.1 29.5 265.4 249.5 16.8 217.9 14.9
         June 1,879.6 964.9 934.5 162.9 639.7 132.0 30.3 266.9 251.0 16.8 219.0 15.2
Changes*
2012 + 77.3 + 93.2 + 90.5 + 14.0 + 57.2 + 19.3 + 2.7 − 5.6 − 4.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.5
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014          Jan + 4.2 + 5.7 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1
         Feb + 8.8 + 8.2 + 8.2 + 0.7 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.2
         Mar − 4.2 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Apr + 7.7 + 11.0 + 11.5 + 4.4 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         May + 9.4 + 10.4 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 9.4 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1
         June − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 3.4 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2011 168.5 37.9 6.2 9.4 22.2 0.1 16.9 34.8 11.4 10.7 12.5 0.2 16.8
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014          Jan 172.1 11.7 3.2 3.1 5.4 0.1 15.7 40.7 9.8 7.8 22.9 0.2 14.6
         Feb 178.1 12.0 3.2 3.3 5.4 0.1 15.6 43.6 10.3 10.2 23.0 0.2 14.6
         Mar 180.5 11.7 3.3 3.0 5.3 0.1 15.6 48.1 11.6 13.4 23.0 0.2 14.5
         Apr 178.1 13.2 2.8 5.4 5.0 0.1 15.6 44.9 11.9 9.8 23.0 0.2 14.4
         May 183.4 10.9 2.7 3.2 5.0 0.1 15.1 44.0 11.0 9.9 22.9 0.2 14.4
         June 190.1 12.8 3.5 4.3 4.9 0.1 14.8 49.7 12.5 13.8 23.1 0.2 14.3
Changes*
2012 + 2.2 − 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 3.9 + 2.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.9
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.2 + 0.3 − 4.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb + 5.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 3.2 − 0.0 − − 0.1
         Apr − 2.6 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 5.3 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         June + 7.0 + 1.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 4.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
17.8 93.6 185.3 18.3 167.0 608.2 599.0 9.2 86.1 0.1 8.1 − 2011
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 201215.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
15.1 68.0 195.3 13.5 181.8 598.2 588.5 9.7 58.8 0.0 6.8 − 2014          Jan 
15.1 68.1 196.1 13.3 182.8 598.8 589.1 9.7 57.9 0.0 6.7 −          Feb 15.3 68.2 196.5 13.2 183.4 597.6 587.9 9.7 57.1 0.0 6.6 −          Mar 
15.5 68.0 196.6 12.9 183.7 595.7 586.1 9.6 55.8 0.0 6.5 −          Apr 
15.9 68.1 197.2 12.7 184.5 595.0 585.5 9.5 54.8 0.0 6.3 −          May15.9 69.0 197.9 12.9 185.0 593.6 584.1 9.5 54.2 0.0 6.2 −          June
Changes*
− 1.1 − 11.2 + 5.6 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 2012
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
− 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2014          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Apr 
+ 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
+ 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
39.3 18.1 13.0 5.0 3.2 0.4 56.5 10.5 36.4 9.1 0.4 0.0 2011
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 201244.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
39.2 18.1 10.5 6.6 4.0 0.4 80.5 12.3 53.9 13.6 0.7 0.0 2014          Jan 
42.1 20.5 10.7 6.8 4.1 0.4 80.4 13.1 52.7 13.8 0.7 0.0          Feb 41.4 19.7 11.0 6.6 4.1 0.4 79.3 12.7 52.0 13.9 0.7 0.0          Mar 
40.8 19.2 11.0 6.6 4.0 0.4 79.2 12.6 51.9 14.0 0.7 0.0          Apr 
45.1 22.2 12.2 6.6 4.1 0.4 83.2 13.3 55.3 13.9 0.7 0.0          May43.3 21.1 11.5 6.5 4.1 0.4 84.4 12.9 56.9 13.8 0.7 0.0          June
Changes*
+ 4.3 + 4.8 − 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 4.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 2012+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013
− 5.7 − 5.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.9 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2014          Jan 
+ 2.9 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 1.5 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Feb − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 4.0 + 0.7 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May− 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2011 626.3 616.1 515.3 413.7 100.8 91.3 10.2 7.8 10.0 122.5 104.8 74.6 17.7
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014          Feb 619.6 609.8 532.3 411.0 77.5 65.0 9.8 7.8 0.2 89.8 74.4 58.0 15.4
         Mar 618.3 608.6 531.1 408.9 77.5 64.9 9.7 7.7 0.2 87.5 73.7 57.5 13.7
         Apr 616.3 606.7 529.3 406.5 77.3 64.7 9.7 7.7 0.2 85.7 72.0 56.2 13.6
         May 615.6 606.0 528.8 405.4 77.2 64.4 9.6 7.7 0.2 84.6 70.9 55.2 13.7
         June 614.1 604.5 528.4 404.2 76.1 63.3 9.5 7.6 0.2 84.1 70.5 54.7 13.6
Changes*
2012 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 14.1 + 5.6 − 12.6 − 14.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 . − 12.0 − 11.2 − 6.1 − 0.7
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014          Feb + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.2
         Mar − 1.3 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.6
         Apr − 1.9 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.1
         May − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 0.1
         June − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2011 1,375.4 352.6 37.2 373.9 75.3 95.2 3.0 53.6 4.5 1,226.6 0.6 0.4 43.2 1.5
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014          Feb 1,138.2 309.4 27.9 331.1 66.6 82.9 2.2 29.6 4.9 1,025.7 0.8 0.2 35.2 1.1
         Mar 1,126.5 306.5 26.2 320.9 63.7 78.2 2.3 28.3 5.0 1,020.0 0.8 0.2 35.2 1.1
         Apr 1,111.9 306.5 23.6 316.8 63.0 75.5 2.4 28.1 5.2 1,008.3 0.8 0.2 35.0 1.1
         May 1,124.7 308.1 23.9 331.4 68.4 80.4 2.5 28.7 5.4 1,015.6 1.0 0.2 38.7 1.1
         June 1,121.4 304.3 23.9 335.1 71.7 85.1 2.4 28.7 5.1 1,007.6 1.0 0.2 38.1 1.1
Changes*
2012 − 111.0 − 7.4 − 6.3 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 19.5 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 89.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 0.5
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014          Feb − 11.5 − 2.9 + 2.3 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 9.2 + 0.1 − − 1.6 −
         Mar − 11.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 10.2 − 2.9 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Apr − 14.6 + 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.1 − 0.7 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 11.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         May + 12.8 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 14.7 + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 0.2 − + 3.7 −         June − 3.3 − 3.8 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014          Apr 22 207.5 45.1 0.0 16.7 20.5 83.6 17.1 18.2 1.7 22.4 151.1 5.3 3.1 9.2 7.9
         May 22 208.4 45.1 0.0 16.7 20.3 84.0 17.1 18.9 1.7 22.4 151.7 5.2 3.1 9.2 8.2         June 22 209.1 45.2 0.0 16.7 20.1 84.5 17.1 19.4 1.7 22.6 152.1 5.2 3.1 9.2 7.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Apr 12 146.3 27.7 − 9.9 14.2 65.8 14.8 8.5 1.1 19.4 99.8 5.2 3.1 6.1 4.9         May 12 146.8 27.8 − 9.8 14.2 66.0 14.8 8.9 1.1 19.3 100.2 5.1 3.1 6.1 4.9         June 12 146.9 27.9 − 9.7 14.1 66.5 14.7 8.9 1.1 19.1 100.4 5.1 3.1 6.1 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Apr 10 61.2 17.4 0.0 6.8 6.2 17.8 2.3 9.7 0.5 3.1 51.3 0.1 − 3.1 3.0         May 10 61.6 17.3 0.0 6.9 6.1 18.0 2.4 10.0 0.6 3.1 51.5 0.1 − 3.1 3.4         June 10 62.2 17.2 0.0 7.0 6.1 18.1 2.4 10.5 0.6 3.5 51.7 0.1 − 3.1 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014          Apr 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.3 2.8 3.7 1.6 0.5 0.7 0.4 1.4 14.4 8.2 0.9 0.0
         May 2.5 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.5 14.5 8.3 0.8 0.0
         June 2.4 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.5 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.5 14.3 8.2 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Apr 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.9 2.8 1.2 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.1 9.7 4.6 0.6 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.2 2.8 1.6 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.7 4.7 0.6 0.0         June 1.6 0.0 0.2 2.8 1.8 2.7 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.1 9.7 4.7 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Apr 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.6 0.2 0.0         May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.6 0.2 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.5 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2013          Aug 54 206 1,812.6 506.8 492.3 147.6 344.6 14.6 533.5 422.8 12.2 410.6 110.7 772.3 508.3
         Sep 55 206 1,720.0 471.0 457.5 143.2 314.3 13.6 560.5 449.8 12.1 437.7 110.7 688.4 492.6
         Oct 55 204 1,779.4 475.8 462.5 145.6 317.0 13.2 549.2 439.7 10.7 429.0 109.5 754.4 487.0
         Nov 55 206 1,787.6 485.8 472.0 146.7 325.3 13.8 540.5 428.9 10.3 418.6 111.6 761.4 494.0
         Dec 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014          Jan 56 209 1,814.4 480.7 466.8 146.1 320.7 13.9 543.7 433.4 10.3 423.1 110.3 790.1 457.6
         Feb 56 210 1,769.7 485.5 472.1 147.8 324.3 13.5 543.5 436.9 9.9 426.9 106.7 740.7 433.8
         Mar 56 209 1,695.7 469.6 455.3 159.0 296.3 14.3 558.2 450.2 9.6 440.6 108.1 667.9 425.2
         Apr 56 209 1,731.7 473.1 459.1 157.4 301.7 14.0 569.0 458.2 9.7 448.5 110.8 689.5 431.7
         May 56 207 1,766.9 478.5 465.8 154.9 310.9 12.7 570.9 454.3 9.3 445.0 116.6 717.6 443.0
Changes *
2012 − 1 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2013          Sep + 1 − − 82.9 − 30.1 − 29.2 − 4.4 − 24.7 − 0.9 + 30.3 + 29.6 − 0.1 + 29.8 + 0.7 − 83.1 − 15.7
         Oct − − 2 + 67.0 + 7.8 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 5.8 − 0.3 − 7.2 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 0.5 + 66.3 − 5.6
         Nov − + 2 + 7.1 + 9.9 + 9.3 + 1.1 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 11.8 − 0.4 − 11.3 + 1.9 + 7.1 + 7.1
         Dec + 1 + 3 − 52.4 − 45.8 − 45.7 − 5.1 − 40.6 − 0.1 − 17.1 − 14.6 + 0.7 − 15.3 − 2.5 + 10.6 − 8.5
2014          Jan − − + 76.2 + 40.0 + 40.0 + 4.5 + 35.5 + 0.1 + 18.1 + 17.1 − 0.7 + 17.8 + 0.9 + 18.1 − 28.0
         Feb − + 1 − 31.8 + 11.1 + 11.4 + 1.7 + 9.7 − 0.3 + 5.5 + 8.1 − 0.4 + 8.5 − 2.6 − 48.5 − 23.8
         Mar − − 1 − 74.5 − 16.4 − 17.3 + 11.1 − 28.4 + 0.9 + 14.7 + 13.3 − 0.4 + 13.7 + 1.4 − 72.8 − 8.6
         Apr − − + 37.7 + 4.7 + 5.0 − 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.3 + 11.4 + 8.5 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.9 + 21.7 + 6.5
         May . − 2 + 23.7 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 2.5 + 4.1 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 8.1 + 4.8 + 27.3 + 11.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2013          Aug 33 78 435.0 193.9 163.3 97.8 65.5 30.6 187.4 148.2 28.5 119.7 39.2 53.7 −
         Sep 32 77 430.6 190.9 159.9 97.8 62.2 31.0 187.8 149.6 28.3 121.3 38.2 51.9 −
         Oct 33 77 427.3 190.3 160.1 97.5 62.6 30.2 187.1 148.8 27.9 120.9 38.3 50.0 −
         Nov 33 76 425.6 189.4 160.0 95.1 64.9 29.4 184.0 146.8 27.7 119.1 37.2 52.2 −
         Dec 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014          Jan 33 74 425.9 187.3 159.3 92.2 67.1 28.0 181.2 145.8 25.5 120.2 35.4 57.4 −
         Feb 33 74 408.3 170.0 142.7 75.9 66.8 27.4 181.5 145.5 25.5 120.0 35.9 56.8 −
         Mar 32 73 407.3 171.3 145.7 80.0 65.7 25.5 181.5 146.4 25.0 121.4 35.1 54.6 −
         Apr 32 73 401.4 168.3 143.3 79.1 64.1 25.1 178.1 143.0 25.1 117.9 35.2 54.9 −
         May 32 72 404.9 166.4 141.9 77.5 64.4 24.5 177.2 140.9 24.7 116.1 36.3 61.3 −
Changes *
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2013          Sep − 1 − 1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 1.8 −
         Oct + 1 − − 2.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.8 −
         Nov − − 1 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.9 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 2.2 −
         Dec − − 1 + 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 −
2014          Jan − − 1 − 1.2 − 1.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 5.0 − 3.3 − 0.5 − 2.8 − 1.7 + 5.4 −
         Feb − − − 15.8 − 16.2 − 15.7 − 16.4 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.6 −
         Mar − 1 − 1 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.2 −         Apr − − − 5.6 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
         May − − 1 + 2.0 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2014
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,010.3 652.1 324.2 327.8 358.3 24.2 19.0 5.2 334.1 125.7 40.1 636.4 528.9 2013          Aug 
940.7 603.9 315.4 288.5 336.8 26.4 21.7 4.7 310.4 125.1 39.9 614.3 502.5          Sep 
1,004.8 649.5 329.4 320.1 355.4 27.7 23.2 4.5 327.6 127.0 39.9 607.6 498.5          Oct 1,010.6 674.3 347.7 326.6 336.2 28.1 23.4 4.7 308.1 126.8 39.4 610.9 501.1          Nov 
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1          Dec 
1,011.7 672.1 342.4 329.7 339.5 26.8 21.7 5.1 312.7 127.3 40.9 634.6 469.6 2014          Jan 1,008.5 664.1 336.0 328.1 344.4 28.0 23.0 5.0 316.4 130.1 40.4 590.6 450.4          Feb 
964.2 625.5 340.9 284.6 338.7 29.0 24.0 5.0 309.7 125.3 40.5 565.7 435.1          Mar 
1,001.9 653.8 341.1 312.7 348.1 27.4 22.4 4.9 320.7 127.1 40.4 562.4 436.0          Apr 1,011.4 663.0 349.1 313.9 348.4 25.8 20.9 4.9 322.6 134.1 40.3 581.2 452.3          May
Changes *
− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013
− 62.6 − 44.1 − 8.8 − 35.3 − 18.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 20.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 19.4 − 26.4 2013          Sep 
+ 69.0 + 48.0 + 14.0 + 34.1 + 21.0 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.1          Oct 
+ 4.9 + 24.5 + 18.3 + 6.2 − 19.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 20.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 2.6          Nov − 114.0 − 74.7 − 20.7 − 54.0 − 39.3 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 35.4 − 1.4 + 1.8 + 61.2 − 16.9          Dec 
+ 113.2 + 71.6 + 15.4 + 56.2 + 41.6 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 39.0 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 38.6 − 14.6 2014          Jan 
+ 5.5 − 3.2 − 6.4 + 3.2 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 7.5 + 2.8 − 0.4 − 39.7 − 19.2          Feb − 44.6 − 38.8 + 4.9 − 43.8 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 4.9 + 0.0 − 25.0 − 15.3          Mar 
+ 38.8 + 29.0 + 0.2 + 28.7 + 9.9 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 11.5 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 1.9 + 5.2 + 8.0 − 2.8 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 7.0 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 16.3          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
341.8 191.8 112.4 79.3 150.0 22.5 18.4 4.1 127.6 22.4 32.0 38.8 − 2013          Aug 
337.3 195.4 114.8 80.6 141.9 21.2 17.2 4.0 120.7 22.1 32.0 39.1 −          Sep 
337.9 193.3 111.5 81.8 144.6 22.7 18.7 4.0 121.9 21.9 30.1 37.4 −          Oct 
336.6 193.7 109.7 84.0 142.9 23.0 19.0 4.0 119.9 21.6 29.9 37.5 −          Nov 
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 −          Dec 
333.9 197.0 109.9 87.1 136.9 20.5 18.5 2.0 116.4 21.3 30.4 40.2 − 2014          Jan 
320.7 186.5 94.5 92.0 134.2 19.8 17.8 2.0 114.3 21.0 28.9 37.7 −          Feb 
319.5 186.3 95.0 91.3 133.2 19.6 17.6 2.0 113.6 20.3 29.1 38.4 −          Mar 
312.7 181.1 94.5 86.6 131.5 19.2 17.2 2.0 112.3 20.9 29.2 38.7 −          Apr 
316.4 186.7 95.6 91.1 129.7 18.8 16.7 2.1 110.9 20.5 28.5 39.4 −          May
Changes *
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 3.4 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.8 − 7.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 2013          Sep 
+ 1.4 − 1.7 − 3.3 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 −          Oct 
− 1.5 + 0.3 − 1.8 + 2.1 − 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Nov 
− 1.5 + 7.9 + 3.7 + 4.2 − 9.5 − 4.6 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 −          Dec 
− 1.7 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.4 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 2014          Jan 
− 11.8 − 9.6 − 15.4 + 5.8 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.2 −          Feb 
− 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 −          Mar 
− 6.6 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Apr 
+ 2.6 + 4.8 + 1.1 + 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2014
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Savings deposits Applicable from Ratio
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 2012  Jan 18 1    
 
  
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies pur-
suant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves 4 
Monthly Required % of the
average 1 Total Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Actual reserves 3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3.1
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4.3
1997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3.3
1998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 3.8
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount after tutions subject to reserve requirements on their giro accounts at the Bundesbank.
applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve requirements (section 5 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
(1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). 3Average credit balances of the credit insti-
  
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
beginning in 1 of lump-sum Lump-sum after deduction of
Reserve base 2 allowance 3 allowance 4 lump-sum allowance Current account 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 
Euro area (€ billion)
 
2013          Dec  8 10,385.9 103.9 0.5 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014          Jan 10,408.1 104.1 0.5 103.6 216.0 112.4 0.0
         Feb 10,330.4 103.3 0.5 102.8 201.1 98.3 0.0
         Mar 10,403.5 104.0 0.5 103.6 195.2 91.6 0.0
         Apr  r 10,397.4 104.0 0.5 103.5 191.2 87.7 0.0
         May r 10,438.9 104.4 0.5 103.9 192.3 88.3 0.0
         June 10,489.4 104.9 0.5 104.4 214.3 109.8 0.0
         July p 10,546.8 105.5 0.5 105.0 ... ... ...
         Aug  p ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany (€ million)
2013          Dec 2,743,933 27,439 177 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014          Jan 2,772,133 27,721 178 27,544 64,060 36,516 1
         Feb 2,733,718 27,337 178 27,159 61,004 33,845 3
         Mar 2,765,104 27,651 178 27,473 58,580 31,107 0
         Apr 2,769,221 27,692 178 27,515 55,827 28,312 2
         May r 2,759,990 27,600 178 27,422 55,483 28,061 0
         June 2,783,746 27,837 177 27,660 64,558 36,898 1
         July p 2,814,276 28,143 177 27,966 ... ... ...
         Aug  p 2,790,404 27,904 176 27,728 ... ... ...
1From March 2004, the reserve maintenance period will start on the settlement day the application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of the credit insti-
of the main refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the tutions at the national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves
Governing Council of the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary after deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of
policy stance is scheduled. 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank the lump-sum allowance. 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio allowance, including required reserves of Estonia ( €0.187 billion). Required reserves
of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratios of the euro area up to 31 December 2013 amounted to € 103.2 billion. 
to the reserve base. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2014
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50          July                1 2.47          July                1 3.19
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2009 Jan                1 1.62         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22          July                1 0.12
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50          July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 2004 Jan                1 1.14 2011 July                1 0.37
         Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00          July                1 1.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50          July                1 1.17 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          July                1 −0.38
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 2006 Jan                1 1.37         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 1.95 2014 Jan                1 −0.63         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75          July                1 −0.73
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
  
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2014 July                  2 97,103 97,103 0.15−−−7
         July                  9 94,150 94,150 0.15−−−7
         July                16 99,908 99,908 0.15−−−7
         July                23 97,887 97,887 0.15−−−7
         July                30 133,304 133,304 0.15−−−7
         Aug                  6 107,922 107,922 0.15−−−7
         Aug                13 108,203 108,203 0.15−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2014 May                14 32,335 32,335 0.25−−− 2 8
         May                29 10,949 10,949 2 ... − − − 91
         June                11 9,970 9,970 0.15−−− 2 8
         June                26 10,386 10,386 2 ... − − − 91
         July                31 6,786 6,786 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
  
4 Money market rates, by month 
*
 
 
% per annum
EONIA Swap Index 2 EURIBOR 3 
Monthly One-week One-month Three-month Six-month One-week One-month Three-month Six-month Twelve-month Twelve-month
average EONIA 1 funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds funds
2014          Jan 0.20 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.17 0.16 0.19 0.22 0.29 0.40 0.56
         Feb 0.16 0.18 0.16 0.14 0.12 0.11 0.19 0.22 0.29 0.39 0.55         Mar 0.19 0.18 0.18 0.16 0.16 0.15 0.20 0.23 0.31 0.41 0.58
         Apr 0.25 0.23 0.21 0.19 0.16 0.15 0.22 0.25 0.33 0.43 0.60
         May 0.25 0.23 0.19 0.14 0.11 0.10 0.24 0.26 0.32 0.42 0.59         June 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.11 0.15 0.24 0.33 0.51
         July 0.04
4 . 4 . 4 . 4 . 4 . 0.05 0.10 0.21 0.30 0.49
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 20 June 2005 to 30 June 2014 by Reuters as a reference rate for euro-money
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate, market-derivatives. As a Spot-figure (T+2) it is calculated according to the act/360
the EURIBOR rate and the EONIA Swap rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: method. 3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 4Discontinued
Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the as of 1 July 2014. act/360 method and published via Reuters. 2EONIA Swap Index: published rate from

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          June 1.30 106,091 2.04 225,027 0.57 77,887 3.23 20,352
         July 1.22 103,026 2.03 224,111 0.55 79,887 3.16 20,464
         Aug 1.16 101,003 2.02 223,993 0.52 80,986 3.14 20,406
         Sep 1.12 99,321 2.01 223,867 0.53 79,626 3.11 20,467
         Oct 1.07 97,939 2.00 223,989 0.50 80,517 3.11 20,505
         Nov 1.05 97,422 1.98 224,581 0.49 79,894 3.10 20,486
         Dec 1.03 96,913 1.97 226,745 0.48 81,898 3.07 20,531
2014          Jan 1.01 95,966 1.95 227,207 0.48 83,425 3.04 20,595
         Feb 0.99 95,572 1.94 227,617 0.44 86,581 3.02 20,561
         Mar 0.97 95,257 1.92 227,604 0.45 85,751 3.01 20,226
         Apr 0.95 94,627 1.91 226,848 0.45 86,699 2.98 19,598
         May 0.92 94,570 1.89 226,619 0.46 87,856 2.95 19,903
         June 0.91 95,691 1.87 226,531 0.44 84,036 2.92 19,989
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          June 3.33 5,484 3.26 28,964 4.12 965,019 7.56 61,368 5.13 76,634 5.14 308,931
         July 3.28 5,653 3.22 28,977 4.09 968,047 7.53 59,608 5.12 77,021 5.12 309,175
         Aug 3.25 5,525 3.20 28,947 4.07 971,598 7.49 58,961 5.10 77,302 5.10 309,848
         Sep 3.29 5,599 3.18 29,073 4.05 973,593 7.64 60,893 5.08 77,444 5.08 308,291
         Oct 3.23 5,786 3.15 29,061 4.02 976,282 7.64 59,053 5.07 77,656 5.06 308,891
         Nov 3.17 5,644 3.13 29,027 4.01 979,253 7.55 56,483 5.03 77,800 5.05 309,729
         Dec 3.29 5,683 3.12 28,778 3.98 978,740 7.61 59,488 5.01 77,624 5.01 307,844
2014          Jan 3.16 5,704 3.10 28,563 3.96 977,215 7.66 57,235 4.99 77,651 5.00 308,100
         Feb 3.20 5,602 3.08 28,337 3.94 979,347 7.61 56,749 4.97 77,550 4.98 308,406
         Mar 3.22 5,707 3.06 28,267 3.92 980,208 7.75 58,723 4.97 77,679 4.97 307,181
         Apr 3.17 5,744 3.03 28,198 3.90 981,947 7.53 57,688 4.91 76,672 4.99 309,107
         May 3.17 5,764 3.01 28,197 3.88 984,889 7.51 56,479 4.94 75,911 4.98 309,887
         June 3.17 5,762 2.99 28,112 3.86 986,701 7.59 59,098 4.92 76,099 4.96 308,827
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          June 3.14 136,903 2.92 124,651 3.30 582,718
         July 3.10 133,507 2.89 125,709 3.29 583,497
         Aug 3.05 132,912 2.87 125,631 3.28 581,882
         Sep 3.12 135,674 2.87 123,701 3.28 580,155
         Oct 3.08 132,962 2.86 124,612 3.27 581,133
         Nov 3.07 133,346 2.85 124,895 3.26 584,312
         Dec 3.13 131,319 2.86 124,094 3.24 585,809
2014          Jan 3.10 129,373 2.86 124,931 3.24 585,957
         Feb 3.11 131,524 2.84 125,835 3.23 586,261
         Mar 3.23 133,290 2.84 126,844 3.22 582,771
         Apr 3.17 132,664 2.83 130,113 3.21 583,996
         May 3.14 133,191 2.81 130,069 3.20 586,337
         June 3.11 138,116 2.76 129,524 3.18 582,780
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          June
0.44 888,922 0.77 6,939 1.41 633 1.46 1,345 0.87 528,594 1.18 80,868
         July 0.43 895,155 0.74 8,578 1.26 765 1.37 1,475 0.86 527,971 1.14 79,828
         Aug 0.42 904,740 0.75 7,310 1.17 546 1.36 1,130 0.85 528,142 1.12 78,869
         Sep 0.41 905,458 0.73 7,130 1.16 586 1.45 1,237 0.85 527,842 1.09 78,103
         Oct 0.40 915,399 0.71 7,583 1.06 883 1.44 1,553 0.82 527,870 1.06 78,030
         Nov 0.39 935,789 0.74 7,097 1.09 869 1.58 1,750 0.83 527,862 1.02 77,998
         Dec 0.39 931,980 0.66 7,630 1.06 700 1.48 1,406 0.79 532,012 0.99 77,698
2014          Jan 0.38 937,354 0.75 8,957 1.10 837 1.58 1,785 0.77 531,516 0.96 77,239
         Feb 0.38 945,510 0.78 7,933 0.99 810 1.34 1,514 0.80 531,906 0.94 77,471
         Mar 0.37 942,554 0.69 7,426 0.98 583 1.33 1,496 0.72 530,731 0.92 77,451
         Apr 0.36 953,725 0.68 8,300 1.03 808 1.29 1,523 0.73 529,024 0.91 77,285
         May 0.36 964,096 0.66 7,869 0.92 690 1.33 1,895 0.72 528,416 0.88 77,128
         June 0.35 963,948 0.65 7,904 1.02 595 1.36 1,420 0.70 528,104 0.84 76,049
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          June
0.17 300,393 0.21 14,370 0.60 408 1.21 247
         July 0.16 305,708 0.20 15,631 0.96 460 1.60 538
         Aug 0.16 312,892 0.17 16,639 0.73 516 1.62 191
         Sep 0.16 318,355 0.17 17,489 0.72 463 1.38 224
         Oct 0.16 321,180 0.15 18,642 0.71 381 1.48 277
         Nov 0.16 322,015 0.16 17,258 0.72 383 1.46 232
         Dec 0.16 328,291 0.23 23,419 0.79 367 1.63 428
2014          Jan 0.15 320,229 0.24 25,407 0.66 391 1.36 417
         Feb 0.15 315,847 0.23 22,970 0.65 371 2.07 265
         Mar 0.17 313,232 0.22 22,601 0.67 525 1.03 389
         Apr 0.17 315,372 0.26 26,114 0.68 576 1.04 345
         May 0.16 318,469 0.25 27,178 0.60 432 0.91 390
         June 0.14 314,270 0.18 24,006 0.54 313 1.02 615
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          June
1.84 4,485 3.65 886 2.81 2,651 2.01 2,768 3.85 657 2.76 1,497
         July 1.92 5,623 3.30 1,332 3.01 3,583 2.20 3,201 3.41 999 3.00 2,019
         Aug 1.93 4,052 3.55 961 3.03 2,398 2.04 2,464 3.75 628 2.97 1,568
         Sep 1.93 4,695 3.56 900 3.03 2,472 2.08 2,756 3.67 669 2.96 1,331
         Oct 1.85 5,116 3.48 1,047 3.09 2,141 2.05 2,979 3.62 760 3.04 1,271
         Nov 1.89 3,676 3.61 909 2.99 2,024 2.11 2,160 3.78 666 2.92 1,275
         Dec 1.87 6,139 3.45 1,098 2.90 2,922 2.01 3,261 3.57 858 2.85 1,729
2014          Jan 1.98 5,139 3.38 1,102 2.91 2,188 2.31 2,887 3.49 806 2.83 1,438
         Feb 1.89 3,836 3.32 902 2.94 2,153 2.21 2,252 3.63 622 2.85 1,223
         Mar 2.06 4,627 3.50 1,162 2.89 2,841 2.32 2,832 3.68 694 2.86 1,427
         Apr 2.02 4,931 3.47 1,092 2.91 2,814 2.23 2,924 3.64 778 2.88 1,368
         May 1.96 4,047 3.52 1,023 2.84 2,136 2.26 2,277 3.74 789 2.75 1,213
         June 2.04 4,244 3.46 947 2.77 2,325 2.29 2,614 3.62 712 2.72 1,346
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2013          June 6.41 6.29 5,396 5.46 618 5.03 2,399 7.77 2,379
         July 6.52 6.42 5,990 5.28 480 5.15 2,708 7.84 2,802
         Aug 6.44 6.34 5,253 5.40 554 5.09 2,288 7.73 2,411
         Sep 6.40 6.32 4,759 5.79 379 5.02 2,195 7.71 2,185
         Oct 6.40 6.33 5,232 5.95 504 5.02 2,417 7.77 2,311
         Nov 6.31 6.22 4,766 5.78 592 5.01 2,218 7.73 1,956
         Dec 5.97 5.87 4,327 5.32 588 5.00 2,254 7.41 1,485
2014          Jan 6.56 6.47 5,445 5.73 538 5.20 2,478 7.93 2,429
         Feb 6.40 6.32 5,076 5.87 591 5.09 2,300 7.73 2,185
         Mar 6.19 6.12 5,954 5.72 832 4.99 2,702 7.51 2,420
         Apr 6.26 6.20 5,613 5.44 395 4.92 2,606 7.59 2,612
         May 6.34 6.25 5,665 5.33 497 5.02 2,520 7.59 2,648
         June 6.26 6.24 5,572 5.17 407 5.00 2,438 7.51 2,727
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          June . 4.15 274 3.65 43 4.66 155 3.41 76
         July . 4.09 334 3.27 60 4.74 171 3.48 103
         Aug . 4.16 259 3.49 44 4.69 137 3.60 78
         Sep . 4.28 246 3.47 33 4.67 143 3.87 70
         Oct . 4.37 250 3.63 38 4.70 146 4.07 66
         Nov . 4.40 221 3.64 35 4.71 133 4.12 53
         Dec . 4.24 247 3.48 42 4.63 149 3.79 56
2014          Jan . 4.04 245 2.65 61 4.73 122 4.06 62
         Feb . 4.35 217 3.11 33 4.84 119 4.10 65
         Mar . 4.23 261 3.41 53 4.75 138 3.84 70
         Apr . 3.99 248 2.15 52 4.63 133 4.14 63
         May . 4.32 220 3.57 22 4.64 129 3.97 69
         June . 4.21 215 3.43 28 4.64 121 3.76 66
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          June 2.71 2.64 16,804 2.79 2,317 2.31 2,054 2.57 6,758 2.78 5,675
         July 2.78 2.71 21,404 2.80 3,304 2.39 2,727 2.67 9,161 2.85 6,212
         Aug 2.87 2.79 16,749 2.81 2,302 2.45 2,166 2.74 7,027 2.97 5,254
         Sep 2.92 2.86 15,567 2.86 2,266 2.46 2,017 2.82 6,594 3.07 4,690
         Oct 2.97 2.89 17,153 2.75 3,065 2.53 2,373 2.91 7,044 3.14 4,671
         Nov 2.98 2.90 14,279 2.82 2,106 2.51 1,912 2.91 5,686 3.09 4,575
         Dec 2.90 2.83 14,896 2.75 2,436 2.45 2,119 2.85 6,169 3.04 4,172
2014          Jan 2.94 2.84 16,675 2.70 3,082 2.54 2,460 2.86 6,752 3.07 4,381
         Feb 2.90 2.83 15,089 2.85 2,762 2.43 2,061 2.81 5,540 3.02 4,726
         Mar 2.82 2.75 16,442 2.75 2,449 2.36 2,266 2.73 6,455 2.94 5,272
         Apr 2.85 2.75 17,947 2.69 2,754 2.40 2,574 2.71 7,202 3.02 5,417
         May 2.73 2.66 16,015 2.70 2,259 2.33 2,229 2.63 6,506 2.84 5,021
         June 2.65 2.58 15,767 2.49 2,436 2.31 2,091 2.55 6,359 2.79 4,881
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          June . 2.53 8,137 2.49 958 2.18 1,039 2.51 3,326 2.70 2,814
         July . 2.60 10,324 2.65 1,236 2.27 1,392 2.58 4,435 2.76 3,261
         Aug . 2.69 7,910 2.51 979 2.33 1,045 2.68 3,307 2.91 2,579
         Sep . 2.76 7,391 2.65 860 2.36 1,045 2.76 3,193 2.99 2,293
         Oct . 2.84 8,293 2.64 1,219 2.49 1,268 2.87 3,471 3.09 2,335
         Nov . 2.83 6,718 2.68 801 2.45 969 2.85 2,709 3.03 2,239
         Dec . 2.74 6,812 2.55 895 2.34 1,066 2.80 2,849 2.95 2,002
2014          Jan . 2.79 7,816 2.68 1,079 2.48 1,271 2.80 3,255 3.01 2,211
         Feb . 2.80 7,211 2.87 1,276 2.37 1,011 2.76 2,664 2.99 2,260
         Mar . 2.69 7,808 2.69 954 2.31 1,152 2.66 3,125 2.90 2,577
         Apr . 2.73 8,786 2.61 1,159 2.35 1,336 2.65 3,499 3.07 2,792
         May . 2.60 7,592 2.61 923 2.24 1,110 2.58 3,109 2.80 2,450
         June . 2.53 7,151 2.41 901 2.20 1,017 2.50 2,955 2.76 2,278
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2014
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          June
9.50 46,126 9.52 39,588 14.65 4,127 4.32 69,789 4.34 69,530
         July 9.55 44,772 9.51 38,381 14.58 4,136 4.30 66,621 4.31 66,406
         Aug 9.44 44,307 9.49 37,586 14.60 4,183 4.22 66,681 4.24 66,472
         Sep 9.48 46,356 9.54 39,542 14.63 4,254 4.31 69,234 4.33 68,982
         Oct 9.43 44,775 9.44 38,011 14.63 4,258 4.26 66,570 4.28 66,316
         Nov 9.35 42,848 9.30 36,099 14.64 4,288 4.21 67,193 4.23 66,944
         Dec 9.30 45,730 9.41 38,335 14.62 4,358 4.28 66,825 4.30 66,572
2014          Jan 9.36 43,888 9.38 37,050 14.51 4,288 4.27 65,336 4.29 65,106
         Feb 9.31 43,418 9.29 36,571 14.55 4,259 4.28 66,556 4.31 66,281
         Mar 9.33 45,617 9.34 38,706 14.58 4,313 4.39 68,638 4.41 68,379
         Apr 9.20 43,618 9.27 37,048 15.35 3,587 4.38 66,730 4.39 66,493
         May 9.21 42,626 9.22 36,563 15.42 3,566 4.39 66,148 4.41 65,901
         June 9.26 44,675 9.30 38,374 15.43 3,636 4.35 69,615 4.37 69,358
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          June 2.97 7,849 3.62 902 2.67 1,260 1.75 41,928 2.58 2,153 2.80 5,651
         July 2.95 8,387 3.57 1,131 2.80 1,489 1.71 43,328 2.84 2,497 3.00 6,045
         Aug 2.80 6,715 3.66 830 2.80 1,275 1.70 32,698 2.51 1,386 2.83 4,394
         Sep 2.97 7,696 3.69 822 2.82 1,074 1.80 38,460 2.84 1,757 2.87 4,817
         Oct 2.92 8,264 3.61 992 2.95 1,181 1.79 42,301 2.86 2,872 3.03 4,462
         Nov 2.99 6,860 3.69 903 2.85 1,022 1.70 32,900 2.43 1,180 2.70 5,032
         Dec 3.01 7,750 3.59 1,032 2.74 1,380 1.86 44,537 2.62 3,368 2.75 8,311
2014          Jan 2.92 7,777 3.50 995 2.93 1,164 1.85 40,304 2.41 1,534 2.82 4,479
         Feb 2.97 6,822 3.67 726 2.87 1,009 1.71 32,393 2.14 1,285 2.91 3,721
         Mar 3.01 8,295 3.54 1,018 2.80 1,121 1.91 37,918 2.53 1,289 2.77 4,529
         Apr 2.95 8,017 3.54 1,087 2.73 1,156 1.83 44,756 2.34 1,752 2.87 4,473
         May 3.06 7,005 3.64 919 2.63 1,102 1.74 36,580 2.19 1,457 2.66 3,829
         June 2.97 7,708 3.61 907 2.59 1,098 1.65 43,029 2.31 2,260 2.42 5,386
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          June 2.82 948 2.82 124 2.50 336 2.10 6,829 2.51 1,058 2.55 1,344
         July 2.83 1,301 2.85 184 2.63 468 2.20 7,145 2.98 985 2.95 1,621
         Aug 2.82 799 3.08 130 2.61 404 2.14 4,994 2.60 459 2.86 1,245
         Sep 2.87 904 2.80 138 2.65 318 2.10 5,972 3.08 926 2.71 1,439
         Oct 2.67 1,133 2.88 153 2.79 326 2.22 8,531 2.99 1,523 2.92 1,288
         Nov 2.88 746 2.97 114 2.77 274 2.11 4,596 2.75 415 2.65 1,445
         Dec 2.83 912 2.75 154 2.55 449 2.24 6,744 2.35 1,542 2.73 3,014
2014          Jan 2.71 1,122 2.69 161 2.85 324 2.16 8,627 2.65 519 2.87 1,224
         Feb 2.86 772 2.72 105 2.66 316 2.16 4,281 2.39 300 2.73 796
         Mar 2.81 1,000 2.72 145 2.70 320 2.27 5,618 2.74 408 2.66 994
         Apr 2.66 1,161 2.73 152 2.60 340 2.09 9,522 2.31 658 2.98 1,495
         May 2.86 862 2.71 118 2.48 358 2.23 5,063 2.60 477 2.64 984
         June 2.87 952 2.67 119 2.46 344 2.07 4,951 2.33 1,055 2.22 1,518
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2012          Q1 2,058.3 1,994.4 572.5 248.3 275.5 222.1 549.8 62.4 63.8 63.9
         Q2 2,078.0 2,013.1 568.9 259.6 275.6 221.0 561.3 62.6 64.0 64.9
         Q3 2,124.8 2,059.2 566.1 277.5 277.0 223.5 588.0 62.9 64.3 65.6
         Q4 2,157.2 2,090.9 560.1 289.6 278.4 223.7 611.6 63.1 64.4 66.3
2013          Q1 2,196.3 2,129.1 559.9 304.0 280.3 225.2 629.3 64.9 65.6 67.2
         Q2 2,190.5 2,122.6 554.2 306.4 280.5 224.6 626.6 64.7 65.6 67.9
         Q3 2,207.7 2,138.3 546.9 311.8 284.0 224.3 641.8 64.6 64.9 69.4
         Q4 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2014          Q1 2,309.5 2,236.1 541.4 349.0 290.0 228.7 693.2 67.4 66.5 73.4
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2012          Q1 1,620.6 1,578.7 415.4 211.4 249.4 210.3 381.3 58.6 52.5 41.9
         Q2 1,635.4 1,592.7 412.5 220.6 249.3 209.0 389.9 58.7 52.6 42.7
         Q3 1,671.2 1,628.1 409.4 236.7 250.6 211.3 408.6 58.8 52.7 43.0
         Q4 1,694.4 1,651.1 403.7 247.6 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013          Q1 1,726.1 1,682.3 402.1 261.5 253.5 212.5 438.2 60.7 53.8 43.8
         Q2 1,719.6 1,675.3 397.2 262.2 253.8 211.9 436.1 60.5 53.7 44.3
         Q3 1,730.7 1,685.2 390.1 266.6 256.8 211.3 447.2 60.4 52.8 45.5
         Q4 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2014          Q1 1,804.7 1,757.6 382.7 298.7 262.5 213.7 483.9 63.0 53.3 47.1
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2012          Q1 437.7 415.7 157.1 36.9 26.1 11.8 168.5 3.9 11.3 22.0
         Q2 442.6 420.4 156.4 39.0 26.2 12.0 171.4 3.9 11.4 22.2
         Q3 453.6 431.1 156.7 40.9 26.4 12.2 179.4 4.0 11.5 22.5
         Q4 462.8 439.8 156.5 42.0 26.7 12.3 186.5 4.1 11.7 23.0
2013          Q1 470.3 446.8 157.8 42.5 26.8 12.7 191.1 4.2 11.8 23.4
         Q2 470.9 447.3 157.0 44.2 26.7 12.8 190.6 4.2 11.9 23.6
         Q3 477.0 453.1 156.8 45.2 27.3 12.9 194.6 4.3 12.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2014          Q1 504.8 478.5 158.7 50.3 27.5 15.0 209.3 4.4 13.2 26.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2014
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2012          Q1 2,058.3 19.4 72.9 134.6 1,652.9 1,383.4 269.6 71.8 106.6
         Q2 2,078.0 18.7 75.5 123.0 1,667.9 1,398.2 269.7 71.5 121.3
         Q3 2,124.8 19.3 77.2 141.1 1,684.5 1,414.5 270.0 71.4 131.3
         Q4 2,157.2 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,703.2 1,432.0 271.2 71.4 124.0
2013          Q1 2,196.3 21.4 78.1 169.7 1,739.0 1,460.7 278.3 72.8 115.3
         Q2 2,190.5 17.8 79.0 172.1 1,751.6 1,474.0 277.6 73.1 97.0
         Q3 2,207.7 16.5 79.6 177.0 1,766.0 1,488.6 277.3 73.4 95.3
         Q4 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2014          Q1 2,309.5 16.3 83.4 191.3 1,831.5 1,539.1 292.4 76.0 111.0
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2012          Q1 1,620.6 19.4 69.1 128.8 1,245.0 975.9 269.1 69.9 88.4
         Q2 1,635.4 18.7 71.5 117.7 1,256.4 987.1 269.3 69.7 101.4
         Q3 1,671.2 19.3 73.2 135.0 1,268.5 998.9 269.6 69.6 105.6
         Q4 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013          Q1 1,726.1 21.4 74.0 162.3 1,308.8 1,031.0 277.8 70.9 88.6
         Q2 1,719.6 17.8 74.8 164.5 1,317.7 1,040.5 277.2 71.2 73.7
         Q3 1,730.7 16.5 75.4 169.2 1,326.8 1,050.0 276.9 71.4 71.4
         Q4 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2014          Q1 1,804.7 16.3 79.0 183.0 1,369.7 1,077.7 292.0 74.0 82.8
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2012          Q1 437.7 − 3.9 5.8 407.9 407.5 0.5 1.9 18.2
         Q2 442.6 − 3.9 5.3 411.5 411.1 0.5 1.9 19.9
         Q3 453.6 − 4.0 6.1 416.0 415.6 0.4 1.9 25.7
         Q4 462.8 − 4.1 6.9 423.3 422.8 0.4 1.9 26.6
2013          Q1 470.3 − 4.1 7.4 430.1 429.7 0.5 1.9 26.7
         Q2 470.9 − 4.2 7.5 433.9 433.5 0.5 1.9 23.3
         Q3 477.0 − 4.2 7.8 439.1 438.7 0.5 2.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2014          Q1 504.8 − 4.4 8.3 461.9 461.4 0.5 2.0 28.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing pro- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
visions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2014
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2002 175,396 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 51,361 60,476 13,536 . 46,940 114,920
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 36,638 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 23,064 − 17,173 − 94,793 36,805 40,814 53,811
2012 54,965 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,382 7,184 − 42,017 − 3,573 52,774 47,781
2013 − 11,186 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 90,429 24,256 − 25,778 − 12,708 62,744 − 35,442
2013          Aug 929 − 6,470 − 12,968 70 6,428 7,399 − 2,952 1,447 − 1,568 − 2,831 3,881
         Sep − 4,645 − 4,784 − 560 − 1,743 − 2,481 139 − 5,965 − 6,077 − 351 463 1,320
         Oct 7,451 5,582 − 5,401 5,716 5,266 1,869 6,018 − 3,717 − 751 10,486 1,433
         Nov 19,214 4,316 − 8,410 − 1,251 13,977 14,898 6,386 7,717 − 167 − 1,164 12,828
         Dec − 38,456 − 39,871 − 24,847 − 4,973 − 10,051 1,415 − 4,338 − 4,647 − 1,215 1,524 − 34,118
2014          Jan 6,624 2,476 3,705 3,516 − 4,744 4,147 − 4,478 − 4,149 − 1,511 1,182 11,102
         Feb 4,043 691 − 8,978 409 9,260 3,352 − 9,935 − 1,895 − 560 − 7,480 13,978
         Mar 5,306 − 14,577 − 12,262 − 1,890 − 425 19,883 15,646 641 − 203 15,208 − 10,340
         Apr − 6,811 − 23,586 − 12,132 635 − 12,088 16,775 7,854 1,680 − 1,786 7,960 − 14,665
         May 32,039 28,566 11,336 − 1,127 18,357 3,473 5,235 1,764 − 966 4,437 26,804
         June 1,737 − 5,765 − 9,400 − 4,686 8,321 7,502 3,553 − 2,228 − 1,632 7,413 − 1,816
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2002 39,338 9,232 30,106 18,398 − 23,236 41,634 20,941
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 23,718 21,713 2,005 38,558 670 37,888 − 14,838
2012 19,164 5,120 14,044 18,022 10,259 7,763 1,142
2013 30,015 10,106 19,910 24,993 11,991 13,002 5,022
2013          Aug 790 158 632 − 408 − 855 447 1,198
         Sep 1,609 188 1,421 248 3,053 − 2,805 1,361
         Oct 1,847 181 1,666 5,545 − 242 5,787 − 3,698
         Nov − 1,327 153 − 1,480 − 4,639 347 − 4,986 3,312
         Dec − 2,573 1,042 − 3,615 − 7,874 − 2,257 − 5,617 5,301
2014          Jan 3,931 115 3,816 11,526 8,586 2,940 − 7,595
         Feb − 4,284 599 − 4,883 − 9,985 − 11,608 1,623 5,701
         Mar 5,095 111 4,984 9,181 10,246 − 1,065 − 4,086
         Apr 2,250 136 2,114 12,035 9,932 2,103 − 9,785
         May 9,679 868 8,811 3,517 − 7,328 10,845 6,162
         June 11,395 9,015 2,380 117 168 − 51 11,278
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2013          Nov 128,109 79,061 1,435 1,276 63,765 12,585 7,094 41,954 −
         Dec 87,498 64,466 2,593 83 52,602 9,189 3,694 19,338 −
2014          Jan 139,700 84,157 3,375 739 67,865 12,178 8,279 47,264 −
         Feb 124,699 75,356 1,798 1,693 56,175 15,689 6,962 42,382 −
         Mar 106,104 67,913 1,311 1,140 51,987 13,474 6,396 31,795 −
         Apr 112,584 64,982 1,556 669 50,865 11,892 8,150 39,451 −
         May 126,094 76,179 147 1,356 58,774 15,902 5,531 44,384 −
         June 97,623 59,724 2,532 816 42,949 13,427 3,509 34,390 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,8502004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −
2013          Nov 34,143 9,962 995 1,266 2,947 4,754 3,910 20,271 −
         Dec 15,389 5,600 1,003 83 1,140 3,375 3,013 6,775 −
2014          Jan 47,766 19,040 1,966 678 11,913 4,483 5,450 23,277 −
         Feb 37,065 14,515 1,456 1,193 4,557 7,309 5,831 16,718 −         Mar 30,525 14,067 1,025 555 8,299 4,188 4,175 12,283 −
         Apr 37,733 11,784 1,456 669 3,499 6,159 6,284 19,665 −
         May 35,993 12,714 147 856 3,161 8,551 3,794 19,485 −         June 34,521 11,498 2,122 632 5,037 3,707 2,280 20,743 −
Net sales  6 
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,057
2013          Nov 13,485 − 6,268 − 452 − 1,779 − 1,315 − 2,722 1,627 18,127 − 15
         Dec − 38,645 − 26,745 − 258 − 2,089 − 14,217 − 10,180 − 3,261 − 8,639 − 264
2014          Jan − 16,657 669 1,245 − 6,460 14,678 − 8,795 1 − 17,327 −
         Feb 12,134 − 8,752 − 1,965 − 703 − 3,936 − 2,149 4,413 16,473 − 4         Mar − 16,495 − 14,777 − 862 − 956 − 9,313 − 3,646 505 − 2,223 −
         Apr − 17,187 − 12,316 − 18 − 1,898 − 10,837 438 5,177 − 10,048 − 2,500
         May 31,808 12,395 − 1,996 − 614 11,034 3,971 − 257 19,671 −         June − 5,487 − 5,439 − 544 − 5,692 6,003 − 5,206 − 3,862 3,813 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2014
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2013          Dec 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014          Jan 3,128,671 1,289,009 128,887 102,830 584,815 472,477 221,852 1,617,811 10,422
         Feb 3,140,805 1,280,256 126,922 102,127 580,879 470,329 226,265 1,634,283 10,419
         Mar 3,124,310 1,265,480 126,060 101,171 571,566 466,683 226,770 1,632,060 10,419
         Apr 3,107,123 1,253,164 126,042 99,273 560,728 467,121 231,947 1,622,012 7,919
         May 3,138,932 1,265,558 124,045 98,659 571,762 471,092 231,690 1,641,683 7,919
         June 3,133,444 1,260,119 123,501 92,967 577,765 465,886 227,829 1,645,496 7,919
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2014 
1,190,411 566,704 52,683 42,945 230,260 240,817 48,841 574,867 2,530    less than 2
650,738 290,574 34,025 26,314 142,287 87,948 36,027 324,137 1,935 2 to less than 4
447,752 182,498 21,782 13,070 101,514 46,130 41,383 223,873 204 4 to less than 6
270,268 92,341 7,729 4,397 51,442 28,772 18,649 159,280 341 6 to less than 8
239,806 44,584 4,847 3,566 17,576 18,595 16,244 178,979 1,333 8 to less than 10
77,666 28,553 2,276 2,204 14,731 9,342 6,702 42,410 599 10 to less than 15
43,847 10,854 16 242 5,155 5,441 3,011 29,983 10 15 to less than 20
212,955 44,011 142 228 14,800 28,842 56,975 111,969 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2013          Dec 171,741 − 70 280 − 0 − − 8 − 317 − 27 1,432,658
2014          Jan 171,660 − 81 65 1 − − 49 − 32 − 164 1,382,182
         Feb 171,638 − 22 131 0 17 − − 3 − 143 − 24 1,439,031
         Mar 171,576 − 62 96 200 0 − − 81 − 246 − 30 1,435,810
         Apr 171,385 − 191 100 36 1 − − 215 − 62 − 52 1,428,621
         May 171,398 13 52 1534−5 − 8 1− 1 20 1,455,934
         June 172,946 1,548 1,434 20 233 − − 7 − 24 − 108 1,445,714
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2014
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.162004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014          Feb 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.2 2.1 3.4 134.67 107.99 474.14 9,692.08
         Mar 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.2 2.1 3.4 134.70 108.16 467.04 9,555.91
         Apr 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.1 2.0 3.3 134.91 108.60 465.58 9,603.23
         May 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.0 1.9 3.2 136.00 109.49 474.47 9,943.27         June 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.3 0.9 1.8 3.0 136.38 109.92 469.36 9,833.07
         July 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 0.8 1.6 2.8 136.83 110.37 447.74 9,407.48
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- end Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2002 66,571 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 7,089 67,251 2,100 3,007 65,151 4,082 − 680
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,7932004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,497 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,277 39,401 − 7,576 − 694 46,977 1,970 7,0952012 111,639 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,696 115,438 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,500 23,257 − 3,7992013 122,658 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,321 116,657 771 100 115,886 31,220 6,001
2013          Dec 14,437 13,930 520 15 − 40 398 13,410 507 13,927 − 1,662 − 1,537 15,589 2,044 5102014          Jan 7,048 4,613 750 124 − 15 479 3,863 2,435 6,350 − 365 − 451 6,715 2,886 698
         Feb 12,757 8,445 2,163 − 52 2,426 114 6,282 4,312 12,737 − 99 243 12,836 4,069 20         Mar 13,527 10,588 − 173 − 205 − 558 192 10,761 2,939 14,325 121 322 14,204 2,617 − 798
         Apr 5,268 2,764 192 14 − 254 181 2,573 2,504 8,707 2,236 − 731 6,471 3,235 − 3,439
         May 7,434 6,762 1,519 − 20 1,081 158 5,243 672 4,590 − 2,624 − 220 7,214 892 2,845         June 10,089 4,615 766 − 80 224 290 3,849 5,473 8,840 849 1,001 7,991 4,472 1,249
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
1  Acquisition of financial assets and financing of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  € billion
2012 2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 66.7 86.4 68.3 22.2 19.9 23.3 9.1 17.3 10.3 31.6 10.3
Debt securities 2 − 1.9 − 17.0 − 15.0 − 2.4 − 4.7 − 7.2 − 4.6 − 5.5 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6
Shares 16.1 − 3.4 − 5.7 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 2.6 − 0.6 − 4.3 − 3.5 2.9
Other equity 3.0 3.1 3.0 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.6
Mutual funds shares − 14.5 0.2 20.3 − 2.1 − 1.1 5.0 10.5 3.9 2.8 3.1 2.7
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 45.7 69.8 70.0 16.5 12.8 16.2 24.6 16.9 12.5 16.1 25.3
short-term claims 0.6 2.3 2.8 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.8
longer-term claims 45.2 67.5 67.2 16.0 12.2 15.7 23.8 16.2 11.9 15.4 24.5
Claims from companypension commitments 11.1 11.9 10.9 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.7
Other claims 
4 17.6 2.0 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 3.9 1.3 1.4 8.0 − 15.2 7.2
Total 143.8 152.9 147.4 38.5 30.0 34.6 47.0 36.9 31.9 31.6 49.2
  II Financing
Loans 11.6 15.1 11.6 6.8 6.1 3.3 − 3.6 5.9 8.7 0.7 0.4
short-term loans − 2.1 − 1.0 − 3.2 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.7
longer-term loans 13.6 16.1 14.8 5.9 7.1 4.1 − 2.1 6.2 8.7 2.0 − 0.3
Other liabilities 1.6 1.4 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Total 13.1 16.4 11.9 6.8 6.2 4.1 − 3.5 5.9 8.7 0.8 0.7
Corporations
I   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 14.0 6.6 5.9 − 10.2 4.7 33.5 − 46.0 − 16.2 50.6 17.5 − 34.0
Debt securities 2 4.9 − 2.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.2 1.4 − 2.1 1.2 − 0.7 1.2
Financial derivatives 14.8 9.3 6.8 3.9 2.2 3.4 1.3 2.9 0.7 1.9 2.7
Shares 19.6 20.7 15.3 − 6.5 5.5 15.3 10.6 0.8 8.5 − 4.7 7.1
Other equity 43.8 24.1 17.1 13.3 13.4 − 11.9 13.0 − 1.0 4.4 0.7 5.1
Mutual funds shares 8.2 − 0.2 7.4 1.0 0.7 3.3 4.5 − 1.0 2.1 1.9 1.1
Loans 5.3 26.5 − 10.6 12.1 0.6 3.4 5.3 − 1.1 4.3 − 19.1 7.9
short-term loans 10.2 16.3 10.4 11.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 10.3 − 1.8 2.8 − 0.9 8.9
longer-term loans − 4.9 10.2 − 21.0 1.0 2.4 3.6 − 5.0 0.7 1.5 − 18.2 − 1.0
Claims on insurancecorporations 
3 0.6 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
short-term claims 0.6 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 25.4 48.9 80.7 − 23.7 37.3 27.1 24.9 − 0.4 48.7 7.6 2.1
Total 136.7 134.6 123.9 − 9.8 64.1 72.3 15.3 − 17.7 120.9 5.4 − 6.3
  II Financing
Debt securities 2 7.6 18.7 12.8 3.9 7.1 4.7 9.1 3.2 − 0.5 0.9 1.2
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 7.4 2.9 1.5 1.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 0.1 − 0.3 1.0 0.1
Other equity 19.3 9.3 10.5 1.5 − 4.0 9.4 1.0 2.1 1.6 5.8 2.2
Loans 27.6 19.1 6.3 14.8 26.0 − 21.7 19.7 11.7 − 15.3 − 9.8 13.5
short-term loans 19.1 7.4 − 3.4 7.5 3.8 − 5.6 12.1 10.2 − 16.3 − 9.4 12.5
longer-term loans 8.5 11.7 9.7 7.3 22.3 − 16.1 7.6 1.5 1.0 − 0.3 1.0
Claims from companypension commitments 5.8 6.6 5.7 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4
Other liabilities 45.2 28.0 − 12.3 6.3 14.5 15.7 − 1.1 − 16.9 17.0 − 11.2 − 2.5
Total 112.9 84.6 24.5 29.1 45.6 10.7 30.7 1.6 4.0 − 11.8 15.9
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2014
IX  Financial accounts
  
2  Financial assets and liabilities of private non-financial sectors
(non-consolidated)
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2012 2013 
2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Households  1 
  I  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,927.5 2,014.9 2,082.2 1,971.4 1,991.4 2,014.9 2,023.1 2,040.4 2,050.6 2,082.2 2,092.2
Debt securities 2 247.1 238.2 216.0 245.4 244.8 238.2 231.7 221.9 220.0 216.0 214.6
Shares 221.5 259.2 299.5 229.9 250.0 259.2 267.8 264.4 279.5 299.5 306.3
Other equity 188.5 198.4 198.3 195.1 195.2 198.4 199.3 197.3 196.9 198.3 200.3
Mutual funds shares 394.9 420.1 449.5 401.7 414.8 420.1 435.0 430.8 439.7 449.5 457.9
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 1,401.1 1,477.9 1,552.7 1,437.7 1,455.2 1,477.9 1,504.2 1,522.2 1,535.6 1,552.7 1,578.0
short-term claims 71.4 73.7 76.5 72.6 73.2 73.7 74.5 75.2 75.8 76.5 77.3
longer-term claims 1,329.6 1,404.2 1,476.2 1,365.1 1,382.0 1,404.2 1,429.6 1,447.0 1,459.7 1,476.2 1,500.8
Claims from company
pension commitments 295.4 307.3 318.2 301.4 304.3 307.3 310.0 312.8 315.5 318.2 320.9
Other claims 4 38.4 37.1 36.5 38.2 37.9 37.1 37.0 37.0 36.7 36.5 36.5
Total 4,714.3 4,953.0 5,152.8 4,820.9 4,893.6 4,953.0 5,008.1 5,026.8 5,074.5 5,152.8 5,206.7
  II Liabilities
Loans 1,538.6 1,552.6 1,563.4 1,543.1 1,549.1 1,552.6 1,549.0 1,554.8 1,562.8 1,563.4 1,563.8
short-term loans 73.9 72.6 67.7 74.4 73.1 72.6 70.2 69.9 69.8 67.7 68.4
longer-term loans 1,464.8 1,480.0 1,495.7 1,468.7 1,475.9 1,480.0 1,478.8 1,484.9 1,493.0 1,495.7 1,495.4
Other liabilities 13.4 15.2 15.9 15.1 15.0 15.2 17.1 16.0 16.2 15.9 17.3
Total 1,552.0 1,567.9 1,579.2 1,558.1 1,564.1 1,567.9 1,566.1 1,570.8 1,579.0 1,579.2 1,581.1
Corporations
I   Financial assets
Currency and deposits 460.5 506.5 505.4 453.1 468.3 506.5 459.9 449.6 488.3 505.4 471.3
Debt securities 2 52.6 51.9 51.1 53.6 53.9 51.9 53.0 50.3 51.9 51.1 52.6
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 811.4 946.7 1,077.2 838.6 894.1 946.7 981.1 945.4 1,002.3 1,077.2 1,074.8
Other equity 401.2 440.5 450.4 434.9 446.8 440.5 453.7 446.4 448.0 450.4 458.6
Mutual funds shares 123.1 129.0 138.1 119.6 123.9 129.0 134.1 131.9 135.6 138.1 140.9
Loans 369.3 395.8 385.2 391.8 392.5 395.8 401.1 400.0 404.3 385.2 393.2
short-term loans 252.3 268.6 279.0 270.6 268.9 268.6 278.9 277.0 279.9 279.0 287.9
longer-term loans 117.0 127.2 106.3 121.2 123.6 127.2 122.3 123.0 124.4 106.3 105.2
Claims on insurance
corporations 3 41.9 43.3 44.7 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3 44.7 45.1
short-term claims 41.9 43.3 44.7 42.6 42.9 43.3 43.6 44.0 44.3 44.7 45.1longer-term claims . . . . . . . . . . .
Other claims 809.9 846.7 875.8 819.6 836.9 846.7 877.9 856.2 868.3 875.8 853.9
Total 3,070.0 3,360.3 3,528.0 3,153.8 3,259.3 3,360.3 3,404.4 3,323.7 3,443.0 3,528.0 3,490.4
  II Liabilities
Debt securities 
2 110.7 130.9 138.9 117.2 124.6 130.9 139.6 141.3 137.5 138.9 142.5
Financial derivatives . . . . . . . . . . .
Shares 1,110.5 1,373.6 1,664.7 1,166.3 1,294.9 1,373.6 1,430.9 1,389.6 1,503.6 1,664.7 1,672.4
Other equity 741.4 750.7 761.3 745.3 741.3 750.7 751.8 753.9 755.5 761.3 763.5
Loans 1,367.1 1,397.4 1,425.1 1,381.6 1,401.6 1,397.4 1,415.8 1,428.3 1,421.9 1,425.1 1,428.1
short-term loans 421.1 427.6 437.1 429.3 433.0 427.6 439.4 449.6 445.7 437.1 450.2
longer-term loans 946.0 969.8 988.0 952.3 968.5 969.8 976.5 978.7 976.2 988.0 977.9
Claims from companypension commitments 235.0 241.5 247.2 238.2 239.9 241.5 243.0 244.4 245.8 247.2 248.7
Other liabilities 879.6 907.8 909.4 900.9 911.9 907.8 924.8 888.6 905.5 909.4 898.1
Total 4,444.3 4,802.0 5,146.6 4,549.6 4,714.2 4,802.0 4,905.8 4,846.0 4,969.9 5,146.6 5,153.2
1Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2Including money market and supplementary pension funds. 4Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus
paper. 3Including private pension funds, burial funds, occupational pension schemes shares with insurance corporations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2008 − 1.9 − 16.6 − 1.2 + 9.0 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 73.7 − 38.6 − 18.4 − 2.5 − 14.3 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2, p − 104.2 − 82.9 − 20.1 − 5.2 + 4.1 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 22.0 − 27.3 − 11.3 + 1.4 + 15.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.4 − 14.4 − 6.8 + 5.2 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 pe + 5.3 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
2012          H1  p + 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 11.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.9
         H2  p − 5.8 − 6.5 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5
2013          H1  pe + 8.2 − 3.4 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 4.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  pe − 3.0 + 0.4 − 3.9 − 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2008 1,652.8 1,007.8 536.7 123.6 1.5 66.8 40.7 21.7 5.0 0.1
2009 1,770.7 1,076.7 578.5 130.0 1.3 74.6 45.3 24.4 5.5 0.1
2010 p 2,059.2 1,315.5 625.1 135.1 1.3 82.5 52.7 25.1 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,087.7 1,324.5 640.2 139.3 1.3 80.0 50.7 24.5 5.3 0.1
2012 p 2,161.0 1,369.1 664.7 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013 pe 2,147.0 1,372.8 647.1 143.6 1.3 78.4 50.1 23.6 5.2 0.0
2012          Q1 p 2,117.7 1,345.3 647.0 142.6 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.6 5.4 0.1
         Q2 p 2,163.5 1,374.2 666.1 141.9 1.3 81.9 52.0 25.2 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,154.1 1,357.4 672.3 141.3 1.3 81.1 51.1 25.3 5.3 0.1
         Q4 p 2,161.0 1,369.1 664.7 142.9 1.2 81.0 51.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,149.3 1,369.3 656.7 144.0 1.2 80.5 51.3 24.6 5.4 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,148.8 1,377.2 646.2 143.0 1.1 79.8 51.2 24.0 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,129.6 1,362.5 639.2 143.4 1.1 78.5 50.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,147.0 1,372.8 647.1 143.6 1.3 78.4 50.1 23.6 5.2 0.0
2014          Q1 pe 2,139.4 1,369.8 638.6 145.7 1.2 77.3 49.5 23.1 5.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1Unlike the fiscal bal- counts. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auc-
ance as shown in the national accounts, the deficit as defined in the Maastricht tion. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding
Treaty includes interest flows from swaps and forward rate agreements. The quarters. 
half-year figures correspond to the deficit/surplus according to the national ac-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2008 1,088.6 572.6 408.3 107.7 1,090.5 590.3 182.6 68.3 38.9 210.5 − 1.8 993.8
2009 1,072.7 548.1 410.8 113.8 1,146.3 623.6 191.0 63.5 41.6 226.6 − 73.6 969.1
2010 p 1,089.8 549.9 421.2 118.7 2 1,194.1 633.2 195.7 63.5 41.6 2 260.2 2 − 104.3 981.3
2011 p 1,157.2 592.8 437.0 127.4 1,178.7 633.2 199.5 65.7 43.6 236.7 − 21.5 1,040.3
2012 p 1,193.8 617.7 448.9 127.1 1,191.5 643.4 203.8 63.8 41.4 239.1 + 2.3 1,077.3
2013 pe 1,224.1 635.9 459.4 128.8 1,218.9 664.6 208.2 56.8 43.0 246.3 + 5.2 1,106.1
as a percentage of GDP
2008 44.0 23.1 16.5 4.4 44.1 23.9 7.4 2.8 1.6 8.5 − 0.1 40.2
2009 45.2 23.1 17.3 4.8 48.3 26.3 8.0 2.7 1.8 9.5 − 3.1 40.8
2010 p 43.7 22.0 16.9 4.8 2 47.9 25.4 7.8 2.5 1.7 2 10.4 2 − 4.2 39.3
2011 p 44.3 22.7 16.7 4.9 45.2 24.3 7.6 2.5 1.7 9.1 − 0.8 39.9
2012 p 44.8 23.2 16.8 4.8 44.7 24.1 7.6 2.4 1.6 9.0 + 0.1 40.4
2013 pe 44.7 23.2 16.8 4.7 44.5 24.3 7.6 2.1 1.6 9.0 + 0.2 40.4
Percentage growth rates
2008 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 7.9 + 8.2 . + 2.3
2009 − 1.5 − 4.3 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 4.6 − 6.9 + 7.2 + 7.7 . − 2.5
2010 p + 1.6 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 1.6 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 4.9 − 9.0 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.2 + 4.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.8 − 5.2 + 1.0 . + 3.6
2013 pe + 2.5 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 2.1 − 11.0 + 4.0 + 3.0 . + 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 1995. In the website. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and the EU share in
Monthly Reports up to December 2006, customs duties, the EU share in VAT revenue VAT revenue. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency
and EU subsidies were included in the national accounts’ data (without affecting the auction, which are deducted from other expenditure in the national accounts. 
fiscal deficit/surplus). This information can still be found on the Bundesbank’s

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2007 642.8 538.2 18.1 644.0 176.5 256.5 66.0 33.7 9.5 − 1.2 475.3 466.5 + 8.8 1,023.6 1,016.0 + 7.6
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.72009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.5 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.6 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 
p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 pe 745.2 600.0 14.6 769.9 217.9 285.3 70.3 43.3 25.5 − 24.7 536.1 518.8 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,178.6 − 7.5
2013 pe 761.5 619.7 14.7 771.3 224.4 286.6 66.2 42.5 23.8 − 9.8 537.4 531.7 + 5.7 1,198.4 1,202.5 − 4.1
2012          Q1 p 173.9 142.9 2.5 191.4 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 17.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.7 291.5 − 16.9
         Q2 p 190.3 150.4 2.7 178.5 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 11.8 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.1 280.2 + 16.0
         Q3 p 177.9 147.5 4.3 181.3 53.7 66.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 3.4 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.4 284.5 − 2.1
         Q4 p 200.2 159.4 4.9 212.5 58.7 73.6 7.2 16.5 14.9 − 12.3 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 314.4 316.6 − 2.2
2013          Q1 p 177.7 148.6 2.6 186.1 53.5 74.8 22.5 5.9 2.9 − 8.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.0 293.2 − 12.2
         Q2 p 193.4 155.3 4.8 182.9 54.4 68.6 14.2 8.4 8.0 + 10.5 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 301.6 290.6 + 11.0
         Q3 p 183.2 151.8 2.4 190.2 54.9 70.8 20.1 11.4 3.2 − 7.0 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 299.8 297.8 + 2.0
         Q4 p 204.8 164.1 4.6 205.9 60.6 70.9 10.5 15.5 8.3 − 1.1 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 322.0 314.6 + 7.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2007 278.1 292.8 − 14.7 273.1 265.5 + 7.6 169.7 161.5 + 8.2
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.42009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 
p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 pe 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 312.0 320.3 − 8.3 199.8 198.5 + 1.3
2013 pe 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.2 324.6 − 0.4 207.8 206.3 + 1.5
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.8 − 2.9 83.2 90.7 − 7.5 58.7 56.5 + 2.3
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.3 + 3.3
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.0 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 89.0 − 3.3 60.4 57.9 + 2.5
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.5 − 10.7 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2007 538,243 465,554 251,747 191,558 22,249 72,551 + 138 21,643
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2012          Q1 143,334 122,846 62,467 50,558 9,821 13,945 + 6,543 6,831
         Q2 150,393 129,545 72,573 51,679 5,293 20,978 − 131 6,878
         Q3 147,755 127,189 70,803 50,981 5,404 20,522 + 44 7,643
         Q4 158,564 139,383 78,958 54,628 5,798 25,739 − 6,558 7,145
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 ... 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 ... ... 6,803
2013          June . 55,652 30,347 23,133 2,172 . . 2,305
2014          June . 59,266 32,536 24,508 2,222 . . 2,268
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. 4Difference between local government’s share in the joint taxes received by
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state the state government cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are amounts passed on to local government in the same period. 5Volume of the pos-
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT itions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2007 493,817 204,698 131,774 25,027 22,929 24,969 169,636 127,522 42,114 6,975 85,690 22,836 3,983 28,263
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2012          Q1 130,623 56,569 34,106 8,456 5,471 8,537 48,966 36,340 12,626 275 20,059 3,629 1,126 7,777
         Q2 137,597 59,832 36,148 10,010 4,995 8,679 46,600 32,871 13,730 1,661 25,235 3,255 1,013 8,052
         Q3 135,170 54,841 36,582 8,877 2,532 6,850 49,147 36,232 12,915 1,841 24,423 3,718 1,200 7,981
         Q4 148,394 60,313 42,230 9,919 3,936 4,228 49,922 36,995 12,926 3,360 30,077 3,600 1,123 9,011
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059
2013          June 59,650 33,511 14,216 9,814 5,690 3,792 15,754 11,910 3,844 4 8,886 1,186 308 3,998
2014          June 63,460 35,348 14,879 10,558 5,534 4,376 16,490 12,659 3,831 6 9,855 1,418 342 4,194
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2013: 53.4:44.6:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2013: 22.3:77.7. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax taxes
2007 38,955 14,254 12,349 10,331 . 6,355 1,959 1,488 8,898 6,952 4,203 2,783 51,401 40,116 10,713
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,8072009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,377
2012          Q1 4,406 2,305 3,308 5,180 2,328 1,714 576 241 . 1,876 1,057 696 12,986 9,981 2,717
         Q2 9,707 3,550 3,644 2,011 2,258 1,966 490 1,610 . 1,683 972 601 14,457 11,166 3,048         Q3 10,015 3,610 3,183 2,161 2,005 1,567 506 1,376 . 1,913 1,210 594 14,426 10,545 3,604         Q4 15,177 4,678 3,489 1,785 1,852 1,727 549 820 . 1,917 1,066 617 13,529 10,652 2,648
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 ... ... ...
2013          June 3,486 991 1,878 554 663 829 149 336 . 612 343 231 . . .2014          June 3,716 1,239 2,009 579 1,130 700 168 316 . 711 495 212 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3 Notably betting, lottery and beer tax.   
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2007 236,642 162,225 72,928 235,459 201,642 13,665 + 1,183 12,196 11,270 765 46 115 4,819
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,6452009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2007 42,838 32,264 674 6,468 36,196 16,934 533 8,259 1,945 696 3,896 + 6,642 −
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2007 156,058 149,964 2,500 154,314 50,850 27,791 24,788 10,687 8,692 6,017 8,472 + 1,744
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2007 18,036 17,858 18,385 2,475 8,831 4,050 861 896 − 350
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 6222009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 
p 24,955 24,863 24,329 3,365 10,058 5,688 873 1,150 + 626
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2007 + 214,995 + 6,996 + 1,086 − 4,900 2007 1,540,381 4,440 456,900 68 317,473 761,500
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,9002009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 399,900 21 385,270 942,900
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,600 102 412,134 979,2002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,406 4,440 426,700 70 290,796 1,069,4002013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 
p 1,818,818 4,440 442,200 53 268,425 1,103,700
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,766,324 4,440 398,800 91 353,993 1,009,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,780,408 4,440 410,600 92 324,376 1,040,900
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,772,573 4,440 430,100 92 284,442 1,053,500
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,791,406 4,440 426,700 70 290,796 1,069,400
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 4,440 429,900 20 265,513 1,101,900
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 p 1,805,465 4,440 424,200 23 289,603 1,087,200
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 p 1,793,464 4,440 422,700 28 276,996 1,089,300
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 p 1,818,818 4,440 442,200 53 268,425 1,103,700
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 pe 1,808,826 4,440 437,900 28 241,693 1,124,765
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2014
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,396 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,179 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,766,324 54,692 410,585 226,486 7,869 647,077 2,134 303,188 91 109,759 4,440 2
         Q2 1,780,408 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,695 2,137 295,910 92 116,431 4,440 2
         Q3 1,772,573 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,513 1,893 286,823 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,791,406 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,364 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,773 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 288,855 20 111,515 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,805,465 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,394 1,516 294,488 23 111,634 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,793,464 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,115 1,464 278,690 28 111,886 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,818,818 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,728 1,397 294,578 53 110,190 4,440 2
2014          Q1 pe 1,808,826 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 687,424 1,314 282,673 28 110,341 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q1 1,093,828 52,161 126,956 226,486 7,869 646,696 2,134 17,894 − 9,190 4,440 2
         Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
State government
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q1 535,494 2,531 283,629 .... 153,643 51 95,639 . 1
         Q2 536,354 2,814 287,249 .... 143,830 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,322 1,949 302,720 .... 137,141 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,301 1,425 303,722 .... 133,278 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 p 537,836 270 307,046 .... 130,521 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 p 549,774 125 313,412 .... 137,859 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 pe 540,233 261 309,346 .... 132,119 10 98,495 . 1
Local government11
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 375 . 121,695 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 381 . 128,331 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q1 137,001 . − . . 381 . 131,651 40 4,930 . .
         Q2 136,603 . − . . 381 . 131,252 40 4,930 . .
         Q3 135,922 . − . . 381 . 130,571 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 137,552 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,195 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,881 . − . . 423 . 134,245 18 3,195 . .
         Q2 p 136,111 . − . . 423 . 132,475 18 3,195 . .
         Q3 p 136,559 . − . . 423 . 132,923 18 3,195 . .
         Q4 p 136,538 . − . . 423 . 132,902 18 3,195 . .
2014          Q1 pe 139,639 . − . . 423 . 136,003 18 3,195 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2012   2013   2014
  2011   2012   2013   2011   2012   2013   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2005=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.8 112.3 112.5 5.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 4.0 0.8 0.9 2.9 3.7Construction 106.7 104.2 102.9 4.6 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 2.1 − 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.0 1.0 2.0 7.0Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.0 104.6 105.5 2.7 0.6 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 2.4 1.0 2.2 2.2 3.3Information and communication 146.9 149.9 151.2 8.4 2.0 0.9 2.7 0.5 1.2 1.5 0.4 0.4 1.9Financial and insuranceactivities 117.9 120.0 115.6 2.2 1.8 − 3.7 1.1 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.5 − 3.4 − 7.5 0.3Real estate activities 110.8 112.6 113.8 3.5 1.6 1.1 1.8 1.2 1.2 1.0 1.0 1.4 0.6Business services 
1 107.0 110.1 113.6 3.1 2.9 3.2 3.1 2.0 1.2 3.9 4.0 3.6 3.7
Public services, education and
health 110.5 111.5 111.6 1.5 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.5 1.2Other services 105.2 106.7 106.0 0.2 1.4 − 0.7 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 0.4
Gross value added 111.1 112.0 112.5 3.3 0.8 0.5 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 2.6Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.6 3.3 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 1.3 2.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 105.7 106.5 107.5 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.0 0.5 − 0.4 1.3 1.8 0.9 1.1
Government consumption 111.3 112.3 112.8 1.0 1.0 0.4 1.1 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.8 0.1 0.5
Machinery and equipment 114.2 109.6 106.9 5.8 − 4.0 − 2.4 − 6.6 − 6.2 − 8.9 − 1.1 − 0.2 0.0 6.0Premises 112.3 110.8 110.6 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 3.1 − 7.0 0.6 2.4 2.0 10.2Other investment 
4 129.7 134.1 138.1 5.1 3.4 3.0 3.9 3.3 2.1 3.2 3.3 3.1 3.3
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.5 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.5
Domestic use 108.9 108.6 109.3 2.8 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.9 0.9 1.7 1.0 2.7Net exports 
6 . . . 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 1.3 0.8 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.5 0.4 0.1
Exports 136.0 140.3 141.6 8.0 3.2 0.9 3.2 0.5 − 2.6 1.5 0.9 4.0 5.5Imports 135.8 137.8 139.9 7.4 1.4 1.5 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.4 1.5 2.3 3.7 6.2
Gross domestic product 
2 110.4 111.1 111.6 3.3 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 1.3 2.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,498.4 1,533.9 1,573.1 4.4 2.4 2.6 1.7 2.2 1.1 3.1 3.5 2.4 2.5
Government consumption 499.6 514.4 531.4 2.5 3.0 3.3 3.1 3.1 3.5 3.4 4.0 2.4 3.1Machinery and equipment 181.2 175.0 170.9 6.2 − 3.4 − 2.4 − 5.9 − 5.5 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 0.0 6.2Premises 263.3 266.1 270.6 11.1 1.1 1.7 1.5 − 0.9 − 5.3 2.5 4.3 3.9 12.2Other investment 
4 28.6 29.4 30.0 4.5 2.6 2.1 2.8 2.8 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.6
Changes in inventories 5 3.2 − 10.3 − 6.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,474.3 2,508.5 2,569.8 5.1 1.4 2.4 0.8 1.1 0.8 2.8 3.5 2.6 3.9Net exports 135.7 157.9 167.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,321.4 1,381.0 1,387.2 11.2 4.5 0.4 4.5 1.7 − 2.6 1.1 0.1 3.1 4.6Imports 1,185.8 1,223.1 1,219.4 13.1 3.1 − 0.3 2.3 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.4 0.1 1.3 3.9
Gross domestic product 
2 2,609.9 2,666.4 2,737.6 4.6 2.2 2.7 1.9 1.8 0.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 4.3
IV Prices (2005=100)
Private consumption 108.4 110.2 112.0 2.1 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.5 1.7 1.7 1.5 1.4Gross domestic product 106.3 107.9 110.3 1.2 1.5 2.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.5 2.2 2.1 1.7Terms of trade 97.3 96.9 98.2 − 2.3 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 1.6 1.4 1.6 1.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,325.9 1,377.6 1,416.7 4.4 3.9 2.8 3.9 3.8 3.0 2.6 2.9 2.8 3.5Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 686.1 676.6 711.3 5.3 − 1.4 5.1 − 1.9 − 4.0 − 2.4 9.8 5.4 9.3 5.8
National income 2,012.0 2,054.3 2,127.9 4.7 2.1 3.6 1.8 1.5 1.0 4.9 3.8 4.6 4.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,668.9 2,730.1 2,813.8 4.7 2.3 3.1 2.0 1.9 1.0 4.1 3.3 3.8 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2014. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added software and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5In-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- cluding net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total 1 tion 2 Energy 3 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 4 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2010 99.5 99.2 100.1 99.4 99.5 99.3 99.4 99.5 99.5 99.3 99.3 99.2
2011 106.7 107.0 95.7 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.7 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
 
2013          Q1 101.2 77.0 104.9 104.2 102.6 108.3 100.7 97.5 105.4 104.6 105.9 112.3
         Q2 106.0 108.7 90.0 107.7 105.5 113.8 98.1 98.1 109.2 105.0 113.7 115.9
         Q3 107.3 117.4 91.1 108.0 106.0 112.9 98.8 101.3 109.4 106.1 112.2 114.0
         Q4 111.0 119.3 99.7 111.2 103.6 121.0 102.8 105.8 109.2 108.3 123.1 116.8
2014          Q1 r 105.1 87.5 99.0 108.4 106.6 113.4 102.3 100.4 111.5 106.6 107.7 123.1
 
2013          June 109.5 114.4 87.7 111.6 107.9 120.2 104.8 98.4 113.1 110.9 122.9 118.9
         July 107.7 119.8 91.1 108.1 108.0 111.7 97.0 100.4 110.9 105.2 113.1 109.2
         Aug 101.7 113.1 89.3 101.7 101.2 104.2 85.3 99.1 102.5 101.8 102.7 104.8
         Sep 112.6 119.3 92.8 114.2 108.8 122.7 114.2 104.4 114.9 111.3 120.7 128.0
         Oct 112.3 120.0 99.1 112.9 110.9 116.9 107.1 108.2 115.5 110.4 112.9 120.4
         Nov 116.1 121.2 99.4 117.6 110.1 128.1 111.7 109.1 117.5 115.5 122.9 134.0
         Dec 104.5 116.8 100.6 103.2 89.7 117.9 89.7 100.1 94.6 99.1 133.6 96.1
2014          Jan r 98.1 73.2 103.9 100.8 101.6 101.4 93.5 98.7 105.3 98.3 96.9 108.3
         Feb r 102.4 85.3 94.3 105.9 103.8 111.6 101.0 96.4 108.4 104.5 103.5 124.0
         Mar r 5 114.9 5 104.1 98.9 118.6 114.5 127.2 112.4 106.1 120.9 117.1 122.8 137.0
         Apr x 5 106.4 5 106.5 88.7 108.7 107.1 113.3 98.0 102.1 112.9 105.4 107.7 123.0
         May x 5 104.6 5 105.6 85.5 107.0 104.9 112.8 94.7 98.7 110.8 103.7 108.5 120.8
         June x,p 5 109.0 5 113.2 83.7 111.7 108.1 119.7 101.5 101.0 115.6 110.8 118.0 123.3
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 10.3 . + 3.3 + 11.7 + 14.8 + 12.8 + 9.2 + 1.8 + 16.4 + 16.4 + 10.2 + 24.8
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.4 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 9.7 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
 
2013          Q1 − 2.2 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 5.0 − 4.0
         Q2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 1.7
         Q3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 1.7 + 1.8
         Q4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.4 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 4.4 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 8.0
2014          Q1 r + 3.9 + 13.7 − 5.6 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 9.6
 
2013          June + 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.5 + 3.0
         July − 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 3.5 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 6.4 − 4.2 − 5.5
         Aug + 0.5 + 2.2 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 1.0 + 2.2 − 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.2 + 8.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 3.2
         Oct + 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.0
         Nov + 3.8 + 1.6 − 0.9 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 6.0 + 4.5 + 3.4 + 6.0 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 10.7
         Dec + 3.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 9.7
2014          Jan r + 4.9 + 13.3 − 2.0 + 4.9 + 3.7 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 6.0 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 12.6
         Feb r + 4.4 + 16.4 − 5.4 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 − 0.7 + 9.7
         Mar r 5 + 2.7 5 + 11.9 − 9.3 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 7.2
         Apr x 5 + 1.3 5 + 1.5 − 5.9 + 2.2 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 4.2 − 3.4 + 4.0
         May x 5 + 1.1 5 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 9.2
         June x,p 5 − 0.5 5 − 1.0 − 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 3.1 + 2.6 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 4.0 + 3.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, January 2010 onwards: Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to sector in the base year 2010. 5Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Until December to the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal
2009 excluding, from January 2010 including specialised construction activi- Statistical Office (on average + 3%). xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal
ties.2Data available from 2010. 3From January 2010 including electric power gene- Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Sur-
ration from renewable resources (wind- and solar power stations). 4Weights from vey or the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2009 79.8 − 24.4 77.8 − 26.3 79.4 − 24.5 94.6 − 12.2 86.8 − 14.5 97.2 − 11.7
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.6 + 28.0 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.5 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.5 − 5.5 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 2.0
2013          June 115.9 + 5.1 104.4 − 1.5 125.9 + 10.1 102.3 + 0.0 108.3 + 7.5 100.2 − 2.5
         July
108.9 + 1.6 104.3 − 1.1 111.9 + 3.4 111.5 + 1.5 99.0 − 1.1 115.9 + 2.5
         Aug 99.8 + 2.0 95.7 − 2.0 102.1 + 5.4 103.8 − 1.2 91.6 − 1.2 107.9 − 1.4
         Sep 112.3 + 7.4 102.0 + 1.5 119.6 + 11.6 111.9 + 4.4 111.5 + 0.0 112.2 + 6.1
         Oct 
111.2 + 2.9 107.6 + 3.6 113.8 + 2.4 112.0 + 3.9 110.0 + 7.3 112.8 + 2.8
         Nov 114.5 + 6.8 106.0 + 2.7 120.7 + 9.1 112.8 + 8.6 107.6 + 9.9 114.6 + 8.0
         Dec 107.7 + 5.6 90.2 + 0.7 121.9 + 8.7 94.8 + 2.5 88.5 + 6.2 97.1 + 1.5
2014          Jan 111.4 + 6.3 108.0 + 2.8 113.8 + 8.4 112.6 + 10.7 100.8 + 1.9 116.7 + 13.6
         Feb 113.0 + 5.9 106.0 + 4.1 117.4 + 6.6 116.8 + 8.7 97.6 + 2.2 123.5 + 10.7
         Mar 120.3 + 0.6 113.7 − 1.4 125.9 + 1.5 113.4 + 3.5 113.1 + 1.6 113.4 + 4.1
         Apr 112.4 + 5.8 105.7 + 2.6 117.9 + 8.2 107.2 + 4.9 108.2 + 7.3 106.9 + 4.1
         May 110.5 + 5.0 103.1 + 0.2 116.3 + 8.3 106.4 + 5.2 99.6 + 1.1 108.7 + 6.6
         June p 112.7 − 2.8 106.0 + 1.5 118.2 − 6.1 107.8 + 5.4 105.1 − 3.0 108.8 + 8.6
From the domestic market
2009 83.8 − 22.2 77.2 − 26.2 88.0 − 19.5 98.2 − 15.9 95.1 − 16.1 99.2 − 15.9
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.5 + 2.0 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2013          June 106.5 + 1.1 102.5 − 1.3 112.2 + 3.4 96.9 + 2.5 103.0 + 8.9 94.7 + 0.2
         July 106.6 + 0.9 104.1 − 0.9 109.5 + 2.3 104.7 + 2.0 99.0 + 0.6 106.7 + 2.5
         Aug 100.1 + 3.8 96.5 − 1.1 103.6 + 9.7 101.4 + 0.1 92.8 − 4.0 104.4 + 1.5
         Sep 106.0 + 3.6 100.9 + 0.0 111.2 + 7.3 105.1 + 2.1 113.6 − 1.0 102.1 + 3.4
         Oct 
105.4 + 2.1 103.6 + 0.9 107.2 + 3.7 105.5 + 1.0 117.3 + 4.6 101.4 − 0.4
         Nov 109.6 + 5.3 105.4 + 1.4 114.6 + 9.0 104.5 + 5.9 108.7 + 4.9 103.0 + 6.2
         Dec 94.0 + 1.6 87.9 + 1.7 101.7 + 1.3 84.5 + 3.3 81.4 + 1.2 85.6 + 4.0
2014          Jan 106.2 + 3.3 106.2 + 1.2 106.5 + 5.0 104.9 + 6.3 102.6 − 1.8 105.7 + 9.3
         Feb 107.0 + 3.3 104.2 + 2.8 109.4 + 3.8 109.7 + 3.6 99.9 − 1.9 113.1 + 5.3
         Mar 116.8 + 1.1 109.3 − 3.4 125.3 + 5.0 111.0 + 4.2 113.8 − 0.4 110.0 + 6.1
         Apr 107.7 + 5.0 104.3 + 2.7 112.3 + 7.3 100.0 + 4.7 107.5 + 5.1 97.4 + 4.6
         May 104.7 + 4.6 102.8 + 1.6 107.8 + 8.1 96.9 + 1.8 96.8 + 1.3 96.9 + 1.9
         June p 105.3 − 1.1 102.5 + 0.0 108.9 − 2.9 100.3 + 3.5 107.1 + 4.0 97.9 + 3.4
From abroad
2009 76.7 − 26.0 78.5 − 26.5 74.1 − 27.7 91.5 − 8.7 79.5 − 12.8 95.6 − 7.5
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.5 + 8.9 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.7 − 0.5 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2013          June 123.5 + 8.0 106.7 − 1.6 134.3 + 13.7 106.9 − 1.8 113.0 + 6.5 104.8 − 4.6
         July 110.8 + 2.1 104.6 − 1.4 113.3 + 4.0 117.4 + 1.3 99.0 − 2.6 123.8 + 2.6
         Aug 99.5 + 0.6 94.8 − 3.2 101.2 + 2.8 105.8 − 2.3 90.6 + 1.6 110.9 − 3.5
         Sep 117.4 + 10.2 103.4 + 3.4 124.8 + 14.0 117.8 + 6.3 109.6 + 0.8 120.7 + 8.2
         Oct 116.0 + 3.5 112.4 + 6.6 117.8 + 1.7 117.6 + 6.2 103.6 + 10.1 122.5 + 5.2
         Nov 118.5 + 7.9 106.8 + 4.4 124.5 + 9.2 119.9 + 10.6 106.6 + 14.7 124.5 + 9.4
         Dec 118.8 + 8.3 92.9 − 0.4 134.3 + 12.6 103.7 + 2.0 94.6 + 10.1 106.8 − 0.3
2014          Jan 115.7 + 8.6 110.1 + 4.5 118.3 + 10.3 119.2 + 14.3 99.2 + 5.4 126.0 + 16.9
         Feb 117.9 + 7.9 108.1 + 5.7 122.4 + 8.3 122.9 + 13.0 95.6 + 6.1 132.3 + 14.8
         Mar 123.2 + 0.2 118.9 + 0.9 126.3 − 0.6 115.4 + 2.9 112.5 + 3.6 116.3 + 2.6
         Apr 116.3 + 6.6 107.4 + 2.6 121.4 + 8.8 113.4 + 5.1 108.9 + 9.4 114.9 + 3.7
         May 115.2 + 5.3 103.4 − 1.3 121.6 + 8.4 114.5 + 7.8 102.1 + 1.1 118.8 + 10.1
         June p 118.8 − 3.8 110.1 + 3.2 124.0 − 7.7 114.2 + 6.8 103.3 − 8.6 118.0 + 12.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.4 − 5.2 94.2 − 12.2 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.3 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.3 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.8 + 13.1 96.0 − 3.8
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.6 − 0.2 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.1 103.3 + 7.6
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.4 + 4.1 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.3 111.7 + 3.8 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.2
 
2013          May 125.5 + 5.6 135.3 + 14.0 142.2 + 9.6 140.4 + 16.6 106.7 + 16.1 115.7 − 2.9 127.2 + 6.4 117.0 + 2.8
         June 145.9 + 11.7 157.6 + 15.3 182.0 + 12.0 158.1 + 22.0 108.0 + 0.8 134.2 + 7.8 151.3 + 18.5 125.9 + 4.2
         July 142.5 + 14.5 141.9 + 14.6 158.1 + 14.1 142.4 + 12.4 108.8 + 26.7 143.0 + 14.3 133.1 + 9.5 145.8 + 19.7
         Aug 123.8 − 1.2 124.1 − 11.8 144.8 + 5.9 121.1 − 19.3 92.4 − 23.3 123.4 + 12.2 119.3 − 10.8 119.9 + 7.1         Sep 125.9 + 5.0 135.7 + 4.9 152.8 + 10.1 132.8 + 1.4 110.8 + 4.5 116.1 + 5.1 130.5 + 3.0 110.4 + 4.6
         Oct 117.5 − 11.1 128.6 − 2.4 141.4 + 3.9 134.7 − 2.1 85.6 − 19.2 106.5 − 19.7 125.4 − 9.2 100.0 − 19.7
         Nov 106.6 + 16.6 119.6 + 18.4 122.9 + 0.7 132.4 + 34.1 75.0 + 12.4 93.6 + 14.4 123.1 + 30.8 83.2 + 8.9         Dec 106.3 + 13.8 120.0 + 11.0 136.9 + 11.8 121.3 + 6.9 82.9 + 29.9 92.5 + 17.5 113.6 + 8.0 86.5 + 24.3
2014          Jan 93.1 + 13.4 106.5 + 17.8 112.9 + 10.8 113.3 + 22.4 73.7 + 20.8 79.7 + 7.8 110.7 + 27.8 67.1 − 3.7
         Feb 102.3 + 4.2 112.9 + 12.0 134.0 + 23.7 114.3 + 9.6 67.0 − 11.4 91.7 − 4.1 106.4 + 2.0 85.3 − 3.0
         Mar 138.8 + 6.0 146.4 + 9.9 165.1 + 9.1 147.9 + 12.7 105.1 + 1.7 131.1 + 1.9 141.1 + 8.7 125.8 + 1.5
         Apr 134.0 + 8.4 133.3 + 2.5 170.1 + 17.2 121.6 − 3.1 95.9 − 16.2 134.7 + 15.0 125.4 + 6.5 128.3 + 6.1
         May 127.7 + 1.8 130.9 − 3.3 157.1 + 10.5 122.9 − 12.5 103.0 − 3.5 124.5 + 7.6 120.3 − 5.4 123.5 + 5.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles  3  (R)
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 100.1 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.2 100.2 + 0.8 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 3.0 100.0 + 2.5 100.2 + 3.8 99.3 − 4.7
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.1 + 1.1 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.2 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 4 106.4 + 1.8 101.4 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.6 + 1.3 95.5 − 3.5 102.4 − 2.0 103.4 + 3.0 104.7 − 1.0
 
2013          June 104.4 + 1.3 99.1 − 0.6 110.1 + 4.3 101.2 + 6.2 84.1 − 11.5 101.3 − 0.4 99.2 + 0.6 110.2 − 0.5
         July 106.4 + 2.3 101.5 + 0.4 111.7 + 6.7 103.3 + 0.8 85.4 − 8.0 103.2 − 1.6 106.4 + 3.7 106.4 − 1.5
         Aug 103.4 + 1.7 99.0 + 0.6 108.0 + 4.0 97.9 + 4.7 87.3 − 3.4 98.1 − 5.8 99.2 + 3.1 97.8 + 0.3         Sep 104.7 + 1.3 99.6 + 0.3 103.5 + 1.2 115.1 + 1.8 93.3 +
 0.0 102.0 − 1.6 101.8 + 6.2 105.1 − 0.7
         Oct 109.6 + 1.0 104.0 + 0.1 110.7 + 3.6 118.1 − 0.2 96.5 − 2.4 109.4 − 2.3 106.4 + 4.3 115.7 + 2.8         Nov 112.2 + 2.7 106.6 + 1.7 112.1 + 4.9 111.2 + 7.1 106.7 − 1.6 110.2 − 1.5 106.5 + 3.1 112.5 + 3.1         Dec 122.8 + 1.2 117.3 + 0.4 124.2 + 1.6 120.3 − 1.5 143.4 − 3.0 103.4 − 3.0 116.5 + 7.7 98.0 + 4.4
2014          Jan 99.4 + 2.1 95.0 + 1.0 101.4 + 1.9 90.0 + 3.3 99.3 − 2.2 88.1 − 1.1 105.0 + 5.0 92.4 + 8.2
         Feb 96.2 + 3.2 91.5 + 2.3 100.6 + 2.8 81.9 + 6.8 82.4 − 3.1 90.5 + 2.6 102.5 + 6.7 96.6 + 6.7
         Mar 111.1 + 2.7 104.9 + 1.8 115.6 + 3.5 109.4 + 11.1 86.3 − 9.7 111.6 + 3.2 109.2 + 3.7 119.7 + 5.1
         Apr 108.5 + 1.6 102.4 + 0.9 113.5 + 4.8 104.3 − 5.2 82.2 − 2.7 108.4 + 0.1 109.5 + 7.6 114.6 + 2.9
         May 107.8 + 0.2 101.9 − 0.1 111.6 + 1.3 106.2 + 1.8 83.4 + 1.1 104.5 − 3.1 106.6 + 5.4 111.3 + 1.3         June 107.1 + 2.6 101.5 + 2.4 113.9 + 3.5 101.8 + 0.6 82.6 − 1.8 100.3 − 1.0 109.3 + 10.2 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added advance returns for turnover tax (Umsatzsteuervoranmeldung) and primary data
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business collection, previously based on sample survey. 4Figures from January 2013 are provi-
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In sional, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to es-
stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3From January 2011 based on data from timates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2009 40,372 + 0.1 27,493 − 0.1 8,521 18,210 549 4,905 1,144 1,078 8 3,415 8 1,190 8 8.1 301
2010 40,587 + 0.5 27,757 + 1.0 8,426 18,438 679 4,883 503 429 3,238 1,075 7.7 359
2011 41,152 + 1.4 28,440 + 2.5 8,583 18,836 798 4,865 148 100 2,976 892 7.1 4662012 41,607 + 1.1 28,991 + 1.9 8,731 19,250 775 4,805 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013 41,847 + 0.6 29,355 + 1.3 8,776 19,598 743 4,794 124 77 2,950 970 6.9
r 457
2011          Q2 41,064 + 1.4 28,266 + 2.4 8,535 18,721 786 4,867 121 107 2,977 850 7.1 470         Q3 41,343 + 1.4 28,566 + 2.4 8,638 18,862 836 4,865 76 64 2,893 843 6.9 497         Q4 41,611 + 1.3 28,983 + 2.6 8,732 19,184 830 4,874 102 72 2,743 787 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,145 + 1.4 28,638 + 2.5 8,623 19,036 760 4,797 201 82 3,074 998 7.3 472
         Q2 41,545 + 1.2 28,860 + 2.1 8,696 19,149 773 4,798 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 41,779 + 1.1 29,077 + 1.8 8,770 19,265 799 4,803 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 41,961 + 0.8 29,391 + 1.4 8,835 19,550 767 4,823 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,394 + 0.6 29,016 + 1.3 8,689 19,405 702 4,765 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4
r 444
         Q2 41,749 + 0.5 29,214 + 1.2 8,737 19,508 726 4,779 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 r 459
         Q3 42,029 + 0.6 29,451 + 1.3 8,807 19,626 772 4,810 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 r 471
         Q4 42,214 + 0.6 29,738 + 1.2 8,872 19,853 772 4,820 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 r 455
2014          Q1 9 41,738 9 + 0.8 10 29,410 10 + 1.4 10 8,746 10 19,716 10 725 10 4,738 ... 10 59 3,109 1,078 7.2 r 452
         Q2 9 42,137 9 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,886 900 11 6.6 r 487
2011          Mar 40,679 + 1.5 28,080 + 2.5 8,477 18,632 759 4,836 246 143 3,211 1,010 7.6 442
         Apr 40,908 + 1.5 28,214 + 2.4 8,518 18,703 771 4,857 133 117 3,078 907 7.3 461         May 41,092 + 1.4 28,354 + 2.5 8,559 18,768 798 4,880 122 107 2,960 839 7.0 470         June 41,192 + 1.4 28,381 + 2.4 8,580 18,753 821 4,894 110 96 2,893 804 6.9 480         July 41,209 + 1.4 28,357 + 2.4 8,591 18,712 831 4,890 81 68 2,939 859 7.0 492         Aug 41,303 + 1.4 28,658 + 2.4 8,660 18,922 843 4,840 71 59 2,945 867 7.0 497         Sep 41,518 + 1.3 28,984 + 2.5 8,746 19,149 845 4,833 76 65 2,796 802 6.6 502         Oct 41,656 + 1.3 29,039 + 2.6 8,750 19,206 839 4,851 81 70 2,737 778 6.5 500         Nov 41,679 + 1.3 29,024 + 2.6 8,744 19,207 835 4,901 85 76 2,713 769 6.4 492         Dec 41,498 + 1.4 28,787 + 2.7 8,655 19,128 784 4,909 140 72 2,780 813 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,140 + 1.5 28,580 + 2.6 8,613 18,995 758 4,813 206 82 3,084 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,091 + 1.3 28,580 + 2.4 8,601 19,012 752 4,743 230 87 3,110 1,028 7.4 473         Mar 41,203 + 1.3 28,719 + 2.3 8,653 19,077 758 4,763 167 78 3,028 955 7.2 491         Apr 41,395 + 1.2 28,836 + 2.2 8,687 19,144 765 4,784 83 71 2,963 893 7.0 499         May 41,584 + 1.2 28,924 + 2.0 8,713 19,185 780 4,812 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 41,655 + 1.1 28,921 + 1.9 8,723 19,163 792 4,834 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 41,689 + 1.2 28,910 + 2.0 8,730 19,137 806 4,829 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 41,740 + 1.1 29,154 + 1.7 8,789 19,321 802 4,777 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 41,908 + 0.9 29,414 + 1.5 8,863 19,512 789 4,775 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,044 + 0.9 29,470 + 1.5 8,863 19,579 782 4,803 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,034 + 0.9 29,424 + 1.4 8,840 19,580 767 4,851 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 41,804 + 0.7 29,143 + 1.2 8,739 19,471 715 4,854 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,380 + 0.6 28,965 + 1.3 8,678 19,372 699 4,762 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4
r 420
         Feb 41,368 + 0.7 28,981 + 1.4 8,674 19,387 700 4,736 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 r 448
         Mar 41,433 + 0.6 29,062 + 1.2 8,692 19,439 700 4,740 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 r 463
         Apr 41,599 + 0.5 29,201 + 1.3 8,735 19,505 719 4,761 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 r 460
         May 41,787 + 0.5 29,277 + 1.2 8,752 19,542 734 4,796 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 r 457
         June 41,862 + 0.5 29,269 + 1.2 8,757 19,517 748 4,819 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 r 459
         July 41,939 + 0.6 29,266 + 1.2 8,765 19,484 773 4,829 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 r 469
         Aug 41,966 + 0.5 29,548 + 1.4 8,826 19,701 775 4,795 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 r 471
         Sep 42,182 + 0.7 29,810 + 1.3 8,903 19,868 785 4,795 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 r 473
         Oct 42,298 + 0.6 29,807 + 1.1 8,895 19,879 783 4,805 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 r 466
         Nov 42,271 + 0.6 29,758 + 1.1 8,882 19,861 776 4,841 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 r 458
         Dec 42,073 + 0.6 29,491 + 1.2 8,775 19,769 727 4,834 114 45 2,873 923 6.7 r 440
2014          Jan 41,701 + 0.8 29,348 + 1.3 8,731 19,676 721 4,734 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 r 425
         Feb 41,709 + 0.8 10 29,381 10 + 1.4 10 8,731 10 19,703 10 722 10 4,709 ... 10 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 r 456
         Mar 9 41,805 9 + 0.9 10 29,515 10 + 1.6 10 8,774 10 19,767 10 734 10 4,710 ... 10 56 3,055 1,026 7.1 r 476
         Apr 9 41,997 9 + 1.0 10 29,649 10 + 1.5 10 8,804 10 19,857 10 740 10 4,730 ... 10 61 2,943 938 6.8 r 485
         May 9 42,176 9 + 0.9 10 29,719 10 + 1.5 10 8,813 10 19,909 10 742 10 4,758 ... 10 60 2,882 893 11 6.6 r 481
         June 9 42,239 9 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,833 869 6.5 r 495
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,871 909 6.6 502
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and private employment agencies. 9Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Office. 10Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2012
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: and 2013, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal mum of 0.4 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given 0.9 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding mum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 11From May 2014, calculat-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located ed on the basis of new labour force figures. 
abroad. 8From May 2009, unemployed excluding persons formally on the books of

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2009 98.9 98.6 99.4 96.2 99.5 98.8 99.1 98.5 88.1 97.0 93.4 72.8 74.5
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.0 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.0 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.4 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
 
2012          Sep 104.6 105.0 102.5 119.3 102.6 102.7 107.3 121.4 105.2 108.5 143.2 111.9
         Oct 104.6 105.7 103.0 118.1 102.4 102.8 107.4 122.7 105.0 108.0 139.9 108.7
         Nov 104.7 107.0 102.8 116.7 102.7 102.9 106.3 107.4 125.2 105.1 108.0 138.5 107.0
         Dec 105.0 108.0 102.7 115.5 104.0 102.9 107.1 124.4 104.8 107.4 136.2 106.5
2013          Jan 104.5 109.0 101.7 118.1 101.9 103.2 107.7 123.7 104.8 107.3 138.6 106.2
         Feb 105.1 108.9 102.2 119.5 103.0 103.3 107.1 107.5 124.2 104.7 107.6 141.7 106.9
         Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 123.8 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 124.4 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 124.1 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 121.7 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 119.0 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 118.8 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 120.5 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 121.0 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 122.0 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 122.1 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 p 119.2 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 p 119.1 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 p 120.1 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 p 120.9 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 p 118.6 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 p 117.4 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 ... ... ... ... 127.7 95.6
Annual percentage change  
  
2009 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 − 5.4 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 4.2 − 19.0 − 2.2 − 8.5 − 33.6 − 19.0
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.0 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
 
2012          Sep + 2.0 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 7.0 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.5 − 1.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 9.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 6.0 + 3.4
         Nov + 1.9 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 10.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 3.9
         Dec + 2.0 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 10.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.7
2013          Jan + 1.7 + 4.5 + 0.9 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 10.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.9
         Feb + 1.5 + 3.1 + 1.0 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 8.9 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2
         Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 8.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 7.4 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 p − 3.6 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 p − 4.1 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 3.0 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 2.8 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 p − 4.4 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 p − 3.5 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... − 4.5 − 4.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2014
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2006
935.0 1.4 627.8 0.4 358.5 − 0.4 986.3 0.1 1,502.0 2.6 162.5 3.6 10.8
2007 965.9 3.3 646.2 2.9 353.6 − 1.4 999.8 1.4 1,524.8 1.5 168.1 3.4 11.0
2008 1,002.6 3.8 664.0 2.7 356.2 0.7 1,020.1 2.0 1,569.9 3.0 180.3 7.3 11.5
2009 1,003.8 0.1 667.7 0.6 384.1 7.8 1,051.8 3.1 1,562.9 − 0.4 170.3 − 5.5 10.9
2010 1,033.2 2.9 696.7 4.4 387.8 1.0 1,084.5 3.1 1,609.9 3.0 174.9 2.7 10.9
2011 1,081.7 4.7 723.4 3.8 384.2 − 0.9 1,107.6 2.1 1,672.0 3.9 173.6 − 0.7 10.4
2012 1,126.6 4.2 751.9 3.9 389.2 1.3 1,141.1 3.0 1,710.3 2.3 176.5 1.6 10.3
2013 1,161.2 3.1 773.2 2.8 397.6 2.2 1,170.7 2.6 1,747.2 2.2 174.1 − 1.4 10.0
2012          Q4 311.7 4.0 207.9 3.7 97.3 1.6 305.2 3.0 429.5 1.9 38.0 − 1.1 8.8
2013          Q1 270.0 3.2 180.1 3.0 100.3 2.5 280.4 2.8 428.0 0.6 56.3 − 3.1 13.1
         Q2 283.4 2.8 184.6 2.5 99.0 2.5 283.6 2.5 434.4 2.5 41.5 − 2.5 9.5
         Q3 286.9 3.2 195.1 3.2 99.5 2.1 294.6 2.8 445.1 3.2 37.7 − 0.4 8.5
         Q4 321.0 3.0 213.3 2.6 98.8 1.6 312.2 2.3 439.6 2.4 38.6 1.6 8.8
2014          Q1 279.7 3.6 185.6 3.1 99.8 − 0.4 285.5 1.8 438.6 2.5 57.5 2.1 13.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2014. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change 2005=100 change
2006 101.0 1.0 101.2 1.2 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8 100.8 0.8
2007 102.2 1.2 102.5 1.4 102.2 1.5 102.2 1.4 102.2 1.42008 105.0 2.7 105.4 2.8 105.3 3.0 105.5 3.2 104.6 2.32009 107.1 2.0 107.6 2.0 107.7 2.3 108.1 2.4 104.5 − 0.0
2010 108.8 1.6 109.4 1.7 109.5 1.7 110.0 1.8 106.9 2.3
2011 110.7 1.8 111.4 1.8 111.5 1.8 112.0 1.8 110.4 3.32012 113.7 2.7 114.3 2.6 114.7 2.9 115.1 2.9 113.6 2.92013 116.4 2.4 117.1 2.4 117.5 2.5 118.0 2.5 116.1 2.2
2013          Q1 107.8 2.8 108.4 2.9 108.8 2.9 117.0 2.9 109.1 2.3
         Q2 109.0 2.1 109.6 2.1 109.9 2.1 117.3 2.1 113.6 2.0         Q3 118.7 2.3 119.3 2.3 119.8 2.4 118.7 2.4 114.4 2.3         Q4 130.2 2.4 131.0 2.4 131.4 2.5 118.9 2.4 127.0 2.1
2014          Q1 111.4 3.3 112.0 3.3 111.8 2.8 120.3 2.8 111.8 2.5
         Q2 112.8 3.4 113.4 3.4 113.7 3.4 121.5 3.5 . .
2013          Dec 112.3 2.4 113.0 2.5 113.4 2.7 119.0 2.3 . .
2014          Jan 112.4 4.3 113.0 4.3 111.6 2.6 120.0 2.6 . .
         Feb 110.6 2.6 111.2 2.7 111.7 2.7 120.1 2.6 . .
         Mar 111.3 3.1 111.9 3.1 112.3 3.2 120.8 3.2 . .
         Apr 112.7 3.1 113.3 3.1 113.6 3.3 120.9 3.2 . .
         May 113.3 3.5 113.9 3.5 114.2 3.4 121.6 3.6 . .
         June 112.3 3.7 112.9 3.7 113.3 3.7 121.8 3.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2014. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2009 1,626.3 1,005.4 315.7 436.0 194.5 620.8 150.9 146.3 124.8 449.9 1,176.3 643.3 354.8 533.0 148.0 129.8
2010 1,748.3 1,077.5 334.5 459.6 213.2 670.8 169.5 170.1 132.5 514.6 1,233.7 657.9 354.8 575.8 147.1 151.4
2011 1,838.4 1,115.9 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.4 190.5 180.4 119.3 537.7 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.1 176.8 161.1
2012 1,904.4 1,178.0 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.3 189.8 179.0 126.0 561.4 1,342.9 719.5 380.8 623.5 179.5 160.6
2013 p 1,935.4 1,195.0 386.5 499.1 241.0 740.5 188.5 179.3 138.4 575.1 1,360.3 725.5 382.5 634.8 191.4 166.5
2013          Q1 1,944.9 1,187.9 383.6 491.9 252.4 757.0 192.6 196.7 127.8 555.8 1,389.0 745.1 388.7 643.9 192.1 157.4
         Q2 1,945.9 1,195.7 394.6 493.8 247.7 750.2 195.6 194.9 118.0 552.2 1,393.7 743.3 385.3 650.4 203.9 160.0         Q3 1,932.4 1,197.2 392.3 495.5 250.5 735.2 196.2 183.8 130.3 566.3 1,366.1 730.1 375.3 636.0 200.7 161.4         Q4
p 1,935.4 1,195.0 386.5 499.1 241.0 740.5 188.5 179.3 138.4 575.1 1,360.3 725.5 382.5 634.8 191.4 166.5
as a percentage of total assets
2009 100.0 61.8 19.4 26.8 12.0 38.2 9.3 9.0 7.7 27.7 72.3 39.6 21.8 32.8 9.1 8.0
2010 100.0 61.6 19.1 26.3 12.2 38.4 9.7 9.7 7.6 29.4 70.6 37.6 20.3 32.9 8.4 8.7
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.7 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 p 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.5 38.3 9.7 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2013          Q1 100.0 61.1 19.7 25.3 13.0 38.9 9.9 10.1 6.6 28.6 71.4 38.3 20.0 33.1 9.9 8.1
         Q2 100.0 61.5 20.3 25.4 12.7 38.6 10.1 10.0 6.1 28.4 71.6 38.2 19.8 33.4 10.5 8.2
         Q3 100.0 62.0 20.3 25.6 13.0 38.1 10.2 9.5 6.7 29.3 70.7 37.8 19.4 32.9 10.4 8.4
         Q4 p 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.5 38.3 9.7 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2009 1,284.5 765.6 205.6 334.1 180.7 518.8 134.7 113.8 99.5 346.0 938.4 505.4 261.6 433.1 129.3 89.4
2010 1,382.9 814.2 213.9 355.8 189.5 568.7 152.1 135.1 105.4 400.6 982.4 515.3 258.2 467.0 125.4 108.1
2011 1,474.1 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.5 172.3 143.6 92.6 421.5 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.1 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.5 921.1 258.9 387.9 222.1 619.4 172.4 140.3 98.1 443.7 1,096.8 581.7 286.6 515.1 161.0 116.5
2013 p 1,558.1 932.5 258.7 398.4 224.1 625.6 172.4 139.7 106.4 456.7 1,101.4 580.3 285.5 521.0 170.6 118.4
2013          Q1 1,577.0 929.7 260.6 389.7 235.8 647.4 176.0 155.9 100.1 442.4 1,134.7 603.1 297.4 531.6 170.7 116.8         Q2 1,574.7 932.0 265.1 391.8 231.7 642.7 179.6 152.8 92.3 437.9 1,136.8 600.8 292.9 536.0 180.9 117.1         Q3 1,564.7 935.7 263.1 395.0 234.4 629.0 180.6 143.0 104.1 450.3 1,114.4 593.2 287.5 521.2 174.6 118.1         Q4
p 1,558.1 932.5 258.7 398.4 224.1 625.6 172.4 139.7 106.4 456.7 1,101.4 580.3 285.5 521.0 170.6 118.4
as a percentage of total assets
2009 100.0 59.6 16.0 26.0 14.1 40.4 10.5 8.9 7.8 26.9 73.1 39.3 20.4 33.7 10.1 7.0
2010 100.0 58.9 15.5 25.7 13.7 41.1 11.0 9.8 7.6 29.0 71.0 37.3 18.7 33.8 9.1 7.8
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 p 100.0 59.9 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 11.0 7.6
2013          Q1 100.0 59.0 16.5 24.7 15.0 41.1 11.2 9.9 6.4 28.1 72.0 38.2 18.9 33.7 10.8 7.4
         Q2 100.0 59.2 16.8 24.9 14.7 40.8 11.4 9.7 5.9 27.8 72.2 38.2 18.6 34.0 11.5 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.3 15.0 40.2 11.5 9.1 6.7 28.8 71.2 37.9 18.4 33.3 11.2 7.6
         Q4 p 100.0 59.9 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 11.0 7.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2009 341.8 239.8 110.1 101.9 13.8 102.0 16.2 32.5 25.3 103.9 237.9 137.9 93.2 99.9 18.7 40.4
2010 365.4 263.3 120.6 103.8 23.7 102.1 17.4 35.1 27.2 114.0 251.4 142.6 96.5 108.8 21.7 43.3
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.4
2012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.2
2013 p 377.3 262.5 127.8 100.6 16.8 114.8 16.1 39.6 32.0 118.4 259.0 145.2 97.0 113.8 20.8 48.1
2013          Q1 367.8 258.2 123.0 102.1 16.7 109.7 16.5 40.8 27.6 113.4 254.4 142.1 91.3 112.3 21.4 40.6
         Q2 371.2 263.7 129.5 102.0 16.0 107.5 16.0 42.1 25.7 114.3 256.9 142.5 92.4 114.4 23.0 42.9
         Q3 367.7 261.5 129.3 100.4 16.1 106.2 15.5 40.8 26.2 116.0 251.7 136.9 87.8 114.8 26.0 43.3
         Q4 p 377.3 262.5 127.8 100.6 16.8 114.8 16.1 39.6 32.0 118.4 259.0 145.2 97.0 113.8 20.8 48.1
as a percentage of total assets
2009 100.0 70.2 32.2 29.8 4.0 29.8 4.7 9.5 7.4 30.4 69.6 40.4 27.3 29.2 5.5 11.8
2010 100.0 72.1 33.0 28.4 6.5 27.9 4.8 9.6 7.4 31.2 68.8 39.0 26.4 29.8 5.9 11.9
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.2
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 p 100.0 69.6 33.9 26.7 4.5 30.4 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.4 68.6 38.5 25.7 30.2 5.5 12.8
2013          Q1 100.0 70.2 33.4 27.8 4.5 29.8 4.5 11.1 7.5 30.8 69.2 38.6 24.8 30.5 5.8 11.0
         Q2 100.0 71.0 34.9 27.5 4.3 29.0 4.3 11.4 6.9 30.8 69.2 38.4 24.9 30.8 6.2 11.6
         Q3 100.0 71.1 35.2 27.3 4.4 28.9 4.2 11.1 7.1 31.6 68.4 37.2 23.9 31.2 7.1 11.8
         Q4 p 100.0 69.6 33.9 26.7 4.5 30.4 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.4 68.6 38.5 25.7 30.2 5.5 12.8
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2005 1,083.3 . 150.5 . 13.9 . 6.1 12.0 16.6 73.2 . 6.8 . 3.1 6.6 11.6
2006 1,209.3 10.6 154.8 3.3 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.0 17.1 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.5 11.2
2007 1,234.0 4.4 177.0 14.9 14.4 1.3 9.0 15.0 21.7 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.3 12.9
2008 1,307.5 6.4 168.9 − 5.4 12.9 − 1.6 7.6 14.0 20.2 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.4 6.6 12.0
2009 1,175.3 − 10.5 143.1 − 15.7 12.2 − 0.8 5.7 13.0 18.9 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.1 13.2 189.3 29.4 14.1 1.8 7.3 14.0 22.1 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,444.7 8.4 184.7 − 0.3 12.8 − 1.2 6.9 13.0 21.0 96.9 − 5.4 6.7 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.7
2012 1,550.6 6.6 197.1 1.3 12.7 − 0.7 6.9 13.0 20.0 98.1 − 7.1 6.3 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 10.9
2013 p 1,559.1 − 0.5 191.9 − 0.6 12.3 − 0.0 6.5 13.0 20.4 99.6 6.0 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.9 10.6
2011          Q1 346.2 12.5 47.0 12.3 13.6 − 0.0 4.3 9.8 17.7 29.7 21.2 8.6 0.6 0.7 6.2 12.2
         Q2 356.2 7.9 43.0 − 5.5 12.1 − 1.8 5.2 12.0 19.5 24.1 − 10.2 6.8 − 1.4 1.4 6.0 12.3         Q3 357.2 6.9 45.2 − 3.0 12.7 − 1.3 7.2 13.8 22.1 24.1 2.7 6.7 − 0.3 2.5 7.2 12.7         Q4 397.4 6.9 50.5 − 3.9 12.7 − 1.4 7.0 15.4 25.3 19.7 − 32.8 5.0 − 2.7 1.7 6.8 11.3
2012          Q1 379.9 9.0 47.7 − 0.3 12.6 − 1.2 3.2 9.5 16.4 29.0 − 3.8 7.6 − 1.0 0.2 5.0 11.0
         Q2 382.4 7.2 48.0 8.8 12.6 0.2 4.6 11.4 18.5 27.7 10.6 7.2 0.2 1.2 6.4 11.4         Q3 383.2 7.1 50.0 − 3.5 13.1 − 1.3 6.2 13.6 21.7 17.8 − 49.8 4.6 − 3.9 1.7 6.3 11.9         Q4 406.2 3.3 51.4 0.7 12.6 − 0.3 7.7 16.7 27.6 23.5 24.1 5.8 1.0 0.1 6.4 12.3
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.0 45.6 − 5.8 12.1 − 0.7 2.2 8.1 15.5 26.4 − 11.1 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 9.9
         Q2 393.4 1.3 49.0 − 1.0 12.5 − 0.3 4.4 10.8 19.4 27.2 − 4.7 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.8 10.2         Q3 389.4 − 1.6 49.3 6.9 12.7 1.1 7.3 14.7 21.7 25.5 99.8 6.6 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.5         Q4
p 405.7 − 0.6 48.5 − 1.9 11.9 − 0.2 5.3 12.5 22.9 20.5 − 12.8 5.1 − 0.7 0.9 6.8 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2005 813.6 . 109.5 . 13.5 . 6.9 12.0 16.9 52.7 . 6.5 . 2.9 8.0 11.32006 898.6 9.8 114.7 6.3 12.8 − 0.4 7.7 11.0 17.5 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.0 11.22007 900.5 3.8 131.0 16.9 14.6 1.6 9.2 15.0 20.9 73.7 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 9.0 12.42008 966.0 7.2 124.6 − 5.9 12.9 − 1.8 7.8 14.0 18.9 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 7.0 11.32009 854.0 − 11.5 99.8 − 19.3 11.7 − 1.2 5.7 12.0 17.7 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 5.0 8.7
2010 998.2 15.7 141.3 36.9 14.2 2.2 7.8 14.0 20.4 77.6 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.7
2011 1,098.8 10.6 134.1 − 2.5 12.2 − 1.7 6.7 14.0 19.0 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 7.0 11.12012 1,192.8 7.6 146.1 2.7 12.3 − 0.6 7.3 13.0 18.4 84.2 2.9 7.1 − 0.3 1.8 6.0 9.82013
p 1,199.3 − 0.5 142.4 0.3 11.9 0.1 6.5 13.0 18.2 74.9 − 5.2 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 6.0 9.8
2011          Q1 269.7 15.4 38.0 13.2 14.1 − 0.3 5.0 10.2 16.3 26.2 24.2 9.7 0.7 1.2 6.8 12.1         Q2 274.7 9.8 33.1 − 5.3 12.1 − 2.1 6.2 12.2 18.3 19.5 − 11.3 7.1 − 1.7 1.8 6.7 12.1         Q3 271.9 8.8 32.3 − 4.0 11.9 − 1.7 7.4 13.5 20.6 16.9 0.1 6.2 − 0.6 2.1 7.4 11.4         Q4 294.8 8.7 31.7 − 12.7 10.8 − 2.8 6.6 14.2 22.5 12.9 − 37.4 4.4 − 3.3 0.4 6.1 9.8
2012          Q1 297.1 10.6 38.9 2.5 13.1 − 1.1 3.5 9.8 15.3 25.8 − 0.9 8.7 − 1.0 0.8 5.8 10.7
         Q2 293.9 8.2 36.1 9.1 12.3 0.1 5.1 11.4 17.2 22.0 12.5 7.5 0.3 1.5 6.5 10.2         Q3 291.3 8.3 35.7 − 5.9 12.3 − 1.7 6.2 13.4 20.2 20.4 − 11.0 7.0 − 1.2 1.7 5.8 10.6         Q4 311.4 3.7 35.4 5.1 11.4 0.2 7.7 16.3 23.7 16.0 14.5 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.2 10.7
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.1 36.3 − 7.0 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.7 22.6 − 13.8 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.6 9.4
         Q2 303.2 1.7 36.4 − 1.7 12.0 − 0.4 4.1 10.6 18.0 20.6 − 8.3 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 4.8 9.1         Q3 295.8 − 2.2 34.8 10.6 11.8 1.5 7.4 13.5 20.5 17.5 15.2 5.9 1.0 0.8 5.6 10.0         Q4
p 311.0 − 0.5 35.1 1.4 11.3 0.2 5.1 12.3 19.8 14.2 − 7.6 4.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 6.1 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2005 269.7 . 41.0 . 15.2 . 5.6 10.7 16.2 20.4 . 7.6 . 3.1 5.3 12.12006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 4.8 12.9 − 2.5 5.4 11.1 15.8 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 46.0 8.9 13.8 0.3 8.6 14.1 26.1 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 44.3 − 3.5 13.0 − 1.0 7.1 14.2 27.5 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 43.3 − 4.6 13.5 0.4 5.8 13.5 27.8 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 341.9 5.8 48.0 8.4 14.1 0.3 6.6 13.7 25.2 22.8 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 345.9 1.5 50.5 7.5 14.6 0.8 7.0 13.4 24.8 22.0 − 0.8 6.4 − 0.1 3.2 6.5 13.82012 357.8 3.0 50.9 − 3.3 14.2 − 0.9 6.5 11.3 29.3 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013
p 359.7 − 0.3 49.6 − 3.8 13.8 − 0.5 6.3 12.0 26.6 24.7 90.9 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.8
2011          Q1 76.5 3.0 9.0 8.3 11.8 0.6 3.6 9.4 20.4 3.6 1.3 4.7 − 0.1 0.5 4.8 12.7         Q2 81.5 1.6 9.9 − 6.3 12.1 − 1.0 4.1 12.0 21.6 4.6 − 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 0.8 4.9 13.3         Q3 85.3 0.9 12.9 − 0.1 15.1 − 0.2 7.2 14.5 27.7 7.2 9.3 8.4 0.7 3.3 7.1 15.2         Q4 102.6 0.9 18.8 27.7 18.3 3.5 8.0 19.0 33.9 6.7 − 11.8 6.6 − 0.7 4.2 7.9 15.3
2012          Q1 82.8 3.1 8.8 − 13.1 10.6 − 1.9 2.5 8.2 18.8 3.2 − 27.2 3.8 − 1.3 − 0.7 4.0 11.9
         Q2 88.4 3.8 11.8 7.7 13.4 0.5 4.3 11.7 21.9 5.7 2.6 6.5 − 0.1 0.7 5.2 14.6         Q3 91.9 3.1 14.3 3.3 15.6 0.0 6.1 14.1 25.5 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5         Q4 94.8 1.9 16.0 − 10.1 16.9 − 2.0 8.0 18.3 34.4 7.6 55.9 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.5 9.3 0.2 11.0 0.1 1.7 7.7 19.9 3.8 15.0 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.6 1.4 13.9 0.2 4.6 11.4 25.5 6.7 12.1 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 14.5 − 2.8 15.5 − 0.5 6.8 15.9 26.9 8.1 307.8 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4
p 94.7 − 1.0 13.4 − 11.7 14.1 − 1.6 6.4 15.8 28.5 6.2 − 25.6 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 7.9 16.1
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May p
Current account + 12,059 + 133,091 + 227,810 + 51,420 + 87,712 + 31,583 + 19,540 + 18,793 + 8,888 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) 1,792,948 1,921,514 1,936,218 479,571 496,397 482,542 169,596 162,096 159,476
Imports (fob) 1,792,075 1,832,463 1,770,911 441,505 448,305 445,626 150,439 146,374 144,397
Balance + 874 + 89,048 + 165,309 + 38,066 + 48,092 + 36,916 + 19,157 + 15,723 + 15,078
2 Services
Receipts 590,798 633,551 663,058 176,763 173,346 158,323 54,738 53,993 57,357
Expenditure 512,900 538,515 549,854 143,283 142,879 138,697 48,549 44,609 43,373
Balance + 77,897 + 95,037 + 113,202 + 33,480 + 30,467 + 19,627 + 6,190 + 9,384 + 13,983
3 Income + 39,571 + 56,262 + 69,847 + 13,990 + 23,555 + 17,607 + 7,530 + 4,503 − 11,639
4 Current transfers
Transfers from non-residents 95,827 98,623 99,800 17,610 34,667 28,396 6,490 5,874 6,734
Transfers to non-residents 202,112 205,881 220,347 51,725 49,070 70,963 19,827 16,691 15,268
Balance − 106,284 − 107,257 − 120,547 − 34,115 − 14,403 − 42,567 − 13,336 − 10,817 − 8,534
Capital account + 10,687 + 6,477 + 21,497 + 4,554 + 9,281 + 5,527 + 1,988 + 1,195 + 163 B
Financial account (net capital exports: − − 50,943 − 165,046 − 252,854 − 55,863 − 101,571 − 31,778 − 26,849 − 19,137 − 7,665 C)
1 Direct investment − 101,719 − 71,566 − 32,164 − 12,654 − 16,305 − 24,376 − 14,616 − 18,708 + 12,010
By resident units abroad − 500,864 − 410,125 − 360,726 − 50,361 − 188,432 + 2,688 + 22,031 − 15,378 − 16,045
By non-resident units in the euro area + 399,147 + 338,559 + 328,561 + 37,707 + 172,127 − 27,064 − 36,647 − 3,330 + 28,055
2 Portfolio investment + 238,594 + 95,440 + 110,264 + 4,920 + 58,989 + 63,752 − 16,367 − 86,474 + 48,281
By resident units abroad + 53,663 − 194,261 − 250,519 − 69,144 − 50,682 − 74,526 − 44,542 − 75,629 − 37,967
Equity + 66,257 − 57,983 − 163,667 − 45,940 − 39,626 − 23,475 − 21,554 − 33,181 − 20,170
Bonds and notes + 21,785 − 133,895 − 78,591 − 21,027 − 12,350 − 36,253 − 24,840 − 30,206 − 3,658
Money market instruments − 34,379 − 2,384 − 8,259 − 2,177 + 1,295 − 14,798 + 1,852 − 12,242 − 14,139
By non-resident units in the euro area + 184,930 + 289,703 + 360,782 + 74,065 + 109,671 + 138,279 + 28,175 − 10,845 + 86,248
Equity + 64,393 + 164,940 + 241,801 + 44,426 + 63,550 + 74,418 + 56,869 + 24,691 + 16,781
Bonds and notes + 165,290 + 128,769 + 77,846 − 14,157 + 87,619 + 72,383 − 9,832 − 1,006 + 46,362
Money market instruments − 44,752 − 4,009 + 41,136 + 43,796 − 41,498 − 8,522 − 18,862 − 34,530 + 23,106
3 Financial derivatives − 5,552 + 5,294 + 17,332 + 7,593 + 3,402 + 692 − 2,022 + 2,920 − 1,569
4 Other investment − 171,998 − 179,260 − 343,875 − 52,862 − 147,349 − 69,290 + 6,493 + 83,464 − 65,792
Eurosystem + 137,861 + 13,179 − 58,932 − 16,362 − 9,298 − 23,544 − 7,934 − 3,858 + 1,021
General government + 69,918 − 3,712 + 7,126 + 6,910 − 14,015 + 1,795 − 867 + 1,719 − 4,290
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 341,608 − 111,858 − 267,279 − 36,496 − 112,429 − 66,369 + 4,941 + 44,869 − 62,276
Long-term − 16,768 + 6,476 + 43,463 + 5,264 + 19,872 − 10,992 + 30,768 + 194 − 33,063
Short-term − 324,842 − 118,337 − 310,743 − 41,761 − 132,300 − 55,377 − 25,827 + 44,675 − 29,214
Other sectors − 38,172 − 76,872 − 24,794 − 6,915 − 11,609 + 18,830 + 10,354 + 40,734 − 247
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) − 10,266 − 14,957 − 4,409 − 2,861 − 308 − 2,556 − 336 − 339 − 595
Errors and omissions + 28,197 + 25,477 + 3,545 − 111 + 4,577 − 5,333 + 5,321 − 850 − 1,386 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 5th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
of which
Supple-mentary
Balance of of which Errors
Goods trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total (fob/fob) 1 items 2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
1999 − 29,220 + 68,017 + 983 − 53,298 − 17,237 − 26,702 − 937 + 4,590 − 12,535 + 34,747
2000 − 36,958 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,346 − 12,747 − 29,927 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,6642001 − 7,907 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,151 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1122002 + 41,656 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,600 − 29,408 − 4,010 + 25,935 − 2,065 − 11,7102003 + 31,725 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,695 − 18,513 − 31,088 + 5,920 + 63,349 − 445 + 25,703
2004 + 102,057 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 17,657 − 30,018 − 119 + 127,106 − 1,470 + 25,167
2005 + 107,399 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 22,173 − 31,124 − 2,334 + 118,364 − 2,182 + 13,2992006 + 138,066 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 43,627 − 32,249 − 1,328 + 178,011 − 2,934 + 41,2732007 + 173,132 + 201,989 − 922 − 36,958 + 41,835 − 33,733 − 1,597 + 213,938 + 953 + 42,4022008 + 147,821 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 32,026 + 29,675 − 34,349 − 893 + 168,457 + 2,008 + 21,530
2009 + 143,173 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 21,430 + 58,365 − 34,930 − 1,858 + 136,851 − 3,200 − 4,464
2010 + 146,652 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 28,892 + 54,049 − 39,651 + 1,219 + 112,031 + 1,613 − 35,8392011 + 163,970 + 163,241 − 9,043 − 33,661 + 69,204 − 34,815 + 1,690 + 161,039 + 2,836 − 4,6212012 + 196,242 + 197,116 − 10,086 − 36,849 + 74,668 − 38,692 + 1,298 + 213,430 + 1,297 + 15,8902013 
r) + 191,946 + 210,499 − 4,513 − 47,957 + 72,747 − 43,342 + 2,013 + 245,802 + 838 + 51,843
2011          Q3 + 37,553 + 41,307 − 2,229 − 14,775 + 19,703 − 8,682 + 248 + 13,162 + 639 − 24,639         Q4 + 52,512 + 40,055 − 2,310 − 3,788 + 26,073 − 9,828 + 193 + 33,891 + 366 − 18,815
2012          Q1 + 46,888 + 49,318 − 1,708 − 7,914 + 19,435 − 13,951 − 259 + 33,717 + 963 − 12,912
         Q2 + 44,482 + 49,896 − 2,976 − 8,303 + 8,329 − 5,439 + 632 + 46,454 + 769 + 1,339         Q3 + 48,376 + 52,429 − 2,137 − 15,357 + 19,731 − 8,426 + 846 + 52,846 + 59 + 3,624         Q4 + 56,495 + 45,473 − 3,265 − 5,275 + 27,173 − 10,876 + 79 + 80,413 − 494 + 23,838
2013          Q1 
r) + 45,590 + 52,747 − 1,625 − 11,256 + 19,283 − 15,184 + 756 + 41,504 + 86 − 4,842
         Q2 r) + 46,837 + 56,031 + 2,842 − 11,658 + 9,905 − 7,441 + 847 + 67,186 + 72 + 19,502
         Q3 r) + 39,400 + 49,649 − 4,085 − 17,879 + 17,188 − 9,557 + 369 + 62,211 − 785 + 22,442
         Q4 r) + 60,120 + 52,072 − 1,644 − 7,164 + 26,371 − 11,160 + 41 + 74,901 + 1,464 + 14,740
2014          Q1 r) + 49,409 + 53,107 + 1,335 − 7,138 + 18,219 − 14,780 + 1,667 + 66,747 − 565 + 15,671
         Q2 p) + 44,100 + 53,091 − 3,098 − 8,652 + 6,576 − 6,915 + 624 + 64,195 − 610 + 19,470
2012          Jan + 12,485 + 14,140 − 679 − 3,296 + 5,520 − 3,879 − 676 + 9,349 + 140 − 2,461
         Feb + 14,462 + 16,871 − 382 − 2,304 + 6,850 − 6,956 + 295 + 6,520 + 547 − 8,237         Mar + 19,942 + 18,308 − 646 − 2,314 + 7,065 − 3,116 + 121 + 17,848 + 276 − 2,214
         Apr + 13,082 + 14,818 − 634 − 1,458 + 2,043 − 2,320 + 282 + 15,061 + 581 + 1,697
         May + 11,515 + 16,307 − 1,312 − 3,592 − 19 − 1,181 + 363 + 20,504 + 207 + 8,626         June + 19,886 + 18,772 − 1,029 − 3,253 + 6,305 − 1,938 − 13 + 10,889 − 19 − 8,983
         July + 17,010 + 17,659 − 752 − 4,906 + 6,453 − 2,197 − 35 + 1,700 − 48 − 15,274
         Aug + 13,749 + 17,085 − 793 − 6,509 + 6,508 − 3,335 + 610 + 19,153 + 389 + 4,795         Sep + 17,618 + 17,685 − 592 − 3,942 + 6,769 − 2,894 + 271 + 31,992 − 281 + 14,103
         Oct + 16,095 + 16,318 − 1,084 − 4,358 + 7,296 − 3,160 + 195 + 18,059 + 176 + 1,769
         Nov + 19,510 + 17,584 − 724 − 2,211 + 7,112 − 2,974 + 409 + 30,705 − 308 + 10,786         Dec + 20,890 + 11,571 − 1,458 + 1,295 + 12,766 − 4,742 − 525 + 31,649 − 361 + 11,284
2013          Jan  
r) + 11,111 + 14,750 − 520 − 4,058 + 5,837 − 5,419 + 50 − 9,365 + 493 − 20,526
         Feb  r) + 12,721 + 16,586 − 1,633 − 3,732 + 6,623 − 6,756 + 92 + 16,620 − 321 + 3,807
         Mar  r) + 21,758 + 21,411 + 528 − 3,466 + 6,823 − 3,010 + 614 + 34,249 − 86 + 11,878
         Apr  r) + 16,846 + 20,262 + 662 − 2,752 + 1,675 − 2,339 + 309 + 22,471 + 56 + 5,316
         May r) + 12,818 + 16,744 + 1,997 − 4,511 + 2,819 − 2,235 + 247 + 13,502 − 22 + 438
         June r) + 17,174 + 19,025 + 182 − 4,395 + 5,411 − 2,867 + 291 + 31,213 + 38 + 13,748
         July r) + 12,264 + 16,271 − 1,081 − 6,783 + 6,027 − 3,250 + 141 + 10,408 − 654 − 1,997
         Aug  r) + 7,931 + 12,769 − 1,786 − 7,130 + 5,851 − 3,560 + 121 + 30,078 + 425 + 22,027
         Sep  r) + 19,205 + 20,609 − 1,218 − 3,966 + 5,310 − 2,747 + 107 + 21,725 − 556 + 2,413
         Oct  r) + 17,102 + 19,457 − 170 − 6,140 + 6,427 − 2,643 + 479 + 19,684 − 212 + 2,104
         Nov  r) + 21,519 + 18,894 − 257 − 1,961 + 6,831 − 2,244 + 176 + 22,382 + 407 + 687
         Dec  r) + 21,498 + 13,722 − 1,217 + 937 + 13,112 − 6,273 − 614 + 32,834 + 1,269 + 11,950
2014          Jan  r) + 13,562 + 16,097 − 753 − 3,176 + 5,060 − 4,419 + 867 + 4,153 − 375 − 10,277
         Feb  r) + 14,228 + 17,456 + 128 − 2,289 + 6,199 − 7,137 + 455 + 24,451 − 898 + 9,768
         Mar  r) + 21,618 + 19,554 + 1,960 − 1,673 + 6,961 − 3,224 + 345 + 38,143 + 708 + 16,180
         Apr  r) + 16,892 + 18,513 − 121 − 2,034 + 3,789 − 3,375 + 145 + 30,524 + 151 + 13,487
         May r) + 12,215 + 18,172 − 1,519 − 2,647 − 2,010 − 1,301 + 41 + 17,190 − 631 + 4,934
         June p) + 14,993 + 16,406 − 1,458 − 3,970 + 4,797 − 2,239 + 439 + 16,481 − 130 + 1,049
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net acquisition/disposal of
transactions for the account of residents and the deduction of goods returned. non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from
Deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing; the difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3Including freight and current account and the capital account. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2014
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2014
Country / group of countries  2011  2012  2013 r Jan r Feb r Mar r Apr r May r Jun p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,061,225 1,095,766 1,093,812 90,747 92,362 95,986 93,735 92,059 93,429
Imports 902,523 905,925 896,158 75,702 76,152 79,384 76,523 74,285 76,957Balance + 158,702 + 189,841 + 197,654 + 15,045 + 16,210 + 16,601 + 17,212 + 17,774 + 16,472
I Exports 752,295 751,071 748,835 63,586 64,024 65,812 64,392 62,616 ... European countries
Imports 622,870 629,305 633,543 53,054 55,355 57,290 55,413 53,392 ...
Balance + 129,425 + 121,766 + 115,291 + 10,532 + 8,669 + 8,522 + 8,979 + 9,225 ...
Exports 629,953 622,674 623,114 54,498 54,693 55,511 54,637 53,142 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 506,211 504,494 514,489 42,548 44,995 46,888 45,226 43,439 ...
Balance + 123,742 + 118,180 + 108,626 + 11,950 + 9,697 + 8,624 + 9,410 + 9,703 ...
Euro-area (18) Exports 421,845 407,666 403,346 35,068 34,885 35,230 35,101 33,785 ...
countries Imports 338,988 339,072 343,515 28,479 29,742 31,137 29,876 28,631 ...
Balance + 82,857 + 68,593 + 59,832 + 6,588 + 5,143 + 4,093 + 5,225 + 5,154 ...
of which
Austria Exports 57,671 56,591 56,217 4,604 4,623 4,860 4,803 4,530 ...
Imports 37,028 36,419 36,770 2,868 3,017 3,179 3,087 3,092 ...
Balance + 20,643 + 20,172 + 19,447 + 1,736 + 1,605 + 1,681 + 1,715 + 1,439 ...
Belgium and Exports 53,161 49,424 47,783 4,072 3,875 4,184 4,107 3,875 ...
Luxembourg Imports 41,302 40,528 42,035 3,392 3,566 3,662 3,719 3,527 ...
Balance + 11,859 + 8,896 + 5,748 + 680 + 309 + 521 + 388 + 349 ...
France Exports 101,444 102,911 100,190 8,645 8,892 8,440 8,580 8,158 ...
Imports 65,948 64,035 64,071 5,376 5,781 7,055 5,774 4,733 ...
Balance + 35,496 + 38,875 + 36,119 + 3,269 + 3,111 + 1,385 + 2,806 + 3,424 ...
Italy Exports 62,044 55,529 53,200 4,720 4,560 4,665 4,536 4,602 ...
Imports 47,844 47,957 47,145 3,900 4,248 4,172 4,088 4,036 ...
Balance + 14,200 + 7,572 + 6,054 + 820 + 312 + 493 + 448 + 566 ...
Netherlands Exports 69,423 70,381 70,948 6,262 6,095 6,351 6,364 5,801 ...
Imports 81,804 85,738 89,226 7,665 7,409 7,293 7,592 7,468 ...
Balance − 12,382 − 15,357 − 18,278 − 1,403 − 1,313 − 942 − 1,227 − 1,666 ...
Spain Exports 34,811 31,047 31,333 2,932 2,980 2,887 2,793 3,018 ...
Imports 22,491 23,206 23,673 1,879 2,170 2,130 2,147 2,128 ...
Balance + 12,320 + 7,841 + 7,660 + 1,053 + 810 + 758 + 646 + 890 ...
Other EU member Exports 208,108 215,008 219,768 19,430 19,807 20,281 19,536 19,357 ...
states Imports 167,223 165,421 170,974 14,069 15,254 15,751 15,350 14,808 ...
Balance + 40,885 + 49,587 + 48,794 + 5,362 + 4,554 + 4,530 + 4,186 + 4,549 ...
of which
United Exports 65,570 73,283 75,651 6,824 7,306 7,141 6,600 6,731 ...
Kingdom Imports 44,741 42,820 42,503 3,132 3,759 4,066 3,524 3,525 ...
Balance + 20,829 + 30,462 + 33,148 + 3,692 + 3,546 + 3,075 + 3,077 + 3,206 ...
Exports 122,342 128,398 125,720 9,088 9,331 10,301 9,755 9,474 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,660 124,811 119,055 10,506 10,360 10,402 10,187 9,953 ... countries
Balance + 5,683 + 3,586 + 6,666 − 1,418 − 1,029 − 101 − 431 − 478 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 47,875 48,933 47,323 3,875 3,773 4,089 3,936 3,823 ...
Imports 36,996 37,775 38,239 3,178 3,411 3,695 3,455 3,411 ...
Balance + 10,879 + 11,158 + 9,084 + 698 + 363 + 394 + 481 + 412 ...
II Exports 308,193 340,980 342,492 26,868 28,102 29,917 29,068 29,131 ... Non-European
Imports 279,653 276,620 262,614 22,648 20,797 22,094 21,110 20,889 ... countries
Balance + 28,541 + 64,360 + 79,877 + 4,220 + 7,306 + 7,823 + 7,958 + 8,243 ...
Exports 20,717 21,920 22,047 1,582 1,850 1,849 1,891 1,922 ... 1 Africa
Imports 21,944 24,145 22,889 1,790 1,647 1,802 1,437 1,561 ...
Balance − 1,227 − 2,224 − 842 − 208 + 203 + 47 + 454 + 360 ...
Exports 110,424 128,703 130,924 10,286 10,989 11,283 10,984 10,843 ... 2 America
Imports 80,568 80,549 74,970 5,773 5,975 6,399 6,651 6,028 ...
Balance + 29,856 + 48,154 + 55,953 + 4,513 + 5,014 + 4,884 + 4,334 + 4,815 ...
of which
Exports 73,776 86,971 88,375 7,223 7,634 7,928 7,714 7,542 ... United States
Imports 48,531 51,070 48,453 3,755 4,129 4,318 4,501 3,984 ...
Balance + 25,244 + 35,901 + 39,922 + 3,468 + 3,505 + 3,610 + 3,213 + 3,558 ...
Exports 167,574 179,630 179,539 14,313 14,466 15,931 15,457 15,625 ... 3 Asia
Imports 173,115 167,873 161,393 14,784 12,962 13,666 12,778 13,111 ...
Balance − 5,541 + 11,757 + 18,145 − 471 + 1,504 + 2,265 + 2,679 + 2,514 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,711 32,503 32,854 2,276 2,835 3,091 2,726 3,163 ...
Imports 8,874 8,134 8,658 669 668 634 598 711 ...
Balance + 19,837 + 24,369 + 24,196 + 1,607 + 2,167 + 2,457 + 2,128 + 2,452 ...
Japan Exports 15,115 17,138 17,125 1,608 1,368 1,372 1,298 1,255 ...
Imports 23,595 21,910 19,504 1,625 1,487 1,711 1,611 1,558 ...
Balance − 8,480 − 4,772 − 2,379 − 17 − 119 − 339 − 313 − 303 ...
Exports 64,863 66,746 67,025 5,644 5,401 6,058 6,279 6,200 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,528 78,529 73,638 6,955 6,044 5,848 5,516 5,838 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 14,665 − 11,783 − 6,612 − 1,311 − 643 + 211 + 762 + 362 ...
Exports 41,569 45,651 46,042 3,597 3,517 4,102 4,000 3,817 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,546 37,428 36,622 3,340 2,821 3,324 3,157 3,118 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 2,023 + 8,223 + 9,420 + 257 + 696 + 778 + 843 + 699 ...
Exports 9,479 10,727 9,982 687 797 855 735 741 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,026 4,054 3,361 302 213 227 244 188 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,453 + 6,672 + 6,620 + 385 + 585 + 627 + 491 + 553 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Latvia. 1Including fuel and other supplies Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment Manufacturing intellectual Compensation
Period Total services 1 Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 income of employees
2009 − 21,430 + 1,264 − 3,259 − 33,341 + 8,449 + 120 + 932 − 3,122 + 2,644 + 872 + 55,375
2010 − 28,892 + 1,070 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 7,347 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 + 50,8962011 − 33,661 + 567 − 8,615 − 33,755 + 6,833 + 2,407 + 817 − 6,871 + 2,939 + 1,787 + 66,3362012 − 36,849 + 178 − 10,201 − 33,566 + 6,806 + 2,753 + 1,356 − 10,017 + 3,117 + 2,594 + 71,1212013 − 47,957 + 84 − 12,241 − 37,764 + 5,794 + 3,379 − 929 − 6,711 + 3,084 + 354 + 71,199
2012          Q4 − 5,275 + 100 − 2,769 − 5,678 + 1,354 + 1,218 + 1,270 − 2,485 + 738 + 1,455 + 21,755
2013          Q1 − 11,256 − 32 − 3,209 − 5,687 + 920 + 650 − 1,771 − 2,136 + 795 + 618 + 19,611
         Q2 − 11,658 − 6 − 2,807 − 8,187 + 932 + 638 − 473 − 1,971 + 807 − 141 + 10,921         Q3 − 17,879 − 38 − 2,608 − 16,868 + 2,094 + 794 + 256 − 1,351 + 760 − 474 + 18,583         Q4 − 7,164 + 160 − 3,618 − 7,022 + 1,848 + 1,297 + 1,059 − 1,252 + 722 + 351 + 22,083
2014          Q1 − 7,138 + 170 − 3,670 − 4,893 + 791 + 1,049 + 152 − 580 + 754 + 605 + 18,614
         Q2 
p) − 8,652 + 64 − 3,144 − 8,519 + 1,447 + 947 + 560 − 374 + 779 − 179 + 7,603
2013          Aug − 7,130 − 44 − 695 − 6,713 + 614 + 460 − 199 − 447 + 230 − 132 + 6,290         Sep − 3,966 + 56 − 900 − 4,982 + 1,120 + 105 + 605 + 53 + 268 − 160 + 5,808
         Oct − 6,140 + 44 − 1,289 − 4,506 + 307 + 323 + 32 − 1,181 + 259 + 101 + 6,710
         Nov − 1,961 + 122 − 1,338 − 1,778 + 531 + 520 + 27 − 81 + 265 + 116 + 7,099         Dec + 937 − 6 − 991 − 738 + 1,010 + 453 + 1,000 + 11 + 198 + 134 + 8,275
2014          Jan − 3,176 + 18 − 1,305 − 1,483 + 211 + 276 − 122 − 510 + 259 + 199 + 5,198
         Feb − 2,289 + 40 − 1,185 − 1,181 + 94 + 426 − 139 − 382 + 241 + 202 + 6,301         Mar − 1,673 + 112 − 1,180 − 2,229 + 486 + 347 + 413 + 312 + 254 + 204 + 7,115
         Apr − 2,034 + 4 − 1,178 − 1,760 + 522 + 397 − 49 − 192 + 288 − 56 + 4,101
         May − 2,647 + 21 − 1,029 − 2,407 + 612 + 451 − 82 − 519 + 239 − 46 − 1,708         June 
p) − 3,970 + 38 − 937 − 4,352 + 314 + 100 + 691 + 337 + 252 − 76 + 5,210
1Includes fees for processing goods that are not owned by the processor. 2Since side. 3Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not
2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2009 − 34,930 − 20,922 − 3,944 + 4,329 − 14,008 − 2,995 − 2,995 − 1,858 + 34 − 1,891
2010 − 39,651 − 24,935 − 4,702 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,0852011 − 34,815 − 21,264 − 4,436 + 6,715 − 13,551 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,690 + 1,137 + 5532012 − 38,692 − 24,792 − 4,570 + 5,270 − 13,900 − 3,080 − 3,080 + 1,298 + 1,366 − 682013 − 43,342 − 28,978 − 4,332 + 6,825 − 14,364 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 2,013 + 2,339 − 327
2012          Q4 − 10,876 − 6,817 − 1,337 + 84 − 4,060 − 770 − 770 + 79 + 666 − 587
2013          Q1 − 15,184 − 11,866 − 1,630 + 1,038 − 3,318 − 807 − 807 + 756 + 545 + 211
         Q2 − 7,441 − 3,937 − 871 + 3,588 − 3,504 − 807 − 807 + 847 + 661 + 185         Q3 − 9,557 − 6,211 − 825 + 1,164 − 3,346 − 820 − 807 + 369 + 666 − 298         Q4 − 11,160 − 6,965 − 1,006 + 1,035 − 4,196 − 815 − 807 + 41 + 466 − 426
2014          Q1 − 14,780 − 11,917 − 1,577 + 1,308 − 2,863 − 870 − 863 + 1,667 + 367 + 1,300
         Q2 
p) − 6,915 − 2,853 − 732 + 5,014 − 4,062 − 869 − 863 + 624 + 889 − 265
2013          Aug − 3,560 − 2,499 − 481 + 84 − 1,060 − 274 − 269 + 121 + 264 − 143         Sep − 2,747 − 1,561 − 177 + 884 − 1,186 − 272 − 269 + 107 + 236 − 129
         Oct − 2,643 − 1,622 − 230 + 219 − 1,021 − 273 − 269 + 479 + 225 + 254
         Nov − 2,244 − 1,424 − 156 + 99 − 820 − 271 − 269 + 176 + 218 − 42         Dec − 6,273 − 3,919 − 619 + 718 − 2,354 − 271 − 269 − 614 + 23 − 637
2014          Jan − 4,419 − 3,442 − 1,112 + 591 − 977 − 291 − 288 + 867 + 26 + 841
         Feb − 7,137 − 6,254 − 335 + 305 − 883 − 290 − 288 + 455 + 185 + 270         Mar − 3,224 − 2,221 − 130 + 413 − 1,004 − 290 − 288 + 345 + 156 + 189
         Apr − 3,375 − 1,757 − 242 + 936 − 1,619 − 289 − 288 + 145 + 125 + 19
         May − 1,301 − 75 − 318 + 2,665 − 1,226 − 290 − 288 + 41 + 451 − 410         June 
p) − 2,239 − 1,021 − 171 + 1,414 − 1,218 − 289 − 288 + 439 + 313 + 126
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 p) Apr May June p)
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 263,085 + 388,492 + 38,789 − 17,014 − 36,639 + 92,513 + 109,572 + 54,688 + 40,657 + 14,226
1 Direct investment + 78,164 + 89,900 + 61,568 + 8,573 + 1,130 + 27,095 + 23,151 + 13,371 + 6,042 + 3,738
Equity + 63,213 + 68,215 + 43,065 + 10,980 + 4,072 + 19,992 + 18,711 + 4,822 + 11,158 + 2,731
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 31,349 + 31,692 + 30,054 + 8,668 + 6,126 + 11,349 + 8,452 + 3,758 + 1,739 + 2,955
Debt instruments + 14,951 + 21,685 + 18,504 − 2,407 − 2,942 + 7,103 + 4,439 + 8,548 − 5,116 + 1,007
2 Portfolio investment + 21,627 + 109,814 + 140,956 + 32,644 + 23,661 + 40,511 + 41,344 + 19,538 + 5,786 + 16,020
Shares 2 − 2,713 + 11,736 + 19,206 + 8,667 − 2,861 + 3,443 + 4,944 + 259 + 1,641 + 3,044
Investment fund shares 3 + 1,277 + 21,696 + 31,321 + 7,696 + 8,340 + 9,686 + 8,649 + 2,504 + 672 + 5,473
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 18,272 + 76,487 + 86,676 + 16,610 + 17,704 + 22,487 + 27,554 + 14,031 + 6,664 + 6,860
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 4,791 − 105 + 3,754 − 329 + 478 + 4,895 + 196 + 2,744 − 3,191 + 642
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 26,709 + 25,619 + 18,146 + 1,620 + 6,043 + 5,030 + 9,024 + 3,749 + 5,522 − 247
4. Other investment 7 + 133,749 + 161,862 − 182,718 − 59,066 − 68,937 + 20,441 + 36,664 + 17,880 + 23,939 − 5,155
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 50,275 − 66,082 − 56,647 − 49,580 − 6,557 + 31,733 + 45,182 + 17,727 + 18,774 + 8,681
Long-term + 12,977 − 47,913 − 50,495 − 13,226 − 12,314 + 3,254 − 4,487 − 2,219 + 4,629 − 6,897
Short-term − 63,252 − 18,169 − 6,152 − 36,354 + 5,757 + 28,479 + 49,669 + 19,946 + 14,145 + 15,578
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 24,890 − 14,332 + 11,209 − 7,936 − 7,814 + 27,273 − 1,970 − 11,587 + 16,506 − 6,889
Long-term − 311 + 401 + 943 − 601 + 1,432 − 685 − 1,108 − 26 + 276 − 1,358
Short-term + 25,201 − 14,734 + 10,266 − 7,335 − 9,246 + 27,958 − 863 − 11,561 + 16,230 − 5,531
General government + 21,061 + 49,597 + 8,238 + 3,603 + 5,601 + 2,086 + 1,709 + 4,126 − 515 − 1,902
Long-term + 2,232 + 49,608 + 15,919 + 3,057 + 3,939 − 4,424 + 3,279 + 5,865 − 361 − 2,225
Short-term + 18,829 − 10 − 7,681 + 546 + 1,662 + 6,510 − 1,570 − 1,739 − 154 + 323
Bundesbank + 138,073 + 192,679 − 145,519 − 5,153 − 60,167 − 40,651 − 8,258 + 7,614 − 10,826 − 5,045
5. Reserve assets + 2,836 + 1,297 + 838 − 785 + 1,464 − 565 − 610 + 151 − 631 − 130
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 102,046 + 175,062 − 205,820 − 79,225 − 110,347 + 25,766 + 45,377 + 24,164 + 23,468 − 2,255
1 Direct investment + 63,624 + 39,053 + 38,638 + 4,931 + 11,086 + 1,750 + 7,338 − 583 + 3,334 + 4,587
Equity + 15,527 + 11,109 + 5,918 + 1,394 + 5,757 + 3,222 + 494 + 1,448 + 419 − 1,374
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 − 701 + 6,039 + 3,580 + 688 + 188 + 3,601 + 693 + 1,070 + 395 − 772
Debt instruments + 48,097 + 27,944 + 32,720 + 3,537 + 5,329 − 1,472 + 6,844 − 2,031 + 2,915 + 5,961
2 Portfolio investment + 49,581 + 45,076 − 24,113 − 5,721 − 10,326 + 9,344 + 18,647 − 27,878 + 35,812 + 10,713
Shares 2) − 11,325 + 1,094 + 5,328 + 3,975 + 4,180 − 5,315 + 7,668 − 9,775 + 6,164 + 11,279
Investment fund shares 3 + 7,095 − 3,799 + 6,001 + 1,223 + 5,351 − 80 + 655 − 3,439 + 2,845 + 1,249
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 51,088 + 52,220 − 12,402 − 5,274 + 10,945 + 7,914 + 10,969 − 10,698 + 23,161 − 1,494
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 2,723 − 4,438 − 23,040 − 5,645 − 30,801 + 6,825 − 645 − 3,966 + 3,643 − 322
3. Other investment 7 − 11,160 + 90,934 − 221,538 − 78,435 − 112,300 + 14,672 + 19,392 + 52,625 − 15,678 − 17,555
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 96,708 + 51,508 − 158,453 − 65,025 − 70,382 + 32,528 + 3,347 + 17,475 − 1,442 − 12,686
Long-term − 18,368 − 10,250 − 16,955 − 2,678 − 1,586 − 3,213 − 5,172 + 226 − 1,574 − 3,824
Short-term − 78,340 + 61,758 − 141,498 − 62,347 − 68,796 + 35,741 + 8,519 + 17,249 + 132 − 8,862
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 35,056 + 10,264 − 11,743 − 2,625 − 29,728 + 8,861 + 2,019 + 2,412 − 1,327 + 934
Long-term − 840 + 1,711 − 16,916 − 3,467 − 7,757 − 3,288 − 269 − 826 + 1,245 − 688
Short-term + 35,896 + 8,553 + 5,173 + 843 − 21,971 + 12,149 + 2,288 + 3,238 − 2,572 + 1,622
General government + 18,539 − 30,775 − 2,066 − 7,600 − 3,470 − 3,952 + 5,207 + 14,132 − 12,600 + 3,675
Long-term + 5,104 + 36,230 + 9,474 + 1,896 + 689 − 1,793 + 1,429 + 1,657 − 141 − 87
Short-term + 13,436 − 67,005 − 11,540 − 9,496 − 4,160 − 2,159 + 3,777 + 12,474 − 12,460 + 3,763
Bundesbank + 31,952 + 59,936 − 49,275 − 3,185 − 8,720 − 22,766 + 8,820 + 18,607 − 309 − 9,478
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 161,039 + 213,430 + 244,609 + 62,211 + 73,708 + 66,747 + 64,195 + 30,524 + 17,190 + 16,481
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998 *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from Treasury position
Foreign special on the external discount (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB 
2 on non- trans- liquidity less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances 1 residents 3 actions 4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in accordance with claims on the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). 3Including loans to
section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Commercial Code, the World Bank. 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the Bundesbank;
especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation at the preceding year’s excluding the Treasury discount liquidity paper sold to non-residents between March
balance sheet rates. 1Mainly US dollar assets. 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,9832006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,5702007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,4882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,0752011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,1062012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,5062013 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2013          May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 20,907 27,473 50 557,391 56,280 70,398 691,332         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 21,110 28,388 50 512,734 54,154 53,965 662,902
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 20,589 27,165 50 511,610 54,225 43,789 674,528         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 20,586 27,850 50 482,453 54,440 34,434 653,123
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 20,950 27,534 50 490,066 52,792 53,041 639,916
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 21,125 27,550 50 479,240 52,649 52,748 628,140         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 20,795 27,622 50 474,195 50,875 43,267 634,869
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 21,162 28,406 50 455,926 49,660 17,254 643,267
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banks
revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2010 670,695 242,028 428,667 272,426 156,241 143,032 13,209 807,185 162,091 645,094 498,310 146,784 88,288 58,496
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 747,469 274,802 472,667 298,059 174,608 158,836 15,772 910,840 170,265 740,575 578,392 162,183 94,291 67,892
2013 780,219 280,295 499,924 319,864 180,060 164,767 15,293 916,415 142,433 773,982 611,659 162,323 95,260 67,063
2014          Jan 781,158 287,312 493,846 318,770 175,076 159,824 15,252 915,341 149,655 765,686 610,015 155,671 88,275 67,396
         Feb 788,014 288,560 499,454 322,367 177,087 162,230 14,857 919,203 143,531 775,672 615,749 159,923 90,283 69,640         Mar 817,202 307,559 509,643 326,530 183,113 168,171 14,942 926,968 147,767 779,201 617,703 161,498 94,794 66,704
         Apr 814,932 299,046 515,886 335,543 180,343 165,417 14,926 929,807 154,881 774,926 616,770 158,156 90,976 67,180
         May 832,028 319,247 512,781 334,294 178,487 163,032 15,455 934,131 152,668 781,463 622,831 158,632 90,504 68,128         June 826,348 309,963 516,385 332,438 183,947 168,927 15,020 943,966 147,829 796,137 634,906 161,231 93,811 67,420
Industrial countries 1
 
2010 598,167 240,915 357,252 249,497 107,755 98,428 9,327 725,644 159,522 566,122 464,105 102,017 73,987 28,030
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 659,800 272,400 387,400 269,072 118,328 104,985 13,343 824,182 167,856 656,326 542,994 113,332 79,123 34,209
2013 690,340 276,963 413,377 291,097 122,280 108,838 13,442 829,534 141,063 688,471 574,254 114,217 79,524 34,693
2014          Jan 691,988 284,012 407,976 289,546 118,430 105,175 13,255 829,875 148,290 681,585 572,729 108,856 73,816 35,040         Feb 698,225 285,309 412,916 293,061 119,855 106,774 13,081 832,534 142,111 690,423 579,008 111,415 75,551 35,864         Mar 725,730 303,412 422,318 296,832 125,486 112,343 13,143 840,907 146,308 694,599 580,794 113,805 79,234 34,571
         Apr 719,017 294,482 424,535 302,139 122,396 109,298 13,098 845,169 153,635 691,534 580,192 111,342 76,397 34,945
         May 739,222 314,678 424,544 303,790 120,754 107,144 13,610 848,816 151,404 697,412 586,362 111,050 75,815 35,235         June 731,309 304,888 426,421 301,865 124,556 111,316 13,240 857,264 146,539 710,725 598,153 112,572 77,837 34,735
EU member states 1
 
2010 494,360 230,746 263,614 184,862 78,752 71,525 7,227 618,145 150,817 467,328 395,566 71,762 50,035 21,727
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 547,557 250,191 297,366 212,698 84,668 74,190 10,478 695,214 156,552 538,662 458,505 80,157 53,623 26,534
2013 582,602 262,525 320,077 233,074 87,003 76,438 10,565 694,404 126,314 568,090 488,571 79,519 53,187 26,332
2014          Jan 587,684 268,794 318,890 233,571 85,319 74,991 10,328 700,465 136,463 564,002 487,660 76,342 49,661 26,681         Feb 594,118 269,999 324,119 237,452 86,667 76,407 10,260 700,601 130,594 570,007 491,074 78,933 51,780 27,153         Mar 618,808 288,192 330,616 240,234 90,382 80,096 10,286 709,172 133,358 575,814 494,374 81,440 54,701 26,739
         Apr 610,639 279,063 331,576 242,973 88,603 78,264 10,339 712,013 141,167 570,846 492,063 78,783 51,835 26,948
         May 629,459 299,725 329,734 242,429 87,305 76,521 10,784 715,834 139,131 576,703 498,103 78,600 51,420 27,180         June 621,883 289,943 331,940 241,878 90,062 79,526 10,536 724,332 136,323 588,009 508,077 79,932 53,106 26,826
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2010 366,774 184,299 182,475 130,430 52,045 47,239 4,806 497,433 98,177 399,256 351,352 47,904 33,444 14,460
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 396,816 189,865 206,951 152,060 54,891 48,992 5,899 572,523 110,052 462,471 408,502 53,969 36,754 17,215
2013 422,992 195,834 227,158 171,157 56,001 49,799 6,202 587,628 99,689 487,939 434,631 53,308 36,467 16,841
2014          Jan 425,407 199,154 226,253 170,982 55,271 48,987 6,284 594,488 108,446 486,042 435,530 50,512 33,383 17,129         Feb 433,128 202,913 230,215 174,178 56,037 49,823 6,214 595,520 104,594 490,926 438,735 52,191 34,745 17,446         Mar 446,119 212,228 233,891 175,981 57,910 51,762 6,148 600,162 105,529 494,633 440,633 54,000 36,597 17,403
         Apr 438,764 205,381 233,383 176,775 56,608 50,372 6,236 606,150 115,510 490,640 437,919 52,721 35,166 17,555
         May 453,927 222,947 230,980 175,129 55,851 49,590 6,261 607,379 108,521 498,858 446,264 52,594 34,878 17,716         June 451,418 220,036 231,382 174,495 56,887 50,791 6,096 619,946 107,493 512,453 459,154 53,299 35,884 17,415
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2010 72,528 1,113 71,415 22,929 48,486 44,604 3,882 81,541 2,569 78,972 34,205 44,767 14,301 30,466
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,669 2,402 85,267 28,987 56,280 53,851 2,429 86,658 2,409 84,249 35,398 48,851 15,168 33,683
2013 89,879 3,332 86,547 28,767 57,780 55,929 1,851 86,881 1,370 85,511 37,405 48,106 15,736 32,370
2014          Jan 89,170 3,300 85,870 29,224 56,646 54,649 1,997 85,466 1,365 84,101 37,286 46,815 14,459 32,356         Feb 89,789 3,251 86,538 29,306 57,232 55,456 1,776 86,669 1,420 85,249 36,741 48,508 14,732 33,776         Mar 91,472 4,147 87,325 29,698 57,627 55,828 1,799 86,061 1,459 84,602 36,909 47,693 15,560 32,133
         Apr 95,915 4,564 91,351 33,404 57,947 56,119 1,828 84,638 1,246 83,392 36,578 46,814 14,579 32,235
         May 92,806 4,569 88,237 30,504 57,733 55,888 1,845 85,315 1,264 84,051 36,469 47,582 14,689 32,893         June 95,039 5,075 89,964 30,573 59,391 57,611 1,780 86,702 1,290 85,412 36,753 48,659 15,974 32,685
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia. 3All countries that are not
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not regarded as industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including Netherlands
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- Antilles; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao andgures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2011 St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII External sector
 
11 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2013          Apr 1.2539 1.3268 8.0564 7.4553 127.54 7.5444 8.4449 1.2199 0.85076 1.3026
         May 1.3133 1.3257 7.9715 7.4536 131.13 7.5589 8.5725 1.2418 0.84914 1.2982
         June 1.3978 1.3596 8.0905 7.4576 128.40 7.7394 8.6836 1.2322 0.85191 1.3189
         July 1.4279 1.3619 8.0234 7.4579 130.39 7.8837 8.6609 1.2366 0.86192 1.3080
         Aug 1.4742 1.3853 8.1477 7.4580 130.34 7.9386 8.7034 1.2338 0.85904 1.3310
         Sep 1.4379 1.3817 8.1690 7.4579 132.41 7.9725 8.6758 1.2338 0.84171 1.3348
         Oct 1.4328 1.4128 8.3226 7.4592 133.32 8.1208 8.7479 1.2316 0.84720 1.3635
         Nov 1.4473 1.4145 8.2221 7.4587 134.97 8.2055 8.8802 1.2316 0.83780 1.3493
         Dec 1.5243 1.4580 8.3248 7.4602 141.68 8.4053 8.9597 1.2245 0.83639 1.3704
2014          Jan 1.5377 1.4884 8.2368 7.4614 141.47 8.3927 8.8339 1.2317 0.82674 1.3610
         Feb 1.5222 1.5094 8.3062 7.4622 139.35 8.3562 8.8721 1.2212 0.82510 1.3659
         Mar 1.5217 1.5352 8.5332 7.4638 141.48 8.2906 8.8666 1.2177 0.83170 1.3823
         Apr 1.4831 1.5181 8.5984 7.4656 141.62 8.2506 9.0329 1.2189 0.82520 1.3813
         May 1.4755 1.4951 8.5658 7.4641 139.74 8.1513 9.0298 1.2204 0.81535 1.3732
         June 1.4517 1.4728 8.4698 7.4588 138.72 8.2149 9.0914 1.2181 0.80409 1.3592
         July 1.4420 1.4524 8.3940 7.4564 137.72 8.3880 9.2327 1.2150 0.79310 1.3539
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
12 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2014
XII  External sector
 
13  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-20  1 EER-39  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
25 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
25 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.2 96.1 95.9 96.2 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.6
2000 87.0 86.6 86.1 85.4 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.2 85.2 90.8 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.6 84.5 90.4 87.1 91.3 96.0 85.7 89.9 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.3 89.6 87.8 94.9 90.7 91.9 95.1 88.2 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.6 101.4 100.6 98.8 106.8 101.6 95.2 94.0 97.2 94.6 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.4 105.2 103.4 102.4 111.4 105.2 95.5 92.9 99.6 94.9 98.4 97.9 98.2
2005 102.9 103.7 101.4 100.4 109.4 102.7 94.4 91.5 98.8 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.7 100.7 99.3 109.4 102.0 93.3 90.1 98.4 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.7
2007 106.2 106.4 102.7 101.0 112.8 104.0 94.2 89.2 102.5 91.5 100.8 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.5 103.9 103.8 117.0 106.0 94.4 87.8 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.7 97.0
2009 110.6 109.1 104.8 106.1 119.8 106.9 94.0 88.0 104.1 90.6 101.7 97.9 97.3
2010 103.6 101.6 96.7 98.7 111.5 98.2 91.7 87.8 97.9 87.3 98.8 93.8 92.2
2011 103.4 100.7 95.0 p 96.8 112.2 97.7 91.6 87.7 97.6 86.7 98.2 93.1 91.7
2012 97.9 95.6 89.8 p 91.6 107.1 92.9 89.7 87.6 92.6 84.3 96.0 90.3 88.8
2013 101.7 98.9 p 93.4 p 93.8 112.0 96.2 p 92.0 p 88.1 98.1 p 86.2 98.3 92.1 90.8
2011          Feb 102.4 99.9 94.7 96.9 110.7 96.6 91.6 87.9 97.4 86.8 98.1 92.8 91.2
         Mar 104.1 101.6 112.4 98.2 98.6 93.5 92.0
         Apr 105.8 103.4 114.1 99.7 99.5 94.3 92.8
         May 104.8 102.2 96.9 99.4 113.3 98.7 92.5 87.8 100.1 87.6 99.0 93.7 92.1
         June 104.9 102.2 113.5 98.8 99.0 93.7 92.2
         July 104.0 101.0 112.4 97.7 98.6 93.3 91.7
         Aug 103.8 100.8 94.9 97.3 113.0 98.1 91.4 87.7 97.3 86.6 98.2 93.1 91.8
         Sep 102.8 99.9 112.1 97.5 97.8 92.7 91.5
         Oct 103.0 100.2 112.6 97.9 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 93.7 p 93.5 112.1 97.4 90.7 87.5 95.5 85.8 97.6 92.7 91.5
         Dec 100.8 98.2 110.3 95.8 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.4 108.1 93.8 96.2 90.8 89.4
         Feb 99.7 97.3 91.4 p 93.5 108.4 94.2 90.1 87.5 93.8 84.8 96.8 91.3 89.7
         Mar 99.9 97.4 108.7 94.4 96.9 91.2 89.6
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.5 94.3 96.7 91.1 89.5
         May 98.1 95.7 90.2 p 92.5 107.3 93.1 89.8 87.6 92.8 84.5 95.9 90.4 88.9
         June 97.2 94.9 106.6 92.5 95.5 89.9 88.6
         July 95.4 93.2 104.3 90.7 94.9 89.1 87.5
         Aug 95.2 93.1 88.1 p 90.2 104.5 90.6 89.0 87.7 90.7 83.6 95.0 89.0 87.5
         Sep 97.2 95.0 106.6 92.5 95.6 89.9 88.5
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.3 92.9 95.9 90.1 88.6
         Nov 97.2 94.9 89.7 p 90.2 106.7 92.3 89.9 87.7 93.0 84.4 95.8 89.8 88.4
         Dec 98.7 96.3 108.3 93.6 96.6 90.6 89.2
2013          Jan 100.4 98.0 109.9 94.9 97.4 91.5 89.9
         Feb 101.6 99.1 92.6 p 94.6 111.1 95.8 91.2 87.7 96.7 85.7 98.1 92.0 90.4
         Mar 100.2 97.9 109.5 94.5 97.7 91.5 89.7
         Apr 100.5 97.9 109.8 94.4 97.5 91.3 89.5
         May 100.5 98.1 p 93.1 p 94.5 110.0 94.6 91.9 88.1 97.8 86.1 98.1 91.7 89.9
         June 101.6 98.9 112.0 96.1 98.3 92.2 90.8
         July 101.5 98.9 112.0 96.2 98.4 92.1 90.8
         Aug 102.2 99.5 p 93.5 p 95.2 113.4 97.3 92.1 88.1 98.4 86.2 98.5 92.4 91.3
         Sep 102.0 99.1 113.3 97.0 98.5 92.3 91.3
         Oct 102.8 99.8 114.2 97.4 98.8 92.6 91.5
         Nov 102.6 99.5 p 94.3 p 91.0 114.2 97.3 p 92.7 p 88.4 99.5 p 86.9 99.0 92.8 91.8
         Dec 103.9 100.7 115.8 98.6 99.2 93.1 92.3
2014          Jan 103.4 100.3 115.9 p 98.6 99.1 93.0 p 92.3
         Feb 103.6 100.4 p 95.5 p 93.3 116.3 p 98.9 p 92.7 p 88.3 99.8 p 87.3 99.0 93.0 p 92.4
         Mar 104.6 101.3 117.5 p 99.6 99.2 93.5 p 92.8
         Apr 104.5 p 101.0 117.0 p 98.9 99.0 p 93.3 p 92.4
         May 103.8 p 100.1 ... ... 116.1 p 97.8 ... ... ... ... p 98.7 p 92.9 p 91.9
         June 103.0 p 99.2 115.1 p 96.9 p 98.3 p 92.5 p 91.4
         July 102.6 p 98.7 114.6 p 96.4 p 98.1 p 92.2 p 91.1
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-20 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro-area countries and countries
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, belonging to the EER-20 group. 6Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the
Hungary, Japan, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, EER-39 group (see footnote 2). Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2013 see the index attached 
to the January 2014 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2013
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2012
– The development of government interest 
 expenditure in Germany
– Forecasting models in short-  term business 
cycle analysis – a workshop report
October 2013
– The determinants and regional dependen -
cies of house price increases since 2010– Macroeconomic approaches to assessing 
price competitiveness
– International cooperation in the area of 
 financial sector policy – the Financial Stabil -
ity Board (FSB)
November 2013
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2013
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2014 and 2015
– Outlook for European retail payments
– German enterprises‘ profitability and finan -
cing in 2012
– The financial system in transition: the new 
importance of repo markets
January 2014
– Adjustment processes in the member states 
of economic and monetary union
February 2014
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
81•

March 2014
– The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implica -
tions
– German balance of payments in 2013
– Manufacturing enterprises in Germany and 
their vulnerability to crises – findings of a risk 
analysis using annual financial statement 
data
April 2014
– On the reliability of international organisa -
tions’ estimates of the output gap
– Implications of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
operations during the financial crisis
– Some approaches to explaining the behav -
iour of inflation since the last financial and 
economic crisis
May 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2014 and 2015 
and an outlook for 2016
– Europe’s new recovery and resolution regime 
for credit institutions
– Changes in the methodology and classifica -
tions of the balance of payments and the 
international investment position
– Cash withdrawals at the point of sale: motives 
for use and implications for cash holding
July 2014
– Exchange rates and financial stress
– Germany’s statutory health insurance scheme: 
past developments and future challenges
– Consolidated financial statement statistics as 
a contribution to the extended corporate 
analysis: approach and initial results
– Analyses of the importance of the insurance 
industry for financial stability
August 2014
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 84•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
82•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20142, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2008 to 
2013, June 20142
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
2006 bis 2012 , December 20132, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2010 bis 
2011, May 20142, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20141, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
09/ 2014  
Market transparency and the marking precision 
of bond mutual fund managers
10/ 2014  
A consistent set of multilateral productivity 
 approach-based indicators of price competi -
tiveness
11/ 2014  
Analyzing business and financial cycles using 
multi-level factor models
12/ 2014  
How do households allocate their assets? – 
 Stylized facts from the Eurosystem Household 
Finance and Consumption Survey
13/ 2014  
Consumer cash usage: a cross-country com -
parison with payment diary survey data
14/2014  
Collateral imbalances in intra-European trade? 
Accounting for the differences between gross 
and value added trade balances
15/2014  
Quantifying the components of the banks’ net 
interest margin
16/2014  
Household saving behavior and credit con -
straints in the Euro area
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 84•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
83•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2014  
84•

