Monthly Report
August 2015
Vol 67  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 14 August 2015.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The economic situation and outlook in Greece  ...................................................................  17
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Liquidity development in the Greek banking system and central bank funding  ...................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  25
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Recalculated weights for indicators of the German  economy’s price competitiveness  .........  40
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  48
Initial indications of how the minimum wage is affecting the increase in earnings  .............  55
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61
Third assistance programme for Greece  ..............................................................................  62Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
5

Overview
Ongoing upturn
Following a weak start to the year, global eco -
nomic growth appears to have picked up only 
slightly in the second quarter of 2015. One im -
portant factor behind this minor improvement 
was the economic upturn in the United States. 
Although the adjustment process in the oil 
 industry persisted, the US economy managed 
to shake off other exceptional constraints. In 
China, the previously observed deceleration in 
macroeconomic growth did not continue in the 
second quarter. Nevertheless, risks of a stronger 
cyclical slowdown remain high. The Chinese 
central bank’s decision to allow the renminbi to 
depreciate against the US dollar may be inter -
preted as evidence of uneasiness. The recovery 
in the euro area continued despite the renewed 
intensification of the sovereign debt crisis in 
Greece. All things considered, the pace of 
global economic expansion remained moder -
ate compared with the previous momentum. 
The global industrial sector and the interna -
tional goods trade remained sluggish.
The monetary policy stances became even 
more accommodative over the past few 
months in a number of countries, not least 
China. This, combined with other factors – the 
positive effects of lower oil prices are often 
cited in this context – will support the continu -
ation of the moderate recovery of the world 
economy. Prerequisites for steady growth, 
however, are that no major disruptive factors 
materialise. The macroeconomic consequences 
of the crisis in Greece are likely to be largely 
limited to the Greek economy.
Developments on the international financial 
markets in the second quarter were driven to a 
great extent by the central banks. In March 
2015 the Eurosystem began implementing the 
ECB Governing Council’s decision of mid-  January 
to launch the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme (EAPP), under which public and pri -vate- sector securities totalling, on average, €60 
billion in value are to be bought each month 
on the secondary market. Interest rates on 
euro-  area bond markets initially responded by 
falling – in some cases to record lows. But 
yields on US Treasuries also dipped for a while 
due to a string of unexpectedly negative eco -
nomic data. Sentiment on the bond markets 
turned at the end of April, however. Investors 
worldwide perceived that yields had dropped 
to an unsustainably low level, triggering a con -
siderable counterswing. The euro, too, tempor -
arily made distinct gains in the forex markets 
against the US dollar, pound sterling and yen. 
While the financial markets were subsequently 
gripped for a time by rising uncertainty about 
the outcome of the negotiations between the 
Greek government and its creditors as well as 
developments in China, yields on both sides of 
the Atlantic rose over the reporting period on 
balance. Stock markets in the United States 
and, above all, in Japan posted price gains at 
the end of the second quarter despite rising 
bond yields and intermittent heightened uncer -
tainty, whereas share prices in the euro area 
were down – in some cases clearly – compared 
with the end of the first quarter. Overall, the 
euro gained considerable ground in nominal 
effective terms, primarily because China’s cen -
tral bank – as mentioned – changed its refer -
ence rate.
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to keep key interest rates unchanged in the 
 reporting period. In addition, the Eurosystem 
continued to implement the EAPP with the an -
nounced monthly purchase volume averaging 
€60 billion. Moreover, the fourth of eight tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs) was carried out in June. In this oper -
ation, banks borrowed a total of close to €74 
billion from the Eurosystem.Global economy
Financial 
 marketsMonetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
6

The marked recovery of the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 that set in at the beginning of 
2014 gained further momentum during the 
 reporting quarter. The renewed rise in the an -
nual M3 growth rate to 5.0% at the end of 
June was driven mainly by the money- holding 
sector’s continued preference for highly liquid 
assets as the extremely low general interest 
rate level persisted. The upward trend in loans 
to the non- financial private sector is likewise to 
be seen in the context of both the very favour -
able financing conditions and the modest yet 
broadly based cyclical upturn. The monetary 
aggregate was increasingly buoyed in addition 
by securitised lending to the euro- area general 
government sector, which grew further on bal -
ance in the quarter to June in the wake of the 
EAPP .
The Greek banking system experienced massive 
outflows of liquidity caused by the nervousness 
that followed the general election in Greece. 
Given the lack of other sources of funding, 
these huge outflows were primarily financed in 
the past months through loans granted by the 
Greek central bank – notably in the form of 
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). These 
loans increased by over €80 billion from De -
cember 2014, and the situation did not stabilise 
until capital controls were imposed after the 
assistance programme ended and it was agreed 
that negotiations would be held regarding a 
possible follow- up programme (see the box on 
pages 23 and 24). Unlike the implementation 
of monetary policy operations, Eurosystem 
national  central banks may – under their own 
responsibility and at their own risk and by way 
of exception  – provide emergency liquidity 
assistance  to solvent financial institutions facing  
temporary liquidity problems. Developments in 
Greece should be viewed critically, however, 
particularly in view of the prohibition on the 
monetary financing of sovereigns.
The German economy’s relatively robust up -
swing continued in the second quarter. Accord -
ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash esti -
mate, real gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 0.4% in the second quarter of 2015 com -
pared with the first three months of the year 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. This 
means that the increase in economic output 
nearly matched that of the two preceding 
quarters at an average of 0.5% per quarter. The 
underlying output rate has been distinctly ex -
ceeding the potential rate ever since the cycli -
cal lull in the middle of 2014 was overcome. 
The aggregate rate of utilisation of production 
capacity was in the upper part of the corridor 
of normal capacity utilisation of late.
Economic activity in the second quarter was 
given a sharp boost by exports, which bene -
fited from the slight firming of global economic 
dynamics following the sluggish start to the 
year and probably also from the euro’s earlier 
depreciation and returned to the faster- paced 
development seen in the second half of 2014. 
Export momentum was broadly based in terms 
of both geographic range and product range. 
The very sharp rise in exports was aided by 
large- scale deliveries from the aircraft and aero -
space industry. The pick- up in imports seen pre -
viously tailed off in the second quarter.
The more dynamic export growth offset the 
fact that the impulses from the domestic sector 
were less substantial in the reporting period 
than in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the first 
quarter of 2015 combined. However, the envir -
onment for consumer spending remains fa -
vourable given the positive labour market situ -
ation and a considerable rise in real earnings. 
Yet private consumption was relatively subdued 
in the second quarter after oil price- related 
gains in purchasing power, additional pension 
payments and the introduction of the general 
minimum wage had expanded the income 
base and had triggered a major adjustment in 
household spending patterns already in the 
preceding two quarters. Construction invest -
ment in the first half of the year showed a 
somewhat distorted development in that build -
ing activity was impaired far less than usual by 
the winter weather. Investment in machinery 
and equipment basically continued to point up -German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
7

wards despite a possibly somewhat muted pro -
curement trend on the part of enterprises in 
the reporting period. Firms’ ample scope for 
internal financing, thanks to their ongoing 
stable profit and liquidity situation, is likely to 
have been a decisive factor behind the slight 
contraction in lending to corporates in the real 
sector during the second quarter.
The labour market situation showed a further 
improvement between April and June of this 
year. Both the level of employment and vacan -
cies rose again, while unemployment fell. The 
unusually sharp decline in mini- jobs since the 
beginning of the year, coupled with a com -
paratively strong expansion in jobs subject to 
social security contributions in some relatively 
labour-  intensive services sectors, can probably 
be interpreted largely as an adjustment by 
enter prises in response to the introduction of 
the general statutory minimum wage. Apart 
from this transmutation effect, the impact of 
the introduction of the minimum wage on the 
total number of hours worked appears to be 
very limited in the context of the currently 
 favourable economic environment.
The rise in negotiated rates of pay in the sec -
ond quarter of 2015 was barely higher than in 
the preceding three months. The fact that the 
increase of around 2% in negotiated wages 
during the period under review also fell percep -
tibly short of the year- on- year growth rate of 
close to 3% underlines the moderate basic 
tenor of the current pay round. However, the 
increase in actual earnings in the second quar -
ter probably again outstripped that in negoti -
ated pay rates. The first quarter of 2015 had 
witnessed a positive wage drift for the first 
time in just over two years. This turnaround 
was chiefly attributable to the introduction of 
the general minimum wage. This particularly 
benefited low- skilled workers and employees in 
low- paid sectors in eastern Germany, and pre -
sumably also persons in low- paid part- time 
jobs (up to €450 per month) all over Germany. 
Initial estimates on the basis of the quarterly 
earnings survey suggest that the minimum wage may have contributed around 1¾ per -
centage points to the rise in wages for employ -
ees outside the low- paid part- time sector in 
eastern Germany. Assuming that the introduc -
tion of the minimum wage had no impact on 
wage developments of workers outside the 
low- paid part- time sector in western Germany, 
the contribution to the wage increase calcu -
lated for Germany as a whole amounts to 
around ¼%. Projections based on the Socio-  
Economic Panel (SOEP) indicate that this value 
could roughly double if the impact on the earn -
ings of low- paid part- time workers in the whole 
of Germany is additionally taken into account.
On the whole, prices returned to an upward 
trajectory in the second quarter. This turna -
round in import, producer and consumer prices 
can largely be explained by the fact that crude 
oil prices rebounded from their low level in 
January well into May. In addition, the euro de -
preciated slightly further. Consumer prices 
went up appreciably in the second quarter af -
ter having fallen in the first three months of the 
year. Almost half of this growth was attributa -
ble to the recovery in crude oil prices. Of late, 
however, oil prices have weakened significantly 
again on the international markets. While this 
has initially led to an easing of import prices, in 
particular, it is likely to have a knock- on effect 
on downstream prices as well. After stripping 
out the volatile energy component, the core 
inflation measure, too, currently appears less 
dynamic than had been expected several 
months ago. Should these lower crude oil 
prices become entrenched, the headline infla -
tion rate will probably hover at around 0% in 
the coming months before picking up again at 
the end of the year, driven mainly by the base -
line effect in the energy component.
The conditions are currently in place for solid 
economic growth in the second half of 2015, 
fuelled by both external and domestic demand. 
Domestic demand components will feature 
more prominently in the second half of the 
year – in contrast to the dynamics in the sec -
ond quarter of 2015, which were dominated by Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
8

exceptional factors. This will push up not only 
consumer spending, which remains buoyed by 
the highly favourable underlying setting, but 
also investment, particularly as enterprises that, 
looking ahead, may be facing above- average 
capacity utilisation levels are becoming increas -
ingly likely to invest in capacity expansion. Ex -
port business may benefit, for one thing, from 
the continuing recovery in the euro area. For 
another, the economic outlook for the United 
States and the United Kingdom, which are 
traditionally major sales markets for German 
exports outside the euro area, is comparatively 
favourable. In addition, the euro’s low external 
value will boost exports to non- euro- area coun -
tries. But it should also be borne in mind that 
external demand also currently faces downside 
risks stemming largely from emerging market 
economies.
The favourable development of public finances 
in Germany has continued thus far into the 
year. In the absence of any major disruptions, 
the general government surplus is expected to 
remain relatively stable in 2015 and 2016, at 
around ½% of GDP , and the debt ratio is likely 
to fall further. Public finances are chiefly bene -
fiting from the economic upswing and an on -
going decline in interest expenditure. This is 
 obscuring the underlying expansionary fiscal 
policy stance with its bias towards higher 
spending.
Despite this relaxation of the fiscal stance, dis -
tinct safety margins have been established vis- 
à- vis the borrowing limits. This applies to both 
the general government deficit limit as defined 
in the European fiscal compact and to central 
government’s debt brake. According to its 
most recent financial plan, the Federal Govern -
ment remains committed to its objective of 
maintaining a balanced central government 
budget until 2019. However, since this is predi -
cated on the expectation of an improving eco -
nomic situation, simply maintaining a balanced 
budget would equate to a deterioration in the 
structural balance. Growing relaxation of the 
fiscal stance is also apparent in relation to the financial plan of summer 2014. The targets 
were not altered even though savings on inter -
est expenditure are expected to rise to almost 
€10 billion at their maximum. To sum up, the 
Federal Government’s financial plan appears to 
be based on rather cautious estimates, on the 
one hand, while, on the other, risks exist not 
least from the international environment.
It is precisely in the good times that safety mar -
gins vis- à- vis borrowing limits should be built 
up. They make it easier to withstand negative 
shocks without endangering the credibility of 
budgetary rules or potentially rendering it nec -
essary to initiate procyclical countermeasures. 
At the same time, it would make sense to use 
the current protracted demographic lull to rap -
idly cut the debt ratio to below 60%. The re -
sulting containment of the interest burden 
would create budgetary scope and strengthen 
the resilience of German public finances to pos -
sible future shocks. The favourable economic 
outlook would also suggest that the moderate 
structural surpluses planned by the Federal 
Government are far from overambitious. By 
contrast, calls that have been made in some 
quarters to additionally boost the economies of 
other member states by launching a major fis -
cal demand stimulus in Germany appear un -
convincing owing, inter alia,  to the very limited 
transmission effects that such a national stimu -
lus programme would be likely to entail.
Measures aimed at maintaining a good public 
infrastructure or generally increasing potential 
growth do not require a further easing of the 
budgetary stance or creating additional spend -
ing via shadow budgets; instead, they can be 
implemented within the planned financial 
framework. It is ultimately a question of setting 
the right priorities; furthermore, tapping effi -
ciency reserves should also remain firmly on the 
agenda. In previous years, foreseeable budget -
ary scope has mainly been used to increase 
spending – for instance, on pensions. Should 
additional scope arise in the future, it would 
seem far more appropriate instead to consider 
easing the burden of taxes and social contribu -Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
9

tions, which are set to rise further in the face of 
growing demographic challenges. Thus the 
German government could do more to counter 
income tax bracket creep, lower social contri -
butions by financing non- insurance- related so -
cial benefits out of general taxation or consider a more rapid reduction of the “solidarity sur -
charge” on income and corporation tax, for 
which the justification as a federal tax sur -
charge is becoming less and less apparent now 
that the special- purpose grants to the federal 
states in eastern Germany are being phased out.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Following a weak start to the year, global eco -
nomic growth is likely to have picked up only 
sluggishly in the second quarter of 2015. The 
recovering US economy was a major reason 
why a marginal uptick was possible. Although 
the adjustment process in the oil industry per -
sisted, the US economy managed to shake off 
other exceptional constraints. In China, the 
previously observed deceleration in macroeco -
nomic growth did not continue in the second 
quarter. However, the risk of a “hard landing” is 
still high. The Chinese central bank’s decision 
to devalue the renminbi against the US dollar 
may be regarded as a sign of this uncertainty. 
The recovery in the euro area continued des -
pite the political turmoil in Greece. Elsewhere, 
however, the economic picture became gloom -
ier. Russia’s economy remained mired in reces -
sion, and the same could possibly apply to Bra -
zil. As this report went to press, no official data 
on Japanese economic output for the second 
quarter were out yet. Following the sharp in -
crease in the first quarter, however, a renewed 
cyclical setback in the quarter ended cannot be 
ruled out. All things considered, the pace of 
global economic expansion remained moder -
ate compared with earlier rates.
The exceptionally weak performance of the 
 industrial sector and global trade, which lasted 
into the second quarter, needs to be taken into 
account. According to data provided by the 
Dutch Centraal Planbureau, global industrial 
output in April and May held steady following 
slight growth in the first quarter. The volume of 
global goods trade even fell perceptibly once 
again. However, the decline was regionally 
broadly based, after having been heavily con -
centrated on Asian emerging market econ -
omies (EMEs) in the first quarter. It is note -
worthy that, following both the severe earth -
quake in Japan in 2011 and the euro- area re -
cession in 2012, the volume of global trade did not fall in similar measure. The current weak -
ness is probably due primarily to developments 
in China and other EMEs, which are also asso -
ciated with a longer- term growth slowdown.1
The monetary policy stances grew even more 
accommodative over the past few months in a 
number of countries, not least China. This, 
combined with other factors –  the positive 
 effects of lower oil prices are frequently cited – 
will support the continuation of the moderate 
recovery of the world economy. Steady growth, 
however, is predicated on the absence of major 
disruptions, such as those caused by the finan -
cial markets. The macroeconomic conse -
quences of the Greek crisis are likely to be 
largely confined to that country’s economy.
Consistent with such considerations, the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised its 
growth forecast from the April issue of the 
World Economic Outlook only slightly. As part 
of the usual July update, it even confirmed the 
predicted rise in global economic activity of 
3.8% (purchasing power parity- weighted) for 
2016. However, for the current year it was 
forced to reduce its growth forecast to 3.3%. 
In April, the IMF had still been expecting 
growth for 2015 to tick up slightly to 3.5% fol -
lowing annual actual growth rates of 3.4% for 
the 2012 to 2014 period. The recent downward 
revision fits into a pattern of downward revi -
sions which have already been observed in the 
past few years.2 This latest move was due 
mainly to the weak gross domestic product 
(GDP) performance of some advanced econ -
omies in the first quarter of 2015 which the 
IMF had not expected in April. The United 
States was a particular case in point. The IMF Global 
 economic growth up only slightly …
… and indus-
trial sector and global trade still exceptionally weakModerate global economic 
growth expected 
to continue
IMF growth 
forecast for 2015 reduced somewhat
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Slowdown in growth in the 
emerging market economies, Monthly Report, July 2015, 
pp 15-31.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The global growth forecast 
revisions in recent years, Monthly Report, November 2014, 
pp 12-15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
11

now expects real US GDP growth of only 2.5% 
this year, following forecasts of 3.1% in April 
and as much as 3.6% in January. By contrast, 
the projected increase in euro-  area economic 
activity for 2015 has remained unchanged 
(+1.5%), with the projection for 2016 (+1.7%) 
up slightly from April. Looking at the group of 
EMEs and developing countries, the revisions 
were likewise confined within a narrow corri -
dor, although some economies are showing 
conspicuous revisions in opposite directions. 
The IMF’s assessment of the outlook for Russia 
is no longer quite so unfavourable, whereas for 
Latin America it has once again slashed its pro -
jections.
Following a relatively calm second quarter, the 
prices of key commodities fell considerably in 
July. Concerns about the persisting global in -
dustrial slump are likely to have played a role. 
The HWWI index for industrial commodities (on 
a US dollar basis) in July stood 6% below its 
April level, with the prices of non- ferrous metals falling particularly sharply. In the same 
month, the spot price of a barrel of Brent crude 
dropped back below the US$60 mark. The 
markets were under the spell of evidence indi -
cating that capacity adjustments in North 
American oil production were potentially near -
ing an end. Agreement reached in international 
negotiations with Iran will probably have had a 
similar impact. At last report, the spot price of 
Brent was US$49¼ per barrel. Forward deliver -
ies were once again commanding greater pre -
miums than three months previously. Unlike 
industrial commodities and crude oil, food and 
beverages temporarily became more expensive 
towards the middle of the year, when crop pro -
spects took a turn for the worse owing to the 
impact of inclement weather.
Consumer prices in the industrial countries 
trended back upwards as the second quarter 
progressed. A role was played by energy prices, 
which in June were well above their nadir of 
January. Nonetheless, annual price inflation for 
the entire basket of consumer goods still fluc -
tuated around the zero line. It is likely to per -
ceptibly move away from this barrier only to -
wards the end of 2015, once the preceding fall 
in energy prices has gradually exited the com -
parison and if no renewed markdowns occur. 
Excluding energy and food, the annual increase 
in the price of the basket of consumer goods 
remained restrained. Core inflation, at +1.1% in 
June, was even minimally lower than in March.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, the previously observed moderation 
of growth did not continue in the second quar -
ter. Real GDP growth stood at 7% on the year, 
which was just as high as at the beginning of 
the year. Whereas the industrial and construc -
tion sectors have continued to cool off, some 
services sectors grew at a faster pace. Over the 
past few weeks, prices on the Chinese equity 
markets plummeted dramatically, prompting 
the government to take a raft of measures to Industrial 
 commodity and crude oil prices downIndustrial coun-tries’ consumer price inflation low throughout reporting period
Stabilisation of 
growth in ChinaGlobal industrial output and world trade
Source: Centraal Planbureau. 1 OECD excluding Chile, Czech 
Republic,  Hungary,  Israel,  Mexico,  Poland,  South  Korea  and 
Turkey, but including Cyprus.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015951001051101151201252010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
95100105110115120Global industrial output
Industrial countries 1
World trade volumeEmerging economies
Total
Apr-
MayApr-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
12

stabilise the markets. However, the price slide is 
not expected to have much of an impact on 
the real economy. This does not alter the fact, 
however, that the Chinese economy is probably 
still facing considerable downside risk from an -
other direction: specifically, the high level of 
domestic borrowing.3 Consumer price inflation 
remained moderate in the second quarter, 
averaging 1.4%. In May and June, the Chinese 
central bank reduced its deposit and lending 
rates, which are the rates of policy concern to 
commercial banks. Following the central bank’s 
announcement in mid-  August to make the 
 exchange rate mechanism more flexible, the 
renminbi depreciated considerably against the 
US dollar.
In the first quarter, the most recent for which 
data from the national statistics office are avail -
able, India’s economy appears to have picked 
up steam. According to the official estimate, 
real GDP was up by 7½% on the year following 
growth of 6½% in the closing quarter of 2014. 
Manufacturing was the main driver of aggre -
gate economic acceleration. Inflation, aver -
aging 5.1% in the second quarter, remained 
low by long- term standards. This was due 
mainly to the dampening of pressure on food 
prices, which occupy a large share of the bas -
ket of goods. The Reserve Bank of India subse -
quently reduced its policy rate once again in 
early June.
The available indicators for the quarter ended 
are pointing to a renewed contraction of Brazil -
ian economic output. Real GDP had already 
fallen by ¼% in the first quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. Whereas exports rose strongly, 
household consumption and investment fell off 
considerably. Falling commodity prices and 
 extensive structural problems are besetting the 
Brazilian economy. The economic reforms 
promised by the government are thus far being 
implemented only very slowly. Subsidies for 
public goods were cut in order to consolidate 
public budgets. This caused consumer price in -
flation to go up further despite the recessionary 
tendencies. Inflation in the second quarter averaged 8.5%, thus surpassing the upper limit 
of the central bank’s inflation target band of 
6.5%. Against that background, the policy rate 
was raised once again in the past few months 
and now stands at 14¼%.
The recession into which Russia was driven by 
falling oil prices and international sanctions 
continued in the quarter ended. According to a 
preliminary estimate by the Russian Federal 
State Statistics Service, economic output con -
tracted by 4½% on the year following a decline 
of 2¼% in the first quarter. Manufacturing and 
construction saw activity decline especially 
drastically. Imports of goods on a US dollar 
basis were down by nearly 40% in terms of 
value from the same period a year earlier. Con -
sumer price inflation, though down slightly 
from its early- year record highs, still averaged Revival of 
 economic  activity in India
Economic 
 output 
 contracting 
in BrazilRussian  economy in  sustained slumpWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: avera-
ge of 1 to 7 August 2015, or 1 to 12 August 2015 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015455060708090100110120US dollar basis, 2011 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commodities
Food and 
beverages
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The international ripple 
 effects of a severe economic slowdown in China, Monthly 
Report, July 2015, pp 29-30.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
13

just under 16% in the second quarter. Against 
this background, the central bank gradually cut 
its policy rate to 11%.
United States
US GDP rebounded considerably in the second 
quarter. According to an initial official estimate, 
and after seasonal adjustment, real GDP was 
up by just over ½% from the previous quarter, 
for which, following a revision, weak growth is 
now being reported. Statistically, the acceler -
ation compared with the first quarter is attrib -
utable primarily to net exports, which ceased 
to strongly dampen GDP growth. Exports of 
goods and services grew faster than imports in 
the second quarter. In addition, household 
consumption resumed rapid growth, having 
probably been dampened by inclement wea -
ther conditions in the preceding quarter.4 How -
ever, private gross fixed capital formation rose 
only marginally as this report went to press.  Although real expenditure for private residen -
tial investment continued to tend considerably 
upwards, commercial construction activity was 
scaled back somewhat. The oil and gas indus -
tries even slumped at an accelerated pace. 
Invest ment in machinery and equipment was 
cut back more sharply than commercial con -
struction expenditure. In the second quarter 
the US economy, on the whole, returned to its 
moderate expansionary path, which is now 
somewhat flatter following the latest compre -
hensive revision of the national accounts.5 The 
upturn is expected to persist in the second half 
of the year because, amongst other things, the 
adjustments in the oil industry which are 
weighing on economic activity are likely to 
 expire. Unemployment in July held steady at its 
cyclical low (5.3%). Measured in terms of the 
consumer price index excluding energy and 
food, annual percentage inflation remained 
moderate in June (+1.8%).
Japan
As this report went to press, GDP figures for 
the second quarter had not yet been published. 
However, what the available information does 
indicate is that Japan’s economic recovery 
 appears to have remained unstable. The latest 
reported first-  quarter figures showed season -
ally and price- adjusted quarterly GDP growth 
of 1%. This was driven primarily by a sharp 
slowdown in destocking, the continuation of 
which seems doubtful. In fact, a renewed cyc -
lical setback in the quarter ended cannot be 
ruled out. The perceptible cutback in industrial 
production compared with the first quarter 
would be consistent with this picture. On the 
demand side, this may be associated with a 
 decline in external transactions; real goods 
 exports, according to the monthly indicators, 
fell perceptibly faster than imports. In addition, Return to 
 moderate  expansionary pathEconomic  recovery still  unstableReal gross fixed investment*by the US oil industry
5075100150200250300
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Bur-
eau of Economic Analysis. * Approximated aggregate of real 
commercial investment in structures used for petroleum and natural gas exploration and of real commercial investment in mining and oilfield machinery.
Deutsche BundesbankUS recessions
according to NBER2009 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The effect of one- off factors 
on real GDP growth in the USA in the first quarter of 2015, 
Monthly Report, May 2015, pp 15-18.
5 The growth rate for 2013, in particular, was revised 
downward, from 2.2% to 1.5%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
14

household consumption is likely to have sput -
tered, whereas private gross fixed capital for -
mation has probably continued its growth. Irre -
spective of the fluctuations in the monthly and 
quarterly figures, the Japanese economy’s 
underlying muted upward trend has probably 
remained intact. This is also indicated by the 
decline in the unemployment rate to 3.3% on 
average over the second quarter, its lowest rate 
since 1997. With the disappearance of the VAT 
effect from the annual comparison, consumer 
price inflation slid from 2.3% in March to 0.4% 
in June. Excluding energy and food from the 
basket of goods, the decline in inflation was 
somewhat less pronounced.
United Kingdom
The UK economy again expanded with more 
momentum in the second quarter. According 
to a preliminary estimate, seasonally adjusted 
real GDP rose by ¾% from the first quarter, in 
which it had grown by just under ½%. A key 
reason for this was a surge in oil and gas pro -
duction, which might have been linked to 
changes in tax legislation. Excluding this sector, 
GDP growth was only a little higher than in the 
previous quarter, partly because the manufac -
turing sector’s output even shrank and con -
struction output continued to hover at 2014’s 
third- quarter level.6 By contrast, growth accel -
erated in the services sector, which not only 
generates the greatest portion of value added 
for the UK economy, but is also the only large 
segment in which output surpasses the pre-  
crisis level. The recovery in the labour market 
nonetheless faltered. National figures put the 
standardised unemployment rate at 5.6% in 
the second quarter, marginally up from the pre -
vious quarter. Greater wage growth could have 
played a role in this. On the other hand, con -
sumer price inflation remained weak. Looking 
at the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP), the UK basket of goods excluding 
 energy and unprocessed food saw a year- on- 
year price rise of just 0.6% in June.New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6)7 as a 
group, economic output continued to expand 
at a somewhat more moderate pace in the 
second quarter, following substantial growth in 
the first quarter, when real GDP had risen by 
1¼% on the period after seasonal adjustment. 
In four out of the five EU-6 states that have so 
far published initial seasonally adjusted figures 
for GDP growth, aggregate output recorded a 
continued distinct increase from the previous 
period. In Romania, however, economic activity 
was practically at a standstill at the end of the 
period under review. Data for Croatia are not 
yet available. As before, the key engine of the 
economy was domestic demand, especially pri -
vate consumption, which benefited from the 
improved labour market situation and increased 
purchasing power coupled with falling prices. 
The unemployment rate for this group of coun -
tries as a whole was a seasonally adjusted 7.8% 
in the second quarter, significantly down from 
the prior- year figure of 8.7%. After recording 
its lowest rate in the first quarter (-0.8%), HICP 
inflation for the EU-6 remained in negative ter -
ritory in the second quarter, too (-0.2%). The 
individual rates ranged from -0.7% in Poland 
and +0.4% in Hungary and Romania through 
to +0.7% in the Czech Republic. Given the per -
sistently weak price trend, the central banks of 
Romania and Hungary once again cut their pol -
icy rates.Increased oil 
production and higher growth in the services  sectorEconomic  upward trend continuing
6 An earlier GDP estimate had already revised the assess -
ment of the pronounced bout of weakness in the construc -
tion sector, which had previously been reported for 2014 
Q4 and 2015 Q1, to indicate stagnation. A significant rea -
son for this was the use of new deflators, after the original 
underlying construction price and cost indices were sus -
pended and the interim estimates had proven to be uncer -
tain. The current procedure is merely an interim solution. 
See K Davies (2015), Impact of Interim Solution for OPIs on 
ONS Outputs, Office for National Statistics, available from 
http://www.ons.gov.uk .
7 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
15

Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The economic recovery in the euro area con -
tinued in the second quarter, largely unaffected 
by events in Greece. According to Eurostat’s 
first official estimate, second-  quarter real GDP 
grew by a seasonally adjusted ¼% on the 
period, exceeding the prior- year figure by 1¼%. 
The statistical information available thus far 
 indicates that the economic picture was pre -
dominantly positive, both by country and by 
sector and expenditure components. Divergent 
developments were only seen in a small num -
ber of areas.
Economic growth was once again especially 
strong in Spain, climbing 1% from the preced -
ing quarter. GDP rose by ½% in Germany and 
by ¼% in Italy. In France, aggregate economic 
activity stagnated, after having picked up sig -
nificantly in the first quarter. Most other econ -
omies generated fairly robust growth. In the 
case of the Netherlands, which had seen a 
sharp lift in economic output in the preceding 
12 months, the recent slowdown in GDP 
growth did not signal a cyclical reversal, but ra -
ther stemmed from the court- ordered cutbacks 
in gas production after the Groningen region 
experienced a spate of small earthquakes. With 
a ½% drop in GDP in Finland, the recession 
caused by industrial structural change and the 
slump in business with Russia continued for the 
fourth consecutive quarter. In Greece, real GDP 
went up by ¾% in the second quarter, after 
seasonal adjustment. However, the intensifying 
sovereign debt crisis is likely to place heavy 
strains on the Greek economy in the current 
quarter (see the box on pages 17 to 19).
On the output side, slightly positive impetus 
emanated from the manufacturing sector in 
the second quarter. Production of capital goods 
increased markedly, for instance, and produc -
tion of intermediate goods also rose, albeit on 
a smaller scale. While output of consumer 
goods stagnated, energy production declined 
considerably, partly owing to the forced cut -Economic 
 recovery  continues
Further 
 expansion of economic out -
put in most member states
Sluggish energy 
productionAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201599100101102103Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, 
log scale
99100101
9596979899100101
9697989910010199100101102103104105
Italy
SpainFranceof which
Euro area excluding GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
16

The economic situation and outlook in Greece
Greece’s economic situation is likely to have 
deteriorated considerably in mid-2015 after previously appearing to have stabilised and 
having even shown signs of a gradual 
 recovery. Given the heightened uncertainty 
surrounding the course of government, the considerable loss of consumer and business 
confi  dence and the capital fl  ight this 
sparked, the forced closure of banks at the 
end of June as well as the introduction of capital controls, greater aggregate losses 
can be expected for 2015 as a whole. The 
European Commission recently estimated a decline in real gross domestic product (GDP) of between 2% and 4%.
1
It was not until early 2014 that Greece 
ended the economic downturn which began 
in 2008 and caused economic output to sink by one- quarter and the number of employed  persons to drop by one- fi  fth. In the second half of 2013, the economy 
seemed to be gradually stabilising at a low level, primarily on account of foreign trade, 
which profi  ted from the improved price competitiveness in particular. The real ex-
change rate based on unit labour costs, for example, had improved in the previous fi  ve 
years by almost one- fi  fth in total, and the loss of competitiveness that had accumu-
lated between 2001 and 2009, measured in 
terms of this rate, was largely corrected. The turnaround in foreign trade was par-
ticularly pronounced in the case of exports of services in 2013, which is consistent with the steep rise in the number of tourists and 
in income generated in the tourism sector. 
Exports of goods had already recovered in 
the preceding years. In other sectors, the decline in industrial output and drop in 
 retail sales were at least halted. The current 
account recorded a small surplus in 2013, 
and the government budget ended with a positive primary balance according to the 
programme defi  nition of 1% of GDP .2 Four 
years earlier, these accounts both accrued 
defi  cits of more than 10% of GDP .
Following its stabilisation, the Greek econ-
omy was starting to show signs of a grad-
ual recovery in 2014. As in 2013, this was mainly due to increased export activity fuelled by the improved competitive pos-
ition and the economic recovery in the euro 
area. Exports of services rose by almost 13% in real terms, and exports of goods 
saw growth of 6%. At the same time, pri-
vate consumption also recovered some-
what, and gross fi  xed capital formation in-
creased markedly. Although construction expenditure continued to decline, invest-
ment in machinery and equipment – start-
ing from a very low base – picked up. The 
assistance provided by the EU is also likely 
to have played a major part in this. For ex-
ample, Greece’s mandatory own contribu-
tion to projects fi  nanced by EU structural 
funds was lowered from an average of 22% 
before the economic crisis began to 5%; 
this considerably expanded the investment 
options available to the fi  nancially con-strained country. On the output side, the upswing was concentrated on wholesale and retail trade and on accommodation and restaurant services, whose real value 
added increased by almost 7% on the year. In addition, industrial activity picked up over 
the course of the year, and the number of 
1 See European Commission, Assessment of the Com-
mission, in liaison with the ECB, of the request for sta-bility support in the form of an ESM loan, 10 July 2015, p 7.
2 The primary balance calculated in accordance with 
ESA 2010 was -8.3% of GDP in 2013. However, the 
balance reported here (calculated in accordance with 
the programme defi  nition) is adjusted, in particular, for 
expenditure in connection with bank recapitalisation. 
See also the box on pp 62-66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
17

employed persons also started to rise again. 
However, the economic improvement was 
fragile in that only parts of the economy 
were affected; in other industries, the situ-ation stabilised at most, and the aggregate 
downward trajectory in prices persisted.  Although real economic output rose by 
0.8% in 2014, GDP fell by 1.8% at current 
prices.
The beginnings of positive growth in 2014 
offered hope that the economic recovery 
would continue to fi  rm up in 2015. It was 
thought that the economy would receive 
additional stimulus from the devaluation of 
the euro and the persistent drop in the 
price of oil. At the beginning of 2015, the 
European Commission had therefore fore-cast GDP growth of 2.5% to be driven 
mainly by exports and an upswing in invest-ment.
3However, a stable policy regime would have been essential in order for the recovery pro-
cess to continue in this way. But by the 
second half of 2014, uncertainty about the economic policy course had already gained momentum.
4 The heightened loss of confi  -
dence was accompanied by a slowdown in growth. Exports, in particular, were hit hard; 
private consumption remained virtually un-
changed. Gross fi  xed capital formation held 
up comparatively well. In addition, public consumption rose signifi  cantly in the fi  rst 
quarter with the implementation of a num-
ber of the new government’s pre- election promises. The latest data show that real 
GDP stagnated in the fi  rst quarter of 2015 
and, according to a fl  ash estimate, grew by 
a seasonally adjusted 0.8% in the second 
quarter.5 Additional tourism revenue is also 
likely to have played a major role. Industrial output, by contrast, fell by almost 4% after adjustment for seasonal variations.
The introduction of capital controls and the 
closure of banks after the expiry without 
replace ment of the second assistance pro-
gramme at the end of June are likely to 
have signifi  cantly impaired further aggre-
gate growth. July surveys indicate that the 
assessment of the current situation and the 
expectations of consumers and enterprises 
have deteriorated considerably. Restrictions 
on payment transactions are likely to nega-
tively impact domestic and foreign trade. 
Owing to diffi   culties in acquiring intermedi-
ate goods, industrial productive activity is 
expected to have slowed again. Hardly any 
3 See European Commission (2015), European Eco-
nomic Forecast, Winter 2015, pp 75-76.
4 See the box on pp 62-66.
5 With the publication of the fl  ash estimate for GDP 
growth in the second quarter, the preceding quarters 
were revised slightly upwards. According to this esti-
mate, economic output in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the fi  rst quarter of 2015 did not contract, as previ-ously reported, but remained virtually unchanged. De-
tails on the composition of the growth are not yet 
available.Real GDP, exports of goods and services in Greece
Source: Eurostat. 1 As defined in the national accounts.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15901001101201301402000 Q1 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
Exports of goods1
Exports of services 1110120130140150160
90100110120130140Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
18

new investment projects appear to have 
been initiated. The effects on tourism, which got off to a very good start in the 
new year, remain to be seen. As in the pre-
vious year, bookings had increased and 
prices had recovered further. However, the 
crisis in July may have negatively affected 
the current season.
How quickly Greece is able to halt and re-
verse the renewed recessionary develop-
ment is likely to depend on more than just 
the resumption of payments. It is essential 
that confi  dence in the continued improve-
ment of the general economic climate is 
 restored by way of credible reform efforts. 
Some foundations for this have been laid in 
recent weeks with the agreement in prin-
ciple reached between Greece and its cred-itors on the country’s return to the path of 
reform. However, uncertainty continues to 
surround the political support for the neces-sary and far- reaching reform process.
With favourable developments and the commencement of a third assistance pro-gramme
6 this summer, the economic situ-
ation should gradually improve. Although 
the starting conditions for a successful new 
programme have signifi  cantly worsened this year, it should be taken into account that substantial adjustments have already been made to wages and prices, public 
 fi  nances and the current account balance in recent years. If payments and lending oper-
ations gradually return to normal, this should eliminate the interruptions in pro-duction that these adjustments have caused. Greece should then start to feel 
even more of the positive effects from the 
tourism industry and the extensive invest-
ment projects being fi  nanced by European 
structural funds.
6 See the box on pp 62-66.Confidence indicators in Greece
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 154020020
––+Monthly, balances of positive and negative survey responses
Industrial confidence
Services confidence
Consumer confidence–60–40–200+20+40
80604020
––––Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
19

backs in gas production in the Netherlands. As 
a consequence, overall industrial production 
even remained somewhat down from the pre -
vious period in seasonally adjusted terms. This 
is consistent with the fact that industrial cap -
acity utilisation could not be lifted between 
April and July, staying close to the multi- year 
average. In the construction sector, the avail -
able data show that economic output in April 
and May recorded a marginal seasonally ad -
justed decrease from the first quarter; the year 
of stagnation in this sector has not yet been 
overcome.
On the expenditure side, the recovery in the 
euro area is being supported in equal measure 
by external and internal demand. Private con -
sumption is benefiting from the stabilisation 
and gradual improvement of the labour market 
situation as well as from the low magnitude of 
price increases. In the second quarter, real retail 
sales recorded a seasonally adjusted increase of 
¼% from the first quarter, exceeding the figure from one year earlier by 2%. In seasonally 
 adjusted terms, new passenger car registra -
tions built on the healthy result of the first 
quarter, growing by 7% year- on- year. Business 
investment was probably also a renewed 
source of growth stimulus, as suggested by the 
higher output of capital goods. After seasonal 
adjustment, the value of goods exports to non- 
euro- area countries climbed by 2½% in April-  
May as against the first- quarter average. Given 
an increase in export prices of just 1½%, this 
export success can be explained by a significant 
volume effect. The value of imports rose by 
1¾% in April and May, but there was a price 
component of 2%. Adjusted for prices, imports 
of goods probably did not increase compared 
with the previous quarter.
Forward- looking economic indicators suggest 
that the economic recovery will continue into 
the third quarter. New orders in the industrial 
sector in May confirmed the higher figure of 
the previous month. The average of both 
months surpassed the first-  quarter average by 
2½%. The more current indicators of sentiment 
also point to sustained growth. In July, the 
composite Purchasing Managers’ Index was 
still well inside expansion territory. The Euro -
pean Commission surveys, too, corroborate 
this robust assessment of the situation. The 
confidence indicators for industry and services 
even went up slightly in July – despite a drastic 
worsening of sentiment in Greece. However, 
consumer confidence recently subsided a little.
The gradual improvement in the labour market 
situation continued in the second quarter, 
 albeit with reduced intensity. After seasonal 
 adjustment, the unemployment rate declined 
by 0.1 percentage point from the first quarter 
to 11.1%, following decreases of 0.2 percent -
age point in each of the two preceding quar -
ters. Unemployment abated slightly in most 
countries, although it rose somewhat in Fin -
land, Austria and Italy.8 In the first quarter, the Growth stimulus 
mainly from  private  consumption and exportsEconomic  recovery  expected to continue
Slight improve-
ment in the  labour market; wage inflation strengthening2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20159698100102Real retail sales
2010 = 100
2,0002,2002,4002,6002,800
New passenger car registrations
(Quarterly totals)
€ bnNumber
(thousands)
120140160180 Goods exports
(values)
Goods imports
(values)Seasonally and calendar-adjusted, 
quarterly averages, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche BundesbankScale reduced
Apr-
MayApr-
May
8 Data on unemployment in Greece are not yet available 
for the second quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
20

reduction in unemployment was accompanied 
by a low increase in employment. The number 
of persons in work rose by a seasonally ad -
justed 0.1% from the previous period, and by 
0.8% on the year. In line with the brightened 
labour market situation, wage cost growth 
 accelerated in the first quarter, reaching the still 
moderate level of 2.2% compared with the 
previous year.
Measured by the HICP in the euro area, and 
after seasonal adjustment, consumer prices in 
the second quarter of 2015 climbed by a fairly 
considerable 0.5% from the first quarter, fol -
lowing negative rates in the two preceding 
quarters. This was again mainly owing to 
higher fuel prices. But even when energy is 
 excluded from the calculation, consumer price 
inflation continued to accelerate slightly from 
the previous quarter, to 0.3% after seasonal 
adjustment. The increase in price inflation was 
fairly evenly spread across food, services and 
other industrial goods (excluding energy). The 
annual rate of increase in the latter was posi -
tive for the first time since the third quarter of 
2014, probably thanks in large part to the de -
preciation of the euro. Overall, too, annual 
HICP inflation moved into positive territory 
(+0.2%). Excluding energy, it rose to 0.8%, having stood at 0.6% in the three preceding 
quarters.
In almost all euro-  area countries, annual HICP 
inflation excluding energy was higher in the 
second quarter than in the first. This primarily 
applies to the majority of the (former) pro -
gramme countries. In most other member 
states, too, inflation excluding energy now 
 appears to be back on a slight ascending tra -
jectory. This development owes partly to the 
fact that, in the countries that were not hit as 
hard by the crisis, the decline in annual inflation 
in industrial goods prices was halted and 
 recently reversed to become an upward drift. 
Services prices, on the other hand, have been 
moving sideways year-  on- year for some time 
now.
In July 2015, consumer prices in the euro area 
remained unchanged against June after sea -
sonal adjustment, because the comparatively 
steep rise in other industrial goods and in ser -
vices was offset by a drop in energy and food 
prices. Year- on- year inflation therefore held 
steady at 0.2% as well. Excluding energy and 
food, however, it rose by 0.2 percentage point 
to 1.0%.Significant 
 consumer price inflation under-way, but year- on- year rates very lowHICP excluding energy up in  almost all  countries
Consumer prices 
no higher in July, mainly on account of  energyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to keep key interest rates unchanged in the 
reporting  period. Therefore, the main refinan -
cing rate remains at 0.05%, the marginal lend -
ing rate at 0.30% and the deposit rate at 
-0.20%. Moreover, the Eurosystem continued 
as planned to purchase bonds under the ex -
panded asset purchase programme (EAPP) 
agreed in January 2015 and launched in March 
2015.
The data that became available in the period 
under review were largely in line with the 
expectations  of the ECB Governing Council, 
which therefore did not change its assessment 
of a broadening of the euro area’s economic recovery and of a gradual increase in inflation 
rates over the coming years. The aim of imple -
menting these monetary policy measures is to 
help to achieve a sustained return of inflation 
rates towards levels below, but close to, the 
target of 2% in the medium term, and to 
underpin the anchoring of medium to long-  
term inflation expectations. At its July meeting, 
the ECB Governing Council also announced 
that it would respond to a material change in 
the outlook for price stability by using all the 
instruments available within its mandate.
The purchases made as part of the EAPP mainly 
comprised public sector securities under the 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP). In 
addition, the third covered bond purchase pro -
gramme (CBPP3) and the asset backed secur -
ities purchase programme (ABSPP) were con -
tinued on the same terms under the EAPP .
By 7  August, the Eurosystem had purchased 
€259.7 billion worth of PSPP securities. The 
average residual maturity of the PSPP portfolio 
is currently just over eight years. The cumulated 
holdings under the CBPP3 and ABSPP amount 
to €106.6 billion and €10.6 billion. Overall, the 
volume of securities purchased under the EAPP 
thus equates to the average monthly volume of 
around €60 billion previously announced.1
On 18 June 2015, the fourth of eight targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTROs) 
was carried out, in which 128 institutions bor -
rowed a total of €73.8 billion. This consider -
able demand is probably due first and foremost 
to the yield rise on the euro- area bond markets 
at the end of April and beginning of June, 
which spilled over to banks’ longer- term mar -Key interest 
rates still at historical  low
Implementation of the EAPP
Purchase 
volumes  remain consistent with announced target 
128 banks 
borrow  €73.8 billion in fourth TLTROMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-month  EURIBOR 
less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 1 to 12 August 
2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20150.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
050100Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rate
1 Because market activity usually eases off in August, part 
of the planned purchase volume for this month was 
brought forward (“frontloaded”) and, where necessary, 
subsequent purchases will be adjusted so that the target 
monthly volume of purchases under the EAPP will average 
€60 billion despite fewer purchases being made in August.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
22

Liquidity development in the Greek banking system and 
central bank funding
The calling of early presidential and par-
liamentary elections in Greece between Decem ber 2014 and February 2015 trig-gered a huge loss of confi  dence in Greek 
banks on the part of depositors.
The ensuing months saw extensive out-
fl  ows in the form of cash withdrawals and 
payment transfers abroad. Lacking other sources of funding, the banks fi  nanced 
these outfl  ows primarily through increased 
borrowing from the Greek central bank (see 
the chart below). Accordingly, the share of 
loans issued by the Greek central bank –  which include monetary policy refi  nan-cing operations and emergency liquidity  assistance (ELA) – in the total liabilities of 
the Greek banks has grown from 11.3% at 
the end of November 2014 to 32.8%. By 
contrast, lending by all Eurosystem central 
banks to all euro- area banks made up a 
share of just 2.2% of their aggregate liabil-ities as at the end of June 2015.
Unlike the implementation of monetary pol-
icy operations, ELA may be granted to solv-
ent fi  nancial institutions facing temporary 
liquidity problems, provided the prohibition of monetary fi  nancing is observed, by Euro-system national central banks – under their own responsibility and at their own risk and by way of exception.
1 Bearing this in mind, 
the development in Greece merits a critical assessment on several counts.
– 
The banks have repeatedly received 
 liquidity assistance over several years and for protracted periods of time.2 The 
granting of ELA, which actually is re-
served for exceptional cases, has thus 
evolved from a means of providing tem-
porary liquidity assistance to individual 
institutions into a longer- term source of 
funding for virtually the whole Greek 
banking system.
– The continuous use of ELA over a pro-
tracted period and the repeated need to 
recapitalise major parts of the Greek 
banking system may be seen as an indi-
cation that these were not merely tem-
porary liquidity problems. This is also sug-gested by the current debate surrounding 
the substantial recapitalisation require-ment of the Greek banking system as 
part of a new assistance programme.
1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, 
Novem ber 2013, pp  23-27, and European Central 
Bank, Monthly Bulletin, 10th Anniversary of the ECB, 
2008, pp 123-124.
2 At times, the liquidity assistance was replaced by 
monetary policy refi  nancing operations, made possible 
by temporary exceptions in the Eurosystem collateral 
framework and full allotment of the tendered amounts.Increase in Greek central bank lending to 
banks and outflows of funds from the Greek banking system
Source: Financial statements of the Bank of Greece. 1 Bank-
notes in circulation, including intra-Eurosystem liabilities related 
to the allocation of euro banknotes plus net liabilities related to transactions  with  the  Eurosystem  (TARGET2).  2 Lending  to 
euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy opera-tions denominated in euro plus other claims on euro-area cred-it institutions denominated in euro.
Deutsche BundesbankDec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June
2014 20150102030405060708090Cumulated change vis-à-vis end of November 2014
€ billion
Cumulated outflows of funds from Greece 
(Cash withdrawals and payment transactions)1
Increase in Greek central 
bank lending to banks2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
23

ket- based financing conditions, making the 
current TLTRO more attractive. Although insti -
tutions’ demand for the regular main refinan -
cing operations and three- month tenders con -
tracted, this did not fully offset the expansion 
in the refinancing volume through the TLTRO. 
The Eurosystem’s total monetary policy refinan -
cing volume amounted to just under €550 bil -
lion at the end of July, a level it last reached in 
February 2015.
As a result, excess liquidity rose further during 
the reporting period. While it only increased 
moderately between the beginning of May and 
the end of June, despite the ongoing EAPP pur -
chases, owing to the simultaneous decline in 
the provision of liquidity in the regular refinan -
cing operations, it rose significantly when the 
fourth TLTRO was allocated at the end of June. 
At almost €464 billion, excess liquidity is cur -
rently at the level it last reached in February 
2013. An ongoing rise in excess liquidity, not -
withstanding the dampening effect resulting from banks’ weaker demand for liquidity in the 
regular refinancing operations, has been ob -
served since the start of the PSPP purchases in 
March 2015. This situation is likely to become 
entrenched in the next few months.
Short- term money market rates continued to 
decline slightly during the period under review 
against the backdrop of the rise in excess 
liquidity  . The fall in the unsecured interbank 
money market rate (EONIA) and the secured 
overnight rate (Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight) 
slowed somewhat. The unsecured three- month 
EURIBOR also continued its downward trend to 
reach an all- time low of -0.02% at the current 
end. Overall, short- term money market rates 
therefore remained unaffected by the increase 
in yields and the higher volatility this caused on 
the euro- area bond markets. Temporary inter -
est rate rises were only seen at the longer end 
of the money market forward curve and the 
swap curve for contractual maturities of more 
than one year. Developments in Greece had Excess liquidity 
risingShort- term money market rates firmly in negative territory – The ELA funding should be viewed critic-
ally in the context of the prohibition of 
monetary fi  nancing.3
Given that neither the Greek govern-
ment nor the Greek banks are able to 
tap any sizeable market funding 
sources, the continuous lending by 
these banks to the Greek government 
can ultimately only be maintained by 
the Greek central bank’s ongoing granting of liquidity assistance. Seen 
from this perspective, the granting of 
ELA has the indirect effect of fi  nan-
cing the Greek government.
The main responsibility for managing 
and resolving a solvency crisis lies with 
the governments concerned.4 While 
the Eurosystem is obliged to support 
general economic policy in the EU as 
long as this does not jeopardise the objective of price stability, such sup-port must remain proportionate and should not be a substitution for re-
sponsible actions on the part of eco-
nomic policymakers. Otherwise, fi  scal 
functions which are the responsibility 
of the government would be taken 
over, and funded, by the central bank.
The ECB Governing Council can object to the granting of ELA
5 by a national central 
bank if it fi  nds, by a majority of two- thirds 
of the votes cast, that such operations interfere with the objectives and tasks of 
the Eurosystem.
3 The following is a summary analysis and is not meant 
to be exhaustive.4 See European Central Bank, op cit, pp 123-124.5 Or alternatively, as a more moderate option, restrict the granting of ELA.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
24

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods from 
22  April to 21  July 2015 saw a marked in-
crease in euro- area liquidity needs stemming 
from autonomous factors. In the June- July 2015 reserve period, the fi  gure averaged 
€513.3 billion, which was €48.0 billion higher 
than its average level in the March- April 
2015 period. This was due, fi  rst, to a net in-
crease of €26.1 billion in government deposits with the Eurosystem and, second, to an over-
all increase of €26.8 billion in banknotes in 
circulation. By contrast, the remaining autono-
mous factors (including net foreign assets) 
had a counterbalancing effect. The changes in 
the autonomous factors in the period under 
review had a liquidity- providing effect of €4.9 
billion on balance. Minimum reserve require-
ments rose by €1.7 billion to €112.3 billion across both reserve periods in June and July 
2015. This increase triggered an additional rise in the calculated liquidity needs (see the table 
below).The outstanding tender volume in the report-
ing period stood at €513 billion on average , 
although the greatest fl  uctuations occurred  in 
the June- July 2015 reserve period (see the 
chart on page 27). This was the result of the 
fourth targeted longer- term refi  nancing oper-ation (TLTRO) being conducted, during which 
a total of €73.8 billion was allotted. The out-
standing volume from tender operations rose 
to an overall amount of €557 billion on 
24 June 2015 – the value date of the fourth 
TLTRO. At the same time, in the week the op-
eration was settled, there were, on balance, 
no major shifts from the main refi  nancing op-eration or the three- month tender which was also conducted. This is possibly attributable  in 
part to the end of the month of June ap-proaching. Prior to the two other month- 
ends, the familiar pattern of greater demand 
for the main refi  nancing operations  and a sim-
ultaneous increase in the number of bidders 
was seen. On the whole, a gradual decline in the volume of main refi  nancing operations  (of 
€96 billion in the fi  rst operation  to a level of 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2015
22 Apr to
9 June10 June to21 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 11.5 –  15.3
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  6.3 –  19.8
3 Net foreign assets
1 + 29.8 –  12.8
4 Other factors 1 – 29.4 +  17.3
Total – 17.4 –  30.6
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations – 23.0 –  13.5
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations + 20.5 +  36.6
(c) Other operations + 92.5 +  88.7
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 +   0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 31.1 –   3.4
Total + 58.8 + 108.6
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 41.6 +  78.0
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.2 –   1.9
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
25

around €75 billion in the last few weeks of 
the period under review) could be observed 
across the two reserve periods
Purchases made as part of the expanded asset 
purchase programme (EAPP) had the greatest 
liquidity- providing effect in the reporting 
period. The balance sheet holdings of the three sub- programmes increased in the two reserve periods by €154.0 billion (PSPP), €29.9 billion (CBPP3) and €3.7 billion (ABSPP). As at 
7  August 2015, balance sheet holdings 
amounted to €259.7 billion (PSPP), €106.6 bil-
lion (CBPP3) and €10.6 billion (ABSPP). The 
corresponding holdings in the purchase pro-
grammes of the Eurosystem which had already  
been discontinued further decreased in the 
period under review as a result of maturities 
and taking into account end- of- quarter re-valuations. The balance sheet holdings of 
these programmes stood at €22.5 billion 
(CBPP1), €10.8 billion (CBPP2) and €130.6 bil-
lion (SMP) as at 7 August 2015. On 30 July 
2015, the overall balance sheet volume of all 
outstanding purchase programmes exceeded 
the liquidity needs stemming from autono-
mous factors for the fi  rst time.
Overall, excess liquidity increased signifi  cantly 
in the two reserve periods under review, 
standing at an average of €293 billion in the 
period from April to June and at €372 billion 
in the June- July period after it had amounted 
to an average of only €220 billion in the re-
serve period from March to April 2015. Des-
pite increasing, excess liquidity exhibited at times strong fl  uctuations within only a few 
days, which could often be attributed to the 
higher volatility of the autonomous factors 
(especially general government deposits with 
the Eurosystem). The liquidity needs resulting 
from the autonomous factors fl  uctuated 
between  €459 billion and €548 billion in the 
reporting period.
Due to the very generous liquidity supply, overnight rates in the reporting period re-
mained in line with the deposit facility rate of -0.20% and were consistently below the main 
refi  nancing rate of 0.05%. Excess liquidity, 
which is increasing on the whole, caused the 
gap to the key interest rate to widen further. 
This applied to both the EONIA as a reference rate for unsecured overnight deposits and for 
secured overnight money (GC Pooling Over-night, ECB basket) (see the charts opposite). 
The EONIA averaged -0.10% in the reserve 
period from April to June and -0.12% in the June- July period, compared with -0.06% in 
the period from March to April 2015. Secured 
overnight money showed similar develop-
ments. GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket), Central bank interest rates, money
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.  1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20150.20.100.1
––+Daily data
€ bn%
050100150200250300350400450500
Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
Spread between Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight and the main refinancing rate
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20150.250.200.150.100.050
–––––
Mean value for the reserve maintenance periodPercentage points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
26

which always fell short of the EONIA in the 
reporting period, stood at an average of 
-0.18% in the two periods under review (pre-
vious period: -0.16%), just two basis points higher than the deposit facility rate. New 
historical  lows were reached at -0.143% for 
EONIA and -0.194% for GC Pooling Overnight 
(ECB basket). The increase in excess liquidity 
also led to an overall narrowing of the spread 
between the EONIA and the secured over-
night rate. In addition, the increase in rates at 
month- end in the reporting period was a 
great deal less pronounced than in the previ-
ous months.
Another consequence of the increasingly 
comfortable liquidity situation was the consid-
erably lower overnight turnover. The under-lying EONIA turnover, which was already as 
low as €25.9 billion on average in the March- 
April 2015 reserve period, decreased further 
to stand at just €19.5 billion and €19.9 billion 
in the April- June and the June- July period 
respectively . A similarly strong decline of €5.3 billion on the previous period to an average of 
merely €8.9 billion in the reserve period from April to June 2015 was observed in overnight 
turnover with GC Pooling (ECB basket), which 
continued to fall in the subsequent period (June- July) to an average of €8.3 billion. 
Against the backdrop of excess liquidity in-
creasing further and overnight rates ap-
proaching the deposit rate, overnight trading apparently became less attractive as a conse-
quence.
Overall, excess liquidity continued to increase 
in the fi  rst two weeks of the July- September 
2015 reserve period (€467 billion on 11 Au-
gust). In addition to the continued provision 
of liquidity from the purchases made as part 
of the EAPP , a considerable decline in the autono mous factors contributed to the in-crease. The last day of July 2015, too, had only a marginal effect on overnight rates, 
whereas EONIA turnover, which had fallen to 
€12.3 billion that day (previous day: €19.6 bil-
lion), remained at this exceptionally low level 
for a few days after the turn of the month 
rather than returning to the level prior to 
month- end, as is often the case.Liquidity provision and use
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Securities Markets Programme (SMP), Covered Bond Purchase Programmes (CBPP1, CB-
PP2  and  CBPP3),  Asset-Backed  Securities  Purchase  Programme  (ABSPP)  and  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP).  2 Current 
account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility
60040020002004006008001,0001,200
–––++++++
January February March April May June July August
2015Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tenders
Three-year LTROsPurchase programmes1
Targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs)Marginal lending facility
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
27

just as little impact on short- term money market   
rates.
The positioning of money market rates within 
the interest rate corridor formed by the mar -
ginal lending facility and the deposit facility will 
therefore continue to be determined mainly by 
the (present and anticipated) liquidity position. 
Based on past experience of money market 
rate movements during periods of high excess 
liquidity and given the major alignment that 
has already been made towards the deposit 
facility  rate, the potential for a further fall in 
secured and unsecured overnight rates is likely 
to remain fairly small, however, despite an ex -
pected further increase in excess liquidity.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The marked recovery of the broad monetary 
aggregate M3 seen since the start of 2014 con -
tinued in the quarter under review. Although 
M3 growth was slightly weaker than in the pre -
vious quarter, the annual growth rate reached 
5% at the end of June – its highest level since 
March 2009. This was due, above all, to the 
money- holding sector’s sustained preference 
for highly liquid assets, driven by the exception -
ally low interest rates. The low interest rate level was also one of the reasons behind the 
ongoing recovery in loans to the private sector, 
which benefited additionally from the modest 
yet broadly based cyclical upturn. Owing to the 
Eurosystem’s securities purchases under the 
EAPP , monetary growth is also increasingly 
being underpinned by securitised lending to 
general government.
Growth in M3 in the second quarter was again 
mainly driven by overnight deposits, which 
benefited from the comparatively small and de -
creasing differences in interest rates compared 
to other types of investment, and which were 
accumulated by households and non- financial 
corporations, in particular. Conversely, these 
sectors’ demand for short- term time deposits 
fell again significantly in the reporting quarter. 
As in the two previous quarters, financial 
corporations  also increased their overnight 
deposits , albeit to a lesser extent than the non- 
financial private sector. Ultimately, the upward 
trend in monetary growth that has been 
observed  since the beginning of 2014 gained 
further momentum in the reporting quarter, 
and the annual growth rate of M3 rose slightly 
to 5.0% at the end of the period under review.
Despite a slightly slacker momentum in the 
second quarter, the ongoing recovery also mar -
ginally pushed up the annual growth rate for Low interest 
rates and secur-ities purchase programme key drivers of mon-etary growthSignificant M3 growth still driven by over-night deposits
Upturn in 
lending  growth continuesConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2015 Q2 2015 Q1
Central government deposits – 22.5 22.4
Monetary aggregate M3 113.6 154.6
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 175.8 214.6
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 32.2 – 58.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 30.0 –  1.6
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 
to other non-MFIs – 80.7 – 48.3
of which
Capital and reserves 10.7 32.3
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 91.5 – 80.6Assets 2015 Q2 2015 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area – 11.6 35.3
Loans 3.9 46.4
Loans, adjusted
1 22.2 53.5
Debt securities – 15.5 – 11.2
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 59.9 38.5
Loans – 15.4 21.6
Debt securities 75.3 16.8
Net external assets –  8.7 4.7
Other counterparts of M3 – 47.5 43.2
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. The data shown have been extensively revised, mainly in connection with the new regulation concerning the balance sheet of the monetary fi  nancial institutions sector and changes to the statistical reporting framework 
of a number of national central banks. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
28

loans to the euro- area private sector (adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation) to 0.9% at the 
end of June. Notwithstanding these evident 
signs of recovery, overall growth in lending to 
the private sector and thus the underlying 
monetary dynamics in the euro area remain 
very moderate, however.
The ongoing recovery in lending also extended 
to loans to non- financial corporations, which 
recorded a rise for the third consecutive quar -
ter and which increased appreciably between 
April and June (see chart opposite), albeit with -
out quite matching the prior-  quarter dynamic. 
This increase was once again driven mainly by 
loans with medium- term maturities, whereas 
long-  term lending contracted. Furthermore, 
short- term lending, which increased slightly on 
balance, continued its upward trend. Given the 
strong cyclical bias of this maturity segment, a 
further upward movement may be expected in 
the wake of an ongoing economic upturn. The 
rebound in the annualised rate of change for 
loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area as a whole thus persisted and, at 0.1% at 
the end of the reporting quarter, moved mar -
ginally back into positive territory for the first 
time since May 2012.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) carried out in 
the second quarter also pointed to a continued 
upward movement in lending to the non-  
financial corporations sector. Although the 
euro- area banks surveyed said they had, on 
balance, largely left standards for loans to en -
terprises unchanged at the first- quarter level, 
they reported a further perceptible increase in 
non- financial corporations’ demand for bank 
credit. The banks stated that this was driven 
mainly by the low interest rates on business 
loans, which remained largely unaffected by 
the rise in yields observed in the capital market 
in the three months under review.
While lending to euro- area non- financial cor -
porations in the four largest euro-  area coun -
tries had shown a highly heterogeneous pat -
tern in the first quarter, developments in net Ongoing 
recovery  in lending  to non- financial corporations  …
… against the 
backdrop of rising  demand
Corporate 
lending  in big 
four euro- area 
countries less heterogeneousMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan sales and secur-
itisation.  5 Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  from 
2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations. 7 Non-finan-
cial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201563036912
––++++
–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
30369
–+++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
growth contributions 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Net external
asset position
Credit to the
private sector 4
Financial
corporations 6
Non-financialcorporations 7
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Securitised lending to
general governmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
29

lending were somewhat more convergent in 
the three months under review. Banks in France 
and Germany recorded greater inflows, and 
there was almost a complete reduction of net 
redemptions in Italy.2 Only Spain recorded a 
significant deterioration in loan dynamics, 
which was reflected by a more rapid reduction 
in lending, bringing the upward trend that had 
begun there in mid-2014 to an end. As in the 
preceding quarters, German and Italian firms’ 
domestic demand for bank finance was prob -
ably curbed in part by their greater recourse 
to  alternative sources of funding (see also 
page 34).Growth in lending to households accelerated 
significantly again in comparison to the previ -
ous quarter. However, at an annual growth rate 
of 1.7% between April and June, the expansion 
of this aggregate was still moderate. In an 
environ ment characterised by historically low 
interest rates, lending growth was again driven 
by loans for house purchase, although con -
sumer credit also made a rising contribution. As 
in the previous quarters, euro- area aggregate 
growth in mortgage loans masked heteroge -
neous national developments. While mortgage 
lending continued to increase significantly, 
especially   in Germany and France, the periph -
ery countries saw a decline, not least on 
account  of the need for household deleverag -
ing in some of these countries, even though 
–  except in Spain  – there was a noticeable 
slowdown in net redemptions. For the euro 
area as a whole, the banks surveyed in the BLS 
likewise reported that demand in this credit 
segment had risen even more sharply than in 
the previous quarters, while credit standards 
had eased slightly.Marked rise in 
loans to house-holds driven mainly by mortgages , …Loans to non-financial corporations*
€ billion; three-month changes at the end of the quarter, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Non-financial corporations. As from the implementation of ESA 2010, from December 
2014, holding companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but 
are now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector in banks’ monthly balance sheet statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15252015105051015
–––––+++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2011 12 13 14 1550403020100102030
–––––+++
Securitised lending of MFIs to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 201510050050100150200250300
––++++++€ bn, end-of-month 12-month changes, not seasonally adjusted
Eurosystem
Euro-area MFIs excluding
the Eurosystem
2 In Germany, the lending business of domestic MFIs with 
domestic non- financial corporations was slightly negative 
during the quarter under review. However, because Ger -
man banks expanded their lending to non- financial corpor -
ations in the rest of the euro area during the same period, 
Germany’s contribution to the euro- area aggregate was 
positive overall.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
30

In contrast to loans for house purchases, the 
rise seen in consumer credit over the past few 
quarters was not limited to individual countries. 
It is probably a reflection of the ongoing pick- 
up in private consumption in the euro area. 
This is consistent with the information given by 
the institutions surveyed in the BLS, which 
reported   a large increase in demand for con -
sumer credit. According to the BLS, this was 
mainly attributable to consumers’ high propen -
sity to purchase, improved consumer confi -
dence and the low interest rate level. Further -
more, the banks surveyed reported a slight 
easing  of their credit standards in this segment.
Monetary growth is also increasingly being sup -
ported by an expansion in securitised lending to 
general government (see the lower chart on 
page 30). This is likely to be chiefly a result of 
securities  purchases by the Eurosystem under 
the EAPP . These increase the claims of the Euro -
system on general government, which, in turn, 
are counted as counterparts to the monetary 
aggregate. Given that purchases of securities 
from holdings of euro- area banks have no im -
pact on the money stock, the rise in securitised 
lending to general government by the MFI sec -
tor as a whole indicates that much of the pur -
chases ultimately  originate from holders outside 
the domestic  banking sector. This is consistent 
with the fact that the holdings of sovereign debt by banks and money market funds in the euro 
area fell only moderately in the second quarter.
Another determinant of monetary growth in 
the quarter under review, besides lending to 
non- banks, was again provided by the change 
in other longer- term financial liabilities to other 
non- MFIs (monetary capital), which – despite a 
perceptible rise in capital and reserves in the 
wake of the new regulatory and supervisory 
activities   – were reduced steeply again. This 
was primarily attributable to ongoing signifi -
cant net redemptions of long- term bank debt 
securities with a maturity of over two years and 
marked withdrawals from long- term time de -
posits. In particular, the continued contraction 
of bank debt securities held by the money-  
holding sector is likely to be mainly due to sup -
ply- side factors  in that, given banks’ continu -
ously growing deposits as well as cheap liquid -
ity provided by the Eurosystem, market- based 
financing currently appears to be comparatively 
unattractive for banks. This is consistent with 
the fact that euro- area banks made ample use 
of the TLTRO carried out in June in view of ris -
ing bond market yields. Moreover, the banks 
responding to the March BLS reported that 
they intended to use the funds they procured 
under the EAPP not just for corporate lending 
but also, and primarily, as a substitute for alter -
native sources of funding.… but also 
increasingly  by consumer credit
Securitised 
lending  to general  govern-ment bolstering monetary growthMarked fall in monetary 
capital  on the 
back of shrink-
ing long- term bank debt securities Balance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20153,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++End-of-quarter 12-month changes1 in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIsin the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including financial derivatives 
from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest 
of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
31

In the three months up to June, the MFI sec -
tor’s net external asset position, which has 
been the main counterpart supporting M3 for 
the last two years, recorded net outflows for 
the first time since mid-2012 despite the euro 
area’s sustained high current account sur -
pluses.3 This is presumably attributable to net 
capital exports in portfolio business fuelled by 
strong demand from domestic investors for 
securities  issued outside the euro area. One 
fact behind this is likely to have been the sub -
stitution of domestic securities sold to the 
Euro system under the EAPP by foreign secur -
ities. Yet the expected scaling- down of govern -
ment securities from the euro area by foreign investors under the purchase programme 
appears  to have been rather limited to date. 
Furthermore, non- resident investors expanded 
their purchases of shares a little on balance.
The balance sheet assets of euro- area banks 
contracted perceptibly in the second quarter of 
2015, triggered mainly by a decline in interbank 
claims in the euro area, as well as a marked 
rundown of financial derivatives in the trading 
portfolio (see the chart on page 31). Banks in 
Germany and France, in particular, reduced 
their claims on other financial institutions 
(excluding  the Eurosystem) distinctly, both 
domestically  and in the rest of the euro area. 
This, too, is presumably due to the comfortable 
liquidity position of the financial institutions. 
The reduction in commercial banks’ claims on 
general government in the euro area as a result 
of the EAPP had only a limited impact on their 
balance sheet assets. By contrast, banks’ claims 
on the Eurosystem in the quarter under review 
showed a slight expansion, which was accord -
ingly spread broadly across the euro- area coun -
tries.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
In Germany, too, the investment behaviour of 
non- banks in the second quarter of 2015 – as 
in the preceding quarters – was characterised 
by growth in short- term deposits and a reduc -
tion in longer- term deposits. Investors’ marked 
preference for liquidity is primarily due to the 
current interest rate environment (see the chart 
on this page). Thus the further narrowing of 
the interest rate spread of savings and short-  
term time deposits over overnight deposits was 
a key factor prompting non- financial corpor -
ations and, in particular, households to switch 
to liquid deposits. The growth in overnight de -First outflows 
in net external asset position since 2012Fall in banks’ 
balance sheet 
assets
Deposit business 
still marked by portfolio shiftsInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 15012345% pa, monthly
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
up to 3 monthsDeposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsDeposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
3 The net external asset position for the first quarter was 
revised discernibly upwards after the May Monthly Report 
was published. The revised data now show a small net 
inflow  for the first quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
32

posits in the quarter under review is likely to 
have been amplified by German households’ 
substantially rising disposable incomes and the 
high liquidity position of German enterprises.
The investment behaviour of financial corpor -
ations was likewise marked by shifts in the 
second quarter. While other financial inter -
mediaries, much like the non- financial private 
sector, showed a preference for more liquid 
deposits  and shifted the bulk of the funds freed 
by liquidating their long- term time deposits 
into overnight deposits, insurance corporations 
and pension funds also reduced their shorter-  
term deposits on balance. This is likely to have 
been driven by shifts into higher- yielding forms 
of investment outside M3.4
Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- 
bank sector contracted appreciably in the three 
months under review, after increasing in the 
previous seven quarters, in some cases signifi -
cantly. This was essentially due to a consider -
able decrease  in credit to general government, 
which affected both loans and securitised lend -
ing in equal measure. This is probably attribut -
able to higher net redemptions of loans in the 
context of the ongoing buoyant position of 
public finances and also to securities purchases 
by the Eurosystem under the EAPP .
Conversely, lending to the domestic private 
sector developed positively in the second quar -
ter. However, lending growth was distinctly less 
dynamic than in the first quarter; this waning 
momentum was attributable almost exclusively 
to lower securitised lending. In contrast, the 
marked uplift in loans to the domestic private 
sector, adjusted for loan sales and securitisa -
tion, that had been observed in the first three 
months continued in the second quarter.
In sectoral terms, loans were again primarily 
granted to households, which is reflected in an 
increase in the corresponding annual growth 
rate from 1.8% in the first quarter to 2.1% at 
the end of June. As before, this growth was 
driven by loans for house purchase, which make up the lion’s share of household borrow -
ing, the annual growth rate of which reached 
2.9% at the end of June – the highest level in 
around 12 years. Mortgage lending was fuelled 
by a steep rise in households’ financial assets, 
their stable income situation and the continued 
exceptionally favourable financing conditions. 
The MFI interest rate statistics show that the 
interest rate on long- term mortgage loans 
stood at 1.9% at the end of the second quar -
ter, after May’s figure of 1.8% marked a new Investment 
behaviour  of financial  corporations  mixed
Net decline in 
lending business with non- banks, but …
… lending 
business  with private sector positive and …
… driven by 
private  loans for 
house purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2015
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 45.4 48.9
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 0.1 – 16.5
of over 2 years – 9.9 – 14.3
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months – 2.2 3.3
of over 3 months – 2.6 –  4.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 11.3 –  6.3
Debt securities 2.2 –  6.5
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 14.7 12.1
of which to households 3 9.0 10.0
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4, 5 3.3 –  0.8
Debt securities 6.9 –  5.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Corpor-ations and quasi- corporations. 5 As from the implementation of 
ESA 2010 in banks’ balance sheet statistics, the holding com-panies of the non- fi  nancial corporations sector (eg management holding companies with predominantly fi  nancial shareholdings) 
have been reclassifi  ed from the non- fi  nancial corporations  sector 
to the fi  nancial corporations sector (as other fi  nancial intermedi-aries). Moreover, those entities and enterprises which are non- market producers (eg municipal utilities) and have been counted 
as non- fi  nancial corporations thus far have now been reallo-
cated to the general government sector (as off- budget entities).
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Portfolio reallocations into 
higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly Report, May 
2015, pp 39-41.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
33

historical low since the harmonised MFI interest 
rate statistics were introduced. Other reasons 
for this are provided by the latest BLS results, 
which suggest that demand for credit in this 
segment was additionally supported by house -
holds’ continuing positive outlook regarding 
the housing market and house price develop -
ments. The rising demand for loans for house 
purchase in the quarter under review was 
boosted by banks’ lending policy. Although the 
banks participating in the BLS did not adjust 
their credit standards in this segment in the 
second quarter, they did narrow their margins 
on loans for house purchase, in some cases 
considerably.
The banks surveyed in the BLS also experienced 
a significant increase in demand for consumer 
credit in the second quarter of 2015. The re -
spondent institutions attributed this to con -
sumers’ increased propensity to purchase, 
buoyant consumer confidence and the low 
interest rate level. The banks’ credit standards for consumer credit remained unchanged on 
balance between April and June according to 
the BLS. The BLS banks did, however, narrow 
their margins for both average and riskier loans 
in light of the current heightened competition 
in the banking sector.
By contrast, German banks’ lending business 
with domestic non- financial corporations de -
clined a little in the quarter under review, after 
recording a distinctly positive performance in 
the previous two quarters. However, this state -
ment must be qualified by the fact that long-  
term loans, which firms habitually use to fund 
larger projects, again showed perceptible in -
flows. Hence the outflows stemmed from the 
much more volatile segment of short and 
medium - term lending.
The BLS results provide no indication that the 
decline in loans to non- financial corporations 
could be due to supply-  side reasons. The sur -
veyed institutions markedly reduced their mar -
gins for both average and riskier loans and did 
not noticeably tighten their credit standards for 
business loans. Furthermore, they eased indi -
vidual credit conditions (eg ancillary charges 
and loan covenants) for their borrowers.
Hence, the weak credit dynamics seem to be 
due chiefly to a persistently sluggish demand 
for loans. According to the BLS responses, 
firms’ borrowing needs were dampened above 
all by their abundant scope for internal finan -
cing. In fact, internal funds – which probably 
now exceed  domestic firms’ moderate level of 
investment – have expanded steadily in recent 
years on the back of German enterprises’ stable 
profit and liquidity situation and have lessened 
their need for external funding.5 Moreover, 
Demand for 
consumer credit aided by positive  settingLending to non- financial corpor-
ations slightly 
negative, but …
… no indication 
of supply- side 
constraints, but 
rather …
… driven mainly 
by subdued 
demand Loans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations.  3 Corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  4 As  from 
the implementation of ESA 2010 in December 2014, holding 
companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as 
belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but are 
now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20151.51.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–––++++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2, 4
Non-financial corporations 3, 4Growth rate 1 in %
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The structure of corporate 
financing amid weak loan growth in Germany and the euro 
area, Monthly Report, August 2013, pp 42-43; Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Differences in dynamics of loans to non-  
financial  corporations in Germany and France, Monthly 
Report , November 2014, pp 36-37; and Deutsche Bundes -
bank , An international comparison of the importance of 
bank credit as a debt financing instrument for non- financial 
corporations, Monthly Report, November 2014, pp 42-43.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased some-what” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “nar-rowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2015 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 20151.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 151.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
35

alter native external sources of funds – such as 
intra- group loans, trade credit and loans from 
shadow banks – have been gaining in import -
ance for German businesses for some time, 
therefore additionally curtailing the share of 
bank loans in their funding portfolio. The BLS 
findings imply, on the other hand, that corpor -
ate borrowing was supported per se  in the 
quarter under review by the low interest rate 
level and by funding requirements for refinan -
cing, debt restructuring and renegotiation.
The BLS responses indicating that the current 
interest rate environment is conducive to lend -
ing are borne out by the finding in the interest 
rate statistics that interest rates on business 
loans are still at historically low levels. The 
interest rates on short- term funds, irrespective 
of loan size, were even somewhat lower at the 
end of June than in the preceding quarter, and 
interest rates on long- term small- volume loans 
remained stable at 2.0%. Only interest rates on 
large- volume loans with an interest rate lock- in 
period of over five years went up markedly to 
1.9%. Past experience suggests, however, that 
interest rates in this credit segment are strongly 
driven by individual transactions and are there -
fore highly volatile. Overall, neither the interest 
rates on loans to enterprises nor those on retail 
mortgages shadowed the considerable fall and 
subsequent rebound in capital market yields in 
the first half of 2015 in this form.The BLS conducted in the second quarter con -
tained ad hoc  questions on the banks’ funding 
conditions, the impact of the new regulatory 
and supervisory activities (including the capital 
adequacy requirements defined in the CRR/
CRD IV and the requirements resulting from the 
ECB’s comprehensive assessment) and on the 
banks’ participation in the TLTROs from 2014 to 
2016. The German respondent banks once 
again reported that their funding situation had 
improved slightly compared with the preceding 
quarter as a result of the situation in the finan -
cial markets. The banks did not, on balance, 
reduce their risk- weighted assets further in the 
first half of 2015 in response to the new regu -
latory and supervisory activities, but instead 
significantly strengthened their capital position 
further. The TLTRO carried out in March 2015 
met with similarly moderate interest from the 
surveyed German institutions as had been the 
case three months earlier. Those banks which 
did participate cited the attractive TLTRO terms 
as the reason for doing so. They stated their 
wish to use the funds obtained chiefly for 
granting loans, in accordance with the TLTRO’s 
objective. The banks anticipate that taking part 
will improve their financial situation somewhat, 
but do not expect any effects on their credit 
standards.Interest rates for 
business loans still historically lowTLTRO funds used chiefly for lendingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in the international financial 
markets during the second quarter of 2015 
were strongly influenced by the central banks. 
In March 2015, the Eurosystem began imple -
menting the ECB Governing Council’s decision 
of mid-  January to launch an extended asset 
purchase programme entailing the monthly 
acquisition  of public and private sector secur -
ities on the secondary market totalling, on aver -
age, €60 billion in value each time. As a result, 
interest rates in euro- area bond markets initially 
fell, in some cases, to record lows. Added to 
this, yields on US government bonds also de -
clined for a while due to a string of unexpect -
edly negative economic data. However, senti -
ment in the bond markets rebounded at the 
end of April. Investors around the world came 
to the conclusion that yields had dropped to an 
unsustainably low level, triggering a sizeable 
countermovement. The euro, too, temporarily 
chalked up marked gains in the forex markets 
against the US dollar, pound sterling and yen. 
Thereafter, the financial markets were for a time 
influenced by the heightened uncertainty sur -
rounding the course of negotiations between 
the Greek government and its creditors as well 
as stock market developments in China, where 
there was a dramatic fall in equity prices. In 
mid- August, there were also movements in the 
markets as a result of the Chinese central bank’s 
decision to change the mechanism used to set 
the reference rate of the renminbi against the 
US dollar. This triggered a major depreciation of 
the renminbi in the days following the decision. 
Against this backdrop, market participants con -
sidered it less likely that the US Federal Open 
Market Committee would announce an early 
initial rise in interest rates – despite growth mo -
mentum in the United States once again being 
appraised more positively than before. On bal -
ance, yields on both sides of the Atlantic rose 
over the reporting period. Stock markets in the 
United States and, above all, in Japan posted price gains at the end of the second quarter 
despite rising bond yields and intermittent 
heightened uncertainty, whereas share prices in 
the euro area were down compared with the 
end of the first quarter. Overall, the euro gained 
considerable ground in nominal effective terms, 
primarily on the back of the aforementioned 
depreciation of the renminbi.
Exchange rates
The euro initially fell to a rate of US$1.06 by 
mid- April, based on market participants’ as -
sumption that there might be a speedier rise in 
the key interest rate in the USA following the 
publication of the minutes of the Federal Open 
Market Committee at the beginning of April. 
However, the euro soon managed to stabilise, 
appreciating by 8 cents by mid- May to stand at 
US$1.14. This was brought about, on the one 
hand, by a series of weaker than expected busi -
ness statistics across the Atlantic and, on the 
other, by more favourable economic data in the 
euro area, which caused euro- area bond returns 
to increase sharply. For a while, the euro was 
subdued by the news that the Eurosystem was 
going to bring forward some of the bond pur -
chases planned for the summer. However, by 
June 2016 it was once again trading at US$1.14.
Nevertheless, as of the second half of June, the 
gains made by the euro began to erode, partly 
on account of a series of unexpectedly good 
economic data in the United States, in the 
wake of which market participants once again 
considered an interest rate hike by the Fed to 
be more likely. In addition, the interest rate ad -
vantage of US investments vis- à- vis euro- area 
investments weighed on the euro. Overall, the 
mixed news circulating on the state of negoti -
ations between creditor states and the Greek 
government had only modestly impacted on 
the foreign exchange market over the report -
ing period. As this report went to press, the Financial 
markets  strongly influenced by monetary policy
Euro rises on balance against the US dollar …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
37

euro stood at US$1.11, somewhat up on its 
level at the end of March 2015.
The higher bond yields also boosted the euro’s 
strength in relation to the yen into the first half 
of June. Furthermore, the euro benefited from 
the improved economic outlook in the euro 
area, as opposed to Japan where the central 
bank revised its inflation and growth forecast 
downwards. Against this backdrop, the euro 
traded higher at levels up to about 140 yen. 
However, following the publication of surpris -
ingly strong first- quarter GDP growth data and 
comments by the Bank of Japan’s president 
that he considered a further depreciation of the yen unlikely, the yen once again began to gain 
in value in the second half of June. What is 
more, prior to this development, the Bank of 
Japan had made clear that it did not see any 
need for further monetary policy measures, 
thereby countering the speculation about fur -
ther accommodative action which had been 
brewing in market circles for some time. Lat -
terly, the euro rebounded once more against 
the yen as market participants exhibited in -
creased doubts about the Japanese Central 
Bank achieving its medium- term inflation target 
of 2%. At the end of the reporting period the 
euro stood at 138 yen, which was approxi -
mately 7% higher than at the end of the first 
quarter.
The political uncertainty that had weighed on 
the pound dissipated following the result of the 
British parliamentary election, thus allowing 
the currency to appreciate further. This dynamic  
was supported by surprisingly positive eco -
nomic data indicating buoyant economic 
develop ment on the whole, as well as by the 
materialising expectations among market par -
ticipants that interest rates were set to rise in 
the United Kingdom as well. The upward path 
followed by pound sterling over the reporting 
period was only temporarily interrupted be -
tween the end of April and the start of June 
upon the announcement of a series of unex -
pectedly negative economic indicators. As this 
report went to press, the euro was trading at 
£0.71, around 2½% below its value at the end 
of March 2015.
By contrast, the euro made relatively strong 
gains against the renminbi. This arose from the 
fact that the Chinese central bank changed the 
mechanism used to set the Chinese currency’s 
reference exchange rate against the US dollar. 
The People’s Bank of China sets a reference 
exchange  rate for the renminbi against the US 
dollar on a daily basis, with the actual exchange 
rate allowed to fluctuate either side of this 
within a band of ±2%. The new mechanism is 
now more closely oriented to the notifications 
of market makers, who report the previous … and the 
yen …… but depreci-ates against pound sterling
Gains against 
the renminbiExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2014 20151.201.301.40
1.001.101.20
120130140150
0.700.750.800.85
859095100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange 
rate: US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange 
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange 
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100 Launch exchange 
rate: 103.13 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
38

day’s closing rate on the interbank market to 
the China Foreign Exchange Trade System & 
National  Interbank Funding Center, a sub-  
authority of the Chinese central bank. The ren -
minbi subsequently depreciated by roughly 
4½% overall against the US dollar in the last 
few days before going to press. It is now trad -
ing against the US dollar at its lowest level since 
2011. At the same time, the euro appreciated by 
just under 4½% against the renminbi over the 
same period. The new procedure for setting the 
reference exchange rate is, in the first instance, 
a step toward  greater market orientation. That 
said, it was introduced at a time when market 
participants were fearful of a potential weaken -
ing of the Chinese economy, raising their con -
cerns that the measure was consciously used by 
the central bank to weaken the renminbi in 
order to support the Chinese economy.
In effective terms, the European currency ap -
preciated by about 3.5% against the currencies 
of 19 trading partners over the course of the 
second quarter. This was in large part attribut -
able to the aforementioned appreciation of the 
euro vis- à- vis the renminbi, whose relative 
weighting against the effective euro has further 
increased owing to a recalculation of the 
weights (see the box on pages 40 to 42). As a 
consequence, the price competitiveness of 
euro- area exports has deteriorated slightly, 
though without diverging significantly from its 
long- term average, and should therefore be 
regarded  as neutral.
Securities markets  
and portfolio transactions
Bond markets in the euro area continued to be 
influenced by the asset purchase programme 
agreed upon in September 2014 and expanded 
in January 2015. The Eurosystem has also been 
purchasing bonds from euro- area central gov -
ernments, agencies and European institutions 
since March 2015. In this market environment, 
yields on ten- year Bunds fell at the start of the 
second quarter to a new all-  time low of less than 0.04%. Aside from the expanded asset 
purchase programme, other factors contribut -
ing to the decline in Bund yields included the 
interest rate linkage with the United States, 
where interest rates also fell appreciably for a 
time, and receding levels of uncertainty, as 
reflected  in the implied volatilities of options on 
Bund futures. At the end of April, the Bund 
yield rose from its historical low in several 
waves, climbing to almost 1.0% at the end of 
June, which is likely to have been a correction 
to preceding exaggerations. Furthermore, the 
economic outlook for the euro area and the 
United States stabilised. In the ensuing period, 
there were price movements on Bunds, which 
were determined in part by the progress of 
negotiations  between the creditor group and 
the Greek government. However, there were 
also intensified liquidity- related fluctuations, as 
evidenced, for example, by widened bid- ask 
spreads. These are fairly unusual in large and 
deep markets. With the depreciation of the 
renminbi in mid-  August, however, interest rates 
fell markedly once again. Despite this, the yield 
on ten- year Bunds rose, on balance, by 40 
basis points over the period under review.
By and large, yields on bonds issued by other 
euro- area countries have followed a similar 
path to that of Bunds. On balance, yield spreads 
over Bunds barely widened on the end of the 
first quarter. Based on the GDP- weighted yield 
on ten- year bonds issued by euro- area coun -
tries, the spread was 95 basis points at last 
count. The yield movements are primarily 
attributable  to the monetary policy- related and 
global factors mentioned earlier. Country-  
specific influences played less of a role overall, 
though Greek government bonds are the ex -
ception here. Amid increasing fears among 
market participants that the Greek government 
could potentially halt interest payments and 
principal repayments, the yields on Greek gov -
ernment bonds temporarily rose to a level last 
seen in mid-2012. However, in contrast to the 
situation at the height of the euro-  area sover -
eign debt crisis in 2010, during the reporting 
period market participants’ fears of a default Effective euro 
exchange rate stronger
European 
bond market influenced  by monetary policyYield spreads over German Bunds broadly stableDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
39

Recalculated weights for indicators of the German 
 economy’s price competitiveness
The Bundesbank regularly calculates and 
publishes indicators of the German econo-
my’s price competitiveness, which refl  ect 
price and cost developments in Germany in 
comparison with a weighted average of 
Germany’s trading partners. These indica-tors correspond to the concept of real ef-
fective exchange rates, as calculated by the 
European Central Bank for the euro, for 
example .1 When calculating the indicators, 
the individual partner countries are assigned trade weights which are adjusted over time 
to refl  ect changes in direct and indirect trade fl  ows.
2 The regular adjustments aim 
to take account of current developments in foreign trade. The same applies to the latest 
recalculation. Prior to these modifi  cations, the trade weights for all indicator series 
from 2007 onward were based on the data from the years 2007 to 2009.
3 By contrast, 
the recalculated indicator values applying 
since 2010 use weights derived from trade 
links prevailing between 2010 and 2012.
The table on page 41 presents the recalcu-
lated weights which are used to compute 
the indicator of the German economy’s 
price competitiveness against a broad group of 56 trading partners. The weights for the 
narrow and the medium- sized group of 
countries can be determined by simply re-
scaling the weights calculated for the broad 
group.4 Shifts in Germany’s trading rela-
tions are refl  ected in at times considerable 
deviations of the current weights from 
those seen in the previous period (2007 to 2009). For instance, the weight assigned to 
Germany’s trade relations with China has risen further to stand at 11%. In terms of 
the indicators of Germany’s price competi-
tiveness against the medium- sized and the 
broad group of countries, China now boasts the highest trade weight of all of Germany’s 
trading partners. In the preceding three- 
year periods, France had held its ground as Germany’s most important partner country 
but according to the latest calculation its prominence diminished somewhat (to just under 8½% in the broad group).
5 South 
European euro- area member states have 
likewise seen a slight decline in their weight. 
Similarly, the United States and the United 
1 The calculation method is described in detail in 
M Schmitz, M de Clercq, M Fidora, B Lauro and C Pin-
heiro (2012), Revisiting the effective exchange rates of 
the euro, ECB Occasional Paper No  134. The most recent  modifi  cations to the method can be found in 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Adjustments in the calculation 
of effective exchange rates and indicators of price competitiveness in August 2013, Monthly Report, 
August  2013, pp 50-52.
2 Direct trade fl  ows affect direct bilateral trade be-
tween two given countries while indirect trade fl  ows 
are geared to the fact that countries compete not just 
in the markets of the two countries in question but 
among one another on a worldwide basis.
3 This most recent regular adjustment to the afore-
mentioned weights is collated in Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, February 2012, p 35.
4 The rescaling is achieved by proportionately distrib-
uting the weights of the countries which do not be-
long to the group of countries under review to those 
of the remaining countries.5 The greater weight attached to China than to France 
is attributable to the fact that, with respect to indus-
trial goods, German exporters face greater competi-tion in the target countries from Chinese merchants 
than they do from French ones. Disregarding this third- 
market effect, the weight accorded to France would 
stand at 9.7%, trailed by China at 8.2%.Price competitiveness of theGerman economy
1 Inverted scale: rising curve (decline in values) denotes an in-
crease in competitiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 1585
88
9194
97
1001999 Q1 = 100, monthly, log scale 1
Indicator based on deflators of consumer price 
indices against 56 trading partners
Old weightsNew weightsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
40

Weighting scheme for the price competitiveness indicator of the German 
 economy against a broad group of 56 trading partners
In thousandths
Group of countries/country Up to 1997 11998-2000 2001-2003 2004-2006 2007-2009 From 2010 2
Narrow group of countries 780.1 772.0 746.9 711.9 678.9 636.2
Belgium 55.8 48.1 52.2 56.4 56.3 49.5
Estonia 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0
Finland 10.6 11.3 11.2 11.0 10.6 8.0
France 112.8 107.2 100.3 93.2 89.1 83.7
Greece 4.7 4.5 4.3 4.5 4.5 3.0
Ireland 9.8 15.7 16.0 12.4 10.7 9.4
Italy 86.5 79.6 75.2 72.1 70.0 62.9
Latvia 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9
Lithuania 1.0 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.9 1.9
Luxembourg 3.7 3.1 3.7 4.1 4.2 3.3
Malta 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4
Netherlands 64.9 65.0 63.6 67.1 69.7 69.0
Austria 43.9 42.4 41.3 42.0 42.1 41.0
Portugal 10.7 10.6 9.7 7.9 7.1 6.5
Slovenia 5.1 4.7 4.5 4.5 5.1 5.0
Spain 35.7 37.2 38.0 39.4 38.1 32.7
Cyprus 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.3
Denmark 15.5 13.9 14.3 13.4 13.3 11.1
Sweden 22.6 21.2 19.5 20.8 20.0 19.1
United Kingdom 82.0 80.9 76.4 70.2 60.0 54.7
Norway 7.0 6.0 5.7 5.3 5.7 5.1
Switzerland 43.5 38.3 38.2 35.9 36.2 37.4
Slovakia 5.4 6.9 9.0 10.3 11.6 13.1
Japan 59.2 54.5 44.7 39.1 34.3 34.1
Canada 7.9 8.7 8.9 8.3 7.5 7.5
USA 89.9 108.9 106.1 89.7 78.0 75.6
Medium-sized group 121.3 134.4 160.6 189.7 217.3 249.7
Bulgaria 1.1 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.4 2.5
Croatia 2.5 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.1 1.6
Poland 18.5 21.8 25.0 26.9 33.3 35.3
Romania 3.9 4.3 5.3 7.0 8.7 9.8
Czech Republic 16.9 20.8 26.3 25.9 30.3 31.8
Hungary 10.9 16.6 18.9 19.4 18.6 17.4
China 26.4 31.4 44.8 64.5 84.4 110.2
Hong Kong SAR 11.4 10.1 10.0 10.3 9.2 10.3
Republic of Korea 16.1 13.9 14.7 19.3 18.0 19.3
Singapore 9.4 8.5 8.2 8.4 6.4 7.1
Australia 4.2 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.4
Countries additionally included 
in broad group 98.6 93.6 92.5 98.4 103.8 114.1
Iceland 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5
Israel 4.2 4.3 3.9 3.1 3.0 3.3
Russia 12.2 9.7 11.7 15.8 19.4 20.4
Turkey 14.0 13.4 13.3 16.0 15.9 17.4
Algeria 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6
Morocco 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4
South Africa 5.7 5.6 6.1 6.5 6.0 6.4
Argentina 2.1 1.9 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.1
Brazil 8.0 7.3 6.3 7.0 8.1 8.7
Chile 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.2
Mexico 4.9 7.5 7.8 7.5 7.9 8.5
Venezuela 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5
India 7.4 6.1 6.6 8.3 10.8 12.9
Indonesia 5.6 4.2 4.0 3.4 3.3 4.0
Malaysia 7.2 6.7 6.5 6.1 5.8 6.7
Philippines 2.6 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.1 2.1
Taiwan 13.3 13.8 11.5 10.0 8.8 9.6
Thailand 6.5 5.2 5.3 5.1 5.5 6.2
New Zealand 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
1 Basis 1995 to 1997. 2 Basis 2010 to 2012.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
41

on Greek government bonds only mildly im -
pacted on the financing conditions of other 
periphery countries (see chart below).
In the US bond markets, yields on ten- year gov -
ernment bonds likewise rose on balance, though less sharply than in the euro area. This 
was largely shaped by investor uncertainty with 
regard to the US Federal Reserve making an 
upfront   change to interest rates. Latterly, the 
likelihood of an early rise in interest rates as 
appraised  by market participants initially in -
creased given some surprisingly positive eco -
nomic data. However, this likelihood decreased 
again quite considerably when the Chinese cen -
tral bank decided to change the procedure used 
to set the renminbi’s reference exchange rate to 
the US dollar and thus, in effect, to devalue the 
currency. US yields subsequently fell somewhat. 
In the upshot, the spread between ten- year US 
bonds and Bunds of an equivalent maturity nar -
rowed to 160 basis points. In Japan, too, the 
interest on ten- year government securities mir -
rored global movements, albeit within a rather 
narrow corridor. Ultimately, bond yields in Japan 
remained virtually unchanged. For some time 
now, activity in the Japanese bond market has 
been dominated by purchases on the part of 
the Japanese central bank.Yields in inter-
national bond markets present a mixed pictureKingdom have experienced a further con-
traction in their relative shares of trade with 
Germany. Under the revised calculation, the 
weight attached to Japan and the Philip-pines has remained virtually unchanged. The rest of Asia also recorded moderate relative increases. To summarise, the em-
phasis in Germany’s relative trade fl  ows has shifted away from its traditional EU trading 
partners and the United States to Asian 
countries.
In the case of the broader group of coun-
tries, the indicators derived from the recal-
culated weights show a somewhat stronger 
improvement in the German economy’s price competitiveness than was previously evident (see chart on page  40). This was partly caused by the shift in emphasis in 
favour  of Asian countries, whose currencies 
(with the exception of the yen) have all 
appreciated  against the euro since 2010 in 
net terms. In this regard, China’s enhanced status as a trading partner, coupled with the marked appreciation of the renminbi 
against the euro from the end of 2009 to 
July 2015, has been of particular import-
ance.
The recalculated indicator of price competi-
tiveness against the broad group of 56 
countries and the medium- sized group of 
37 countries for the period in question now shows an improvement of 12½% and 12% 
respectively, whilst if applying the old weights there would have been a slightly 
lower rise of 11% in each case. This effect is 
due to the fact that price developments in 
the now more heavily weighted countries 
have been more unfavourable on the whole than the average for the partner countries. However, modifying the weights only negli-
gibly infl  uences the path followed by the 
narrow indicator.
Changes in the spreads between euro-
area government bonds with a residual maturity of ten years and comparable German Bunds
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank0246810Percentage points
PT PTIT IT IE IE31 March 2015 to
8 July 201530 April 2010 to
19 July 2011
GR GR ES ESDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
42

The slope of the German yield curve derived 
from the yields on Federal securities has steep -
ened since the end of March 2015, but con -
tinues to be in negative territory up to the five- 
year maturity segment. At the end of March, 
even Bunds with a residual maturity of just 
under seven years had a negative yield. When 
last measured, the yield spread between ten-  
year and two- year bonds was 90 basis points, 
putting it 45 basis points above its level at the 
end of March (see adjacent chart). Yields 
remained  at low levels, particularly at the short 
end, suggesting that market participants ex -
pect accommodative monetary policy for some 
time to come.
The market- based five-  year forward inflation 
rate in five years in the euro area as derived 
from inflation swaps rose slightly compared to 
the end of March to stand at 1.7%. Meanwhile, 
the forward inflation rate in the USA fell slightly 
to 2.2%. The influence of global factors on the 
expected inflation rate is manifested in a broadly 
parallel development with regard to market-  
based inflation expectations in the various cur -
rency areas. Most recently, inflation expectations   
were down on account of the drop in oil prices, 
then fell yet further with the devaluation of the 
renminbi. In the euro area, survey- based infla -
tion expectations are still outpacing market-  
based break- even rates, which indicates that a 
negative inflation risk premium has been fac -
tored into market- based indicators.
Market prices for European corporate bonds 
were largely dictated by the development of 
government bond yields. After BBB- rated 
bonds with a residual maturity of seven to ten 
years dipped to historic lows in the first quarter, 
at last count they were yielding 2.3%, just 
under 70 basis points up on the end of March. 
In the same period, the yield spread vis- à- vis 
government bonds widened by 35 basis points 
to 190 basis points. The price corrections seen 
for Bunds also extended to corporate bonds. 
The higher yields on safe investments may have 
weakened the “search for yield”, causing 
spreads to widen slightly. The rise in yields on financial corporations was stronger than for 
non- financial corporations. Nevertheless, the 
values are still significantly below their long-  
term average, meaning that financing condi -
tions for enterprises remain very favourable.Steeper yield 
curve for German  Federal securities
Forward inflation   
rate in the euro area up slightly
Financing 
conditions  for enterprises remain  favourable Bond yields in Germanyand the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015012345
–10+1+2Monthly data
%
Percentage
pointsYield spread between
US and Germangovernment bondsTen-year government bond yields
USA1
Germany
Yield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.40.200.20.40.60.8
––++++
Residual maturity in years13 August 2015
31 March 201530 December 2014%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
43

Gross issuance in the German bond market 
amounted to €307½ billion in the second 
quarter of 2015 and was therefore well below 
its previous- quarter level (€405½ billion). After 
deducting redemptions and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, net redemptions came to €22 billion. In 
addition, foreign borrowers continued to place 
debt securities worth €7½ billion in the German  
market. Thus, redemptions totalling €14½ bil -
lion net were carried out in the German bond 
market in the reporting period.
Domestic credit institutions continued the 
trend of the previous quarter by scaling back 
their capital market borrowing by €18 billion 
(compared to net issuance of €10 billion in the 
first quarter). In the main, they redeemed debt 
securities issued by specialised credit institu -
tions (€8 billion), and to a lesser extent other 
bank securities that can be structured flexibly 
as well as public Pfandbriefe (€5½ billion in 
each case). These redemptions were partly off -
set by net issuance of mortgage Pfandbriefe 
amounting to €1½ billion.
The public sector redeemed bonds amounting 
to €4½ billion net in the second quarter, com -
pared to €5 billion one quarter earlier. These 
figures include issues by resolution agencies set 
up for German banks, which are ascribed to 
the public sector for statistical purposes. For its 
part, the Federal government mainly issued 
ten- year and 30-year bonds (for €8 billion and 
€5½ billion respectively). This contrasted with 
net redemptions of Federal notes (Bobls) total -
ling €7½ billion. In the quarter under review, 
state governments redeemed their own bonds 
to the value of €8 billion in net terms.
Domestic enterprises issued debt securities 
worth €½ billion net in the second quarter. On 
balance, these were chiefly securities with 
maturities  of less than one year. Viewed in net 
terms, the issues are attributable solely to non- 
financial corporations, while other financial 
intermediaries redeemed bonds on balance.Net redemptions 
in the German bond market
Credit institu-
tions’ capital market debt lower
Net public 
sector  redemptions 
Net issuance of 
corporate bondsForward inflation rates* in the euro area 
and the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising from infla-
tion swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban 
Consumers for the USA) realised across the next five or ten 
years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20151.51.82.12.42.73.03.3Weekly averages
% pa
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate
in five years based on swaps
USA
Euro area
Spread between US and euro-area swapsPercentage
points
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 13.4 53.7 12.9
Credit institutions 1.2 9.7 – 39.4
of which
Foreign debt securities 2.3 3.0 –  5.5
Deutsche Bundesbank –  4.4 12.5 36.1
Other sectors 16.6 31.4 16.2
of which
Domestic debt securities – 13.2 –  3.6 2.2
Non-residents 13.7 0.2 – 27.6
SharesResidents 17.5 –  1.5 10.4
Credit institutions 2.8 10.5 –  2.8
of which
Domestic shares 0.5 11.8 –  6.8
Non-banks 14.7 – 11.9 13.2
of which
Domestic shares 1.6 – 17.5 1.4
Non-residents 7.9 6.0 8.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 11.7 45.9 24.6
Investment in retail funds 2.5 9.6 2.6
of which
Equity funds 0.4 3.0 –  2.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
44

In the second quarter, the Bundesbank was the 
dominant buyer, purchasing bonds for €36 bil -
lion under the Eurosystem’s purchase pro -
gramme. In accordance with the programme’s 
rules, the vast majority of these were in the 
form of Federal securities. Foreign investors 
were the largest sellers of public sector paper in 
net terms, divesting investments of this kind to 
the tune of €23½ billion. In addition, they also 
parted with small amounts of securities issued 
by the private sector. Domestic non- banks 
acquired  debt securities for €16 billion, with a 
particular emphasis on foreign securities (€14 
billion). By contrast, bonds were sold by Ger -
man credit institutions and non- resident invest -
ors (€39½ billion and €27½ billion respect -
ively), with credit institutions mainly disposing 
of private- sector instruments.
The global equity markets have seen mixed 
develop ments since mid- March. While in Japan 
the Nikkei 255 rose distinctly by 7.2% and in 
the USA the broad S&P 500 nudged up slightly 
by 0.7%, the Euro Stoxx saw large declines 
(-3.8%), with the German CDAX encountering 
substantial losses (-8.6%). In China, the Shang -
hai Composite closed 5% up on its level at the 
end of March. However, it effectively fell by just 
over 23% compared with its high in mid-  June 
and only stabilised following massive interven -
tion by the Chinese authorities in stock market 
activities. The share price crash in the Far East 
was accompanied by a downward revision of 
profit and dividend expectations in China, 
which – measured on the basis of enterprises’ 
fundamental developments  – had probably 
been overly optimistic.
An important reason for the divergent develop -
ment of equity prices in the different currency 
areas was the varying degree of interest rate 
changes, which, taken in isolation, influence 
the present value of future corporate earnings 
via the discount factor. Yields in Japan in the 
reporting period remained virtually unchanged, 
yet in the United States and, to a marked 
degree , in the euro area they drifted upwards. 
The influence of the discount factor is particu -larly noticeable in the euro area, where price 
declines on the Euro Stoxx and CDAX coincided 
with rising yields on European government 
bonds. Prices in the euro area were additionally 
depressed by eroded share prices in China and 
the appreciation of the euro vis- à- vis the cur -
rencies of important trading partners. The 
aforementioned decision by the Chinese cen -
tral bank was the main driver behind an 
appreciation  of the euro in nominal effective 
terms, which predominantly impacted on ex -
port- oriented enterprises. This is likely to have 
affected the German market particularly 
strongly. When assessing the falls in prices in 
the euro area and Germany, it is important to 
remember that these followed on from a sev -
eral- year high in the case of the euro area as a 
whole and an all- time high in the case of 
Germany  , and that the price gains since the 
start of the year continue to be in double fig -
ures. The ripple effects from China were prob -
ably less to do with the global exchange rate 
arrangement than with investors’ fears that this Purchases of 
debt securities
Uneven develop-
ments on global stock markets …
… bear witness 
to a rise in 
interest  ratesEquity markets
Source: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Monthly, lin scale
Price/earnings ratio based on
12-month earnings expectationsEuro StoxxEnd of December 2008 = 100, weekly averages,
log scale
Price indices
5075100150200250
81012141618
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Standard &
Poor's 500
Standard & Poor's 500
Euro StoxxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
45

could reflect an unexpectedly marked slow -
down in growth in China. On top of this, devel -
opments in Greece dampened the mood in 
European markets, as evidenced by a tempor -
ary sharp upturn in the implicit volatility of 
options  on the Euro Stoxx. By contrast, the pro -
nounced slide in prices on the Athens Stock Ex -
change upon the reopening of the financial 
centre after five weeks’ of closure did not spill 
over into other stock markets. In Japan, share 
prices were also bolstered by rising enterprises’ 
profit margins, which have been on the up for 
some time, and the widespread opinion in mar -
ket circles that potential additional monetary 
policy interventions would benefit stock mar -
kets, too. The mixed patterns of economic 
develop ments in individual countries played 
somewhat less of a role among equity market 
participants in the reporting period.
Pressured by the price falls on the Euro Stoxx, 
the price- earnings ratio – as measured against 
its value at the end of March – was down by 
just over one point to 15.0. However, in com -
parison to historical figures, this is still a very 
high level. The five- year average of this ratio is 
11.7. Excluding developments since the end of 
April, this constitutes its highest value since 
2004. The gains on the US S&P 500 were ac -
companied by greater profit expectations, with 
the effect that the price- earnings ratio based 
on 12-month profit expectations held steady at 
16.8 and thus remains at a historically high 
level.
By means of a dividend discount model it is 
additionally possible to quantify the implied 
cost of equity.1 This cost takes into account the 
price level as well as the profit growth expected 
in the medium term and the dividend level. In 
the case of European enterprises, the cost of 
equity – starting from a level below the five-  
year average  – fell further still, shedding 15 
basis points to stand at 7.5%. Against the back -Enterprises’ 
earnings expect -
ations up, price- earnings ratio downMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I Current account + 45.5 + 57.2 + 57.3
1 Goods 1 + 54.8 + 60.4 + 69.7
2 Services 2 –  8.2 –  6.6 –  8.4
3 Primary income +  5.7 + 18.9 +  3.5
4 Secondary income –  6.8 – 15.6 –  7.4
II Capital account +  0.5 +  0.2 +  1.2
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 57.2 + 54.5 + 73.8
1 Direct investment + 22.7 + 24.7 +  3.2
Domestic investment 
abroad + 28.6 + 39.4 + 21.5
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  5.9 + 14.7 + 18.2
2 Portfolio investment + 18.5 + 50.2 + 48.9
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 41.3 + 56.6 + 26.2
Shares
3 +  4.8 +  0.3 + 10.7
Investment fund shares 4+  8.6 + 17.4 +  8.1
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  2.1 –  1.7 –  1.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 26.8 + 32.8 + 10.4
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 22.8 + 21.7 +  2.0
Short-term debt  securities
7 +  1.0 +  6.1 –  2.9
Foreign investment in 
 domestic debt securities + 22.8 +  6.5 – 22.7
Shares 3 +  8.3 +  1.6 +  8.5
Investment fund shares +  0.8 +  4.7 –  3.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 13.6 – 13.8 – 26.2
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 + 10.3 – 18.7 – 18.3
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  0.1 + 14.0 –  1.4
3 Financial derivatives 9 + 10.1 + 11.7 +  8.2
4 Other investment 10 +  6.6 – 32.1 + 13.9
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 + 41.8 – 66.5 +  9.7
Enterprises and  households
12 –  5.4 +  8.2 +  5.7
General government –  3.6 –  6.4 +  5.0
Bundesbank – 26.2 + 32.7 –  6.6
5 Reserve assets 13 –  0.6 0.0 –  0.5
IV Errors and omissions 14 + 11.2 –  3.0 + 15.3
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank 1 The dividend discount model is based on month- end 
values  and takes into account developments up to the end 
of July 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
46

drop of increased real interest rates – which are 
incorporated into the cost of equity calcula -
tion – the equity risk premium has fallen, which 
points to a moderately increased risk appetite 
among actors in the stock market. Meanwhile, 
the real cost of equity has remained virtually 
unchanged for US enterprises. If one considers 
that the real interest rate has also increased in 
the United States, one can discern a fall in the 
equity risk premium in the United States, too, 
albeit less pronounced than in the euro area. 
This observation is consistent with the overall 
picture of declining implicit stock market vola -
tilities in the USA, as calculated from stock 
options .
Issuing activity on the German equity market in 
the second quarter was somewhat stronger 
than at the start of the year. Domestic enter -
prises issued new shares to the tune of €3 bil -
lion, the majority of which were listed equities. 
The volume of foreign shares in the German 
market rose by €16 billion in the same period. 
Equities were primarily acquired by domestic 
non- banks (€13 billion), but also by non-  
resident investors (€8½ billion), while domestic 
credit institutions offloaded equity instruments 
in the amount of €3 billion.
During the quarter under review, domestic 
invest ment companies recorded inflows of €27 
billion, after raising funds totalling €55½ billion 
in the previous three-  month period. The new 
inflows mainly benefited specialised funds 
reserved  for institutional investors (€24½ bil -
lion). Among the various asset classes, mixed 
securities- based funds proved the most active 
in issuing new shares (€24 billion), but funds of 
funds (€3½ billion) and open-  end real estate 
funds (€3 billion) were also engaged in the 
market. Foreign funds traded in the German 
market attracted inflows totalling €8 billion net 
in the second quarter of 2015. Domestic non-  
banks proved to be the main buyers, adding 
€35 billion worth of mutual fund shares to their 
portfolios, predominantly in the form of do -
mestic shares. German credit institutions pur -
chased investment fund shares for €4 billion, while foreign investors sold mutual fund shares 
worth €3½ billion.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €49 billion in 
the second quarter of 2015, there were also 
net capital exports in the field of direct invest -
ment. These amounted to €3 billion.
A key factor in events was the comparatively 
high level of funding provided by resident 
owners to affiliated enterprises abroad, which 
amounted to €21½ billion in the second quar -
ter of 2015. Domestic investors primarily bol -
stered their equity capital (€13½ billion), doing 
so exclusively via cross- border new investments 
(€18½ billion). Debt instruments also played a 
certain role here on balance (€8 billion). The 
expanded granting of financial credits (€10 bil -
lion) to non- residents contrasted with a slight 
fall in trade credits (€1½ billion). Broken down 
by region, it is evident that during the reporting 
period approximately one- third of direct invest -
ment originating in Germany was made in 
the  Americas, primarily in the United States 
(€4½  billion). Other important destinations 
were Luxembourg (€3 billion), the Netherlands 
(€2 billion) and Belgium (€1½ billion).
In the second quarter of 2015, direct invest -
ment in Germany by non- resident investors 
amounted to just under €18 billion. Thanks to 
group- internal shifts in lending, foreign invest -
ors’ claims against residents grew on balance 
by €12½ billion. This was achieved almost ex -
clusively through an increase in financial credits 
(€11 billion). The balance of foreign trade 
credits to German enterprises rose by the rela -
tively small amount of €1 billion. Foreign in -
vestors also shored up their equity capital by €6 
billion. Here, too, the lion’s share was focused 
on new investments (€5 billion). Parallel to this, 
foreign enterprises also reinvested their earn -
ings in Germany (€2½ billion).Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund sharesCapital exports in direct investment 
German direct 
investment abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
47

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy’s fairly robust upswing 
continued in the second quarter of 2015. 
According  to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the second quarter of 2015 grew by 
0.4% after seasonal and calendar adjustment 
compared with the first three months of the 
year.1 This means that economic output in -
creased almost as strongly as in the two pre -
ceding quarters at an average of 0.5% per 
quarter. The underlying pace of growth since 
overcoming the cyclical lull in the second and 
third quarters of 2014 has been distinctly higher 
than the potential rate. The aggregate degree 
of capacity utilisation is likely to have been in 
the upper part of the corridor of normal cap -
acity utilisation of late.Economic activity in the second quarter was 
given a sharp boost by foreign demand, which 
was benefiting from the slight firming of the 
global economy following the sluggish start to 
the year and probably also from the euro’s 
earlier  depreciation, and returned to the faster 
pace seen in the second half of 2014. More 
buoyant export growth thus offset the fact that 
impulses stemming from domestic activity were 
less dynamic in the reporting period than they 
were in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the first 
quarter of 2015. The environment for con -
sumer spending remains favourable given the 
positive labour market situation and consider -
able growth in earnings. Even so, private con -
sumption was rather subdued in the second 
quarter following an expansion of the income 
base due to oil price- related gains in purchas -
ing power, additional pension payments and 
the introduction of the general minimum wage, 
which had already led to a substantial adjust -
ment in household spending patterns in the 
preceding two quarters. Quarter- on- quarter 
construction investment in the first half of the 
year was shaped by a special factor as building 
activity in the past winter was far less affected 
by the weather than usual. Despite perhaps 
somewhat muted procurement activities on 
the  part of enterprises during the reporting 
period, the underlying trend in investment in 
machinery and equipment is still on a course of 
recovery.
Exports showed very strong growth in the 
second quarter of 2015. The quarter- on- quarter 
increase in exports of goods, at 3% in price 
and seasonally adjusted terms, was particularly 
pronounced, aided by large- scale deliveries of 
products from the aircraft and aerospace in -
dustry. Yet even leaving those factors aside, Quite strong 
economic growth in 2015 Q2Strong external 
impulses, 
domestic  
demand  more subdued this time round
Marked growth 
in exportsOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015949698100102104106108
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1
1 Following the usual mid- year revision of previous years’ 
data, GDP growth in 2013 was revised upwards by 
0.2 percentage  point to 0.3%. The cyclical pattern in 2014 
 remained broadly intact, even though the quarterly pattern 
was somewhat flatter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
48

export  dynamics were broadly based both 
regionally  and in terms of product categories. 
Exports to euro- area as well as non- euro- area 
countries are likely to have increased percep -
tibly in the second quarter. The fact that an 
economic recovery is under way in most south -
ern euro- area partner countries – according to 
the country structure available up until May – 
has been reflected for some time now in a rise 
in the demand for German products. Outside 
the euro area, the stimuli for foreign trade in 
the second quarter came primarily from indus -
trial countries. Sales to the United States ex -
panded considerably, as in the first quarter. 
German exports to central and east European 
EU accession countries and to the United King -
dom also picked up momentum again. By con -
trast, German firms’ business with Asia pre -
sented a mixed picture in the reporting period. 
Exports to China and Japan decelerated, 
whereas business with the newly industrialised 
Asian economies and the south and east Asian 
emerging market economies picked up mark -
edly. Exports to Russia are at an exceptionally 
low level; the downward trend did, however, 
become slower of late.
The expansion in imports tapered off in the 
second quarter after picking up momentum in 
the preceding quarters. The loss of pace in do -
mestic demand is likely to have played a part in 
this. Real goods imports in the second quarter 
were up only slightly on the quarter (+¼%). 
Sales of intermediate goods abroad increased 
sharply despite the continuing lack of momen -
tum in industrial activity, and imports of capital 
goods clearly picked up again. Although signifi -
cantly fewer export orders were received by 
manufacturers of other transport equipment, 
strong growth was posted by motor vehicle 
imports , which had already shown a marked 
rise during the fourth quarter of 2014 and the 
first quarter of 2015. By contrast, there was 
no  growth in imports of consumer goods, 
although  they had expanded very strongly in 
the two preceding quarters. Energy imports 
also declined .Against the backdrop of rising macroeconomic 
capacity utilisation and very favourable finan -
cing conditions, the conditions are in place for 
a further recovery in investment in machinery 
and equipment. According to the available in -
dicators, enterprises are likely to have procured 
new machinery and equipment only on a very 
limited scale during the reporting period. This 
was probably due to the fact that enterprises 
did not invest quite as heavily in their vehicle 
fleets in the second quarter as they did at the 
beginning of the year. There was no further in -
crease in the registration figures for commercial 
vehicles, for instance, and commercial custom -
ers registered distinctly fewer passenger cars Real imports up 
only slightly on previous- quarter level
Investment in machinery and equipment up slightly at best, construction invest ment probably down 
slightly on the 
elevated prior- 
quarter level owing to the weather90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Apr-
May
8090100110120
Apr-
May
120
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
49

than in the previous quarter, when an excep -
tionally sharp rise in registrations had been 
recorded . Domestic sales by capital goods pro -
ducers went up only marginally in seasonally 
adjusted terms, whereas purchases by foreign 
manufacturers showed a significant increase. 
Construction investment is unlikely to have 
made further headway in the second quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Nevertheless, it 
should be borne in mind that the first quarter 
saw a marked expansion in construction invest -
ment owing to the mild weather. The high level 
of equipment utilisation in the main construc -
tion sector suggests that, in cyclical terms, the 
construction sector is still in exceptionally good 
shape.
Private consumption continued to be an im -
portant mainstay of domestic demand in the 
second quarter. There were no longer any 
strong growth stimuli like in the fourth quarter 
of 2014 and the first quarter of 2015, however, 
in view of the preceding rapid adjustment to 
the expanded scope for expenditure. The provi -
sional figures show that real retail sales in the 
second quarter were, in fact, down somewhat 
on the prior- quarter level after adjustment for 
seasonal variations. This outcome is, however, 
essentially due to the fact that retail sales were 
at a very low level in June. The current report is 
subject to considerable uncertainty owing to 
the large percentage of estimates that it con -
tains, and it is a distinct possibility that the 
index will be revised significantly upwards as 
further primary statistical data are incorpor -
ated. The number of new car registrations by 
households suggests that few motor vehicles 
were purchased in the second quarter, follow -
ing an increase in the number of purchases in 
the preceding quarters. Furthermore, expend -
iture on heating oil in the first two months of 
the second quarter fell back below the de -
pressed level of the fourth quarter of 2014 
after households had substantially built up their 
stocks in the winter quarter. Households held 
back on filling up their oil tanks again as a 
result  of the rising prices, especially as con -
sumption in the preceding heating period is unlikely  to have reached the calculated level 
owing to the mild temperatures.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output once again increased only 
moderately in the second quarter of 2015. 
After seasonal adjustment, it was ¼% higher 
than in the first quarter. Output was lacking 
momentum in numerous industrial sectors fol -
lowing a marked expansion in the second half 
of 2014, and which also continued into the first 
quarter of 2015 in some sectors. The inflow of 
new orders slowed down distinctly in the first 
quarter, however. Manufacturing of intermedi -
ate goods failed to gain momentum in the 
second quarter (-½%). Production of capital 
goods went up only moderately (+½%). Output 
in the mechanical engineering sector grew 
strongly following a major cut- back in produc -
tion in the first quarter. The automotive sector 
scaled back its output significantly, however, 
following a marked expansion in the fourth 
quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 2015. 
Moreover, fewer computers, electronic and op -
tical products as well as electrical equipment 
were produced. Production of other transport 
equipment was up only slightly on the high 
level of the previous quarter. By contrast, 
manufacturers of consumer goods, who have 
been benefiting from buoyant consumer 
spending for quite some time now, stepped up 
their output considerably (+1%), even though 
output was being dampened by food products, 
which are likewise assigned statistically to the 
consumer goods sector and also account for a 
comparatively large share of it.
Industrial capacity utilisation declined only mar -
ginally in July and enterprises were operating 
almost at normal capacity levels. According to 
the Ifo business survey, manufacturing capacity 
utilisation stood at 84¼% of normal full cap -
acity of late. Normal capacity utilisation, which 
can be approximated using the long- term aver -
age and amounts to 84%, was therefore ex -
ceeded once again, albeit only marginally.Private con-
sumption still an important main-stay of domestic demandIndustrial output still showing only moderate growth
Manufacturing 
capacity utilisa-tion still at normal  levelsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
50

Construction output in the second quarter was 
down by a seasonally adjusted 2¼% on the 
previous quarter, the level of which had been 
elevated by the favourable weather conditions. 
This sharp decline was due primarily to lower 
output in the finishing trades, the figures for 
which are, however, highly susceptible to revi -
sion and thus subject to considerable uncer -
tainty. By contrast, output in the main con -
struction sector fell only slightly by ¾% and 
was therefore still up on the level of the final 
quarter of 2014. The decline in civil engineering 
was somewhat more pronounced than in 
building construction. Energy production in -
creased substantially in the second quarter 
(+2¼%).
The upward movement in the services sector is 
likely to have continued in the second quarter. 
Furthermore, consumer- oriented service pro -
viders benefited from the extremely favourable 
consumer climate. The business activities of the 
industry- related service providers are also likely 
to have picked up on the whole. This is indi -
cated by the strong improvement in the busi -
ness situation as surveyed by the Ifo Institute. 
Motor vehicle sales, which had already posted 
significant growth in the first quarter, con -
tinued to rise sharply, too. Nevertheless, there 
are signs that industrial activity, which was 
pointing only moderately upwards during the 
reporting period, might have been impeding a 
pick- up in business activity in a number of eco -
nomic sectors. The discernible decline in the 
mileage of domestic heavy goods vehicles 
subject  to tolls on motorways suggests that 
the  transport sector was one of the sectors 
affected . Moreover, wholesale turnover was 
probably down markedly on the level of the 
previous quarter, when, admittedly, strong 
growth had been recorded. Turnover in the 
hotel and restaurant trade is also unlikely to 
have matched the high level of the first quarter.Employment  
and labour  market
The labour market situation showed a further 
improvement between April and June. Employ -
ment and the number of vacancies rose again, 
while unemployment fell. The remarkably sharp 
decline in mini- jobs since the beginning of the 
year, coupled with a comparatively strong 
expansion  in jobs subject to social security con -
tributions in some relatively labour-  intensive 
services sectors, can probably be interpreted 
largely as an adjustment response by enter -
prises to the introduction of the statutory gen -
eral minimum wage. Apart from this transform -
ation effect, the impact of introducing the min -
imum wage on the total number of hours 
worked appears to be very limited in the 
context  of the present favourable economic 
setting.Construction 
output down on weather- boosted prior- quarter level; increase  in energy  production 
Further expan-
sion in services sector
Positive labour market developments Output in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
51

The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany in the second quarter of 2015 
went up by 42,000, or 0.1%, on the quarter. 
The increase was therefore somewhat higher 
than in the first quarter of the year. Besides a 
smaller number of persons working exclusively 
in low- paid part- time employment – the aver -
age for April and May alone was down by 
46,000 on the average of the first quarter – 
there were also 30,000 fewer self- employed 
persons between April and June than in the 
first quarter. By contrast, according to initial 
figures  provided by the Federal Employment 
Agency, an estimated 125,000 additional work -
ers were hired in positions subject to social 
security  contributions in April and May alone, 
which represents an increase of 0.4% on the 
average of the winter months. Looking at the 
individual sectors, the comparatively small con -
tribution of the production sector to the in -
crease in jobs subject to social security contri -
butions is striking. On the other hand, other 
services sectors are also showing considerable 
increases along with the business- related ser -
vices sectors and the health and social work 
sector, which have been posting strong growth 
for quite some time.
Since the turn of the year, employment subject 
to social security contributions has been ex -
panding fairly strongly, especially in those ser -
vices sectors in which an above- average per -
centage of workers is employed in low-  paid 
part- time work. In the wholesale and retail 
trade, the hotel and restaurant sector, the 
transportation and storage sector as well as in 
other services sectors, the increase in employ -
ment subject to social security contributions 
during the last six months –  the period for 
which data are currently available and in which 
employment effects are to be expected follow -
ing the introduction of the minimum wage – 
was more than twice as high in seasonally ad -
justed terms as in comparable periods over the 
past two years. Between November 2014 and 
May 2015, more than 60,000 new positions 
were created in these sectors in addition to the 
existing upward trend. During this period, the Steep rise in 
employment  subject to social security contributions 
Possible merger 
of mini- jobs into 
employment 
subject to 
social  security 
contributions Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015July40.541.041.542.042.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sand Year-on-year change
1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
52

number of mini- jobs was reduced by over 
140,000 taking all these economic sectors 
together  . Although no sectoral data are avail -
able at present, around one- half of all workers 
in low- paid part- time employment are em -
ployed in the economic sectors under consider -
ation. The results therefore suggest that a 
transformation or a merger of mini- jobs into 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions has taken place as a response to the 
introduction of the statutory general minimum 
wage. One incentive from the employer’s per -
spective could have been the lower non- wage 
labour costs.2 Furthermore, the administrative 
and documentation requirements for mini- jobs 
have become more onerous.
Registered unemployment in the reporting 
period was down by 26,000 persons on the 
quarter after adjustment for seasonal vari -
ations. 2.79 million persons were registered as 
unemployed on an average of the second quar -
ter. The unemployment rate fell by 0.1 percent -
age point to 6.4%. Despite this perceptible 
quarter- on- quarter decline, it is striking that the 
downward momentum tailed off considerably 
over the second quarter and that there was a 
slight seasonally adjusted month- on- month 
increase  in unemployment in July for the first 
time in just under a year. The slowdown might 
have been connected with the mild winter 
weather at the beginning of the year, which 
is  likely to have dampened the usual spring 
pick- up.
The leading labour market indicators suggest 
that employment will expand further in the 
coming months. The Ifo employment barom -
eter, which provides information on the em -
ployment plans of trade and industry over the 
coming three months and which already in -
corporates the July survey results, points to a 
further increase in employment. Nevertheless, 
the barometer did not fully maintain its high 
level in the last two months, which is an indica -
tion that a slower pace is quite possible. By 
contrast, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
BA- X job index, which contains information on both the existing number of reported vacancies 
and their dynamics, showed a further increase. 
The driving force behind this was, above all, 
the greater number of vacancies registered 
with the Federal Employment Agency. Growth 
in the number of vacancies for unsubsidised 
positions subject to social security contribu -
tions was reported above all in other business- 
related services (including temporary agency 
work) as well as in other services sectors – 
those sectors in which it can be assumed that 
mini- jobs will be transformed or consolidated 
into employment subject to social security con -
tributions. The labour market barometer of the 
Institute for Employment Research (IAB), which 
is based on surveys conducted among all the 
managers of local employment agencies 
regarding  unemployment developments over 
the coming three months, declined slightly of 
late after being in neutral territory.
Wages and prices
The year- on- year rise in negotiated rates of pay 
in the second quarter of 2015, at 2.2%, was 
barely any higher than in the previous period 
(+2.1%). The fact that the increase in negoti -
ated wages during the period under review 
also fell perceptibly short of the year- on- year 
growth rate of 2.9% underlines the moderate 
basic tenor of the current pay round. This pat -
tern is also visible in the contractually agreed 
basic rates of pay, which were up 2.3% in the 
second quarter compared with the previous 
year’s figure (having risen by the same figure of 
2.3% in the first quarter and by 2.9% in 2014 
as a whole).Slight fall in 
registered unemployment  in Q2
Outlook for 
employment  remains  positiveIncrease in negotiated  rates of pay in 2015 Q2 again con-siderably lower than in 2014
2 For the same gross hourly wage, employers are required 
to pay social security contributions amounting to just 
20.7% for employees subject to social security contribu -
tions, compared with as much as 30.9% (including lump- 
sum taxes) in the case of mini- jobbers. Given that low- paid 
part- time workers pay only a low level of taxes and other 
contributions, if at all, enterprises could, up until now, 
partly compensate for the higher taxes and other contribu -
tions by paying lower gross wages. For particularly low 
wages, this option no longer exists owing to the minimum 
wage.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
53

Wage developments were dampened by the 
“zero” months (months with a pay freeze) that 
were a widespread component in the latest 
pay settlements; only in a small number of sec -
tors, such as in wholesale and foreign trade 
and in the insurance sector, were these effects 
offset by one- off payments. Furthermore, the 
increase in wages remained moderate owing 
to the fact that pay increases in the new wage 
agreements in the services sectors – which are 
typically broken down into two stages – do not 
provide for an increase of over 3% in scheduled 
rates of pay, even in the more substantial first 
stage, and as a result of the second stage not 
becoming effective until some time in follow -
ing year.3
The increase in actual earnings in the reporting 
period probably again outstripped growth in 
negotiated pay rates. The first quarter of 2015 
had witnessed a positive wage drift for the first 
time in just over two years. This turnaround 
was chiefly attributable to the introduction of 
the general minimum wage.4 At any rate, the 
figures contained in the quarterly earnings sur -
vey of the Federal Statistical Office for the first 
quarter of 2015 provide clear indications of a 
significant wage drift, specifically for low- skilled 
workers and some services sectors in eastern 
Germany (for further details, see the box on 
pages 55 and 56).On the whole, prices returned to an upward 
trajectory in the second quarter. This turn -
around in import, producer and consumer 
prices can largely be explained by the fact that 
crude oil prices were rebounding from their 
low January level well into May. In addition, the 
euro depreciated again slightly. Domestic price 
trends were still pointing upwards. Oil prices 
have weakened significantly again on the inter -
national markets of late. While this has initially 
led to an easing, in particular, of import prices, 
it is likely to have a knock- on effect on down -
stream prices as well.
Seasonally adjusted import prices went up by 
1.4%, one- half of which was due to higher en -
ergy prices. The year- on- year figure remained 
negative on the whole (-0.9%). If energy is 
excluded , however, the year- on- year figure 
expanded  strongly again to +2.9%. This applied  
to both imports (excluding energy) from non-  
euro- area countries (+4.5%) and imports from 
euro- area countries, which moved into positive 
territory (+0.7%). Higher production costs in 
other euro- area countries owing to the depre -
ciation of the euro are also likely to be reflected 
here. Domestic sales prices remained broadly 
unchanged on the quarter. The surge in crude 
oil prices that has since occurred also placed 
upward pressure on domestic sales prices. 
Looking at the energy component, however, 
the effects on electricity and gas prices were 
more than offset by the lagged effects  of the 
preceding fall in crude oil prices, even though 
the reaction was significantly weaker than in 
the past. Excluding energy, domestic  sales Further moder-
ate wage agree-ments on the whole in the current pay round
Growth in 
actual  earnings influenced  by general minimum  wagePrice trends at all stages of the economy point -
ing upwards 
in 2015 Q2
Excluding 
energy : import 
prices still 
clearly rising, 
producer prices slowly following suitNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,total
Basic pay
 1
H1
3 One exception to this is the pay settlement that was 
agreed between Deutsche Bahn AG and the German Rail -
way and Transport Union (EVG), where a 3.5% increase in 
basic pay was agreed in the first stage, followed by a fur -
ther rise of 1.6% in the second quarter of the following 
year.
4 The Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics are 
usually  based on an agreed basic pay rate, which presup -
poses completed vocational training and several years of 
professional experience, whereas the minimum wage pre -
dominantly affects segments with lower qualifications and 
skills requirements. However, in individual sectors in east -
ern Germany, the introduction of the general minimum 
wage also led to adjustments in the agreed basic pay rate 
in the Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics, which 
means that the wage drift is not affected.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
54

Initial indications of how the minimum wage 
is affecting the increase in earnings
A general statutory minimum wage of €8.50 
gross per hour was introduced in Germany at 
the beginning of 2015. The quarterly earnings 
survey of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce for the 
fi  rst quarter of 2015 provides initial indications 
of its impact on wage developments for the 
production and services sectors. There follows 
an analysis of the increases in earnings of 
categories  of employees with low salaries 
where the minimum wage is likely to be hav-
ing a particularly strong effect (less qualifi  ed 
and low- skilled employees and predominantly 
low- paid sectors). The impact on low- paid 
part- time workers is likely to have been wide-spread and quite signifi  cant. However, as the 
quarterly earnings survey does not contain any information on the hourly earnings for 
this category, we cannot discuss this in greater detail here.
In the fi  rst quarter of 2015, the gross hourly 
wages (excluding special payments) of un-skilled and semi- skilled employees in eastern 
Germany rose by 9.3% and 6.6% respectively, 
which was roughly three times and twice as high as the increase in the upper two work categories (senior specialists and managerial 
employees). Even in the very heterogeneous 
category of specialists, the increase still matched the fi  gure for employees in total, although  this had been raised by the min-
imum wage. The fi  gure was thus signifi  cantly higher than that for the upper two work cat-
egories. Looking at wage developments in-
cluding special payments (see table at the top 
of page 56) in order to take account of the possibility that enterprises have sought to 
counteract the minimum wage- related in-
creases in basic rates of pay by means of cuts 
in special payments, a very similar picture 
emerges.
The differences are less marked in western 
Germany, probably on account of the higher 
level of earnings at the lower end: the overall 
increase in earnings categories with simple, 
routine activities was scarcely higher than the 
average for all employees. In previous years, 
however, increases in the case of unskilled and semi- skilled workers were still mostly 
below those of the other work categories, as was also the case in eastern Germany.
A noticeable increase was likewise recorded in 
the fi  rst quarter of 2015 in industries with pre-
dominantly low rates of pay. This is again 
especially  true for the hourly earnings of full- 
time employees in eastern Germany. In west-
ern Germany, there was a pronounced in-crease only in some sectors such as accom-
modation, textile manufacture and the food 
industry (see table at the bottom of page 56). 
The very high pay increases of 11.5% in the 
east German food industry are due in part to 
the collective wage agreements and the in-
dustry- specifi  c minimum wage in the process-
ing of meat products. The pay increase would 
have been higher still if the legal transitional 
arrangement had not been applied, like it was in the east German textile industry. The transi-
tional arrangement allows the general min-
imum wage level to be undercut for a limited 
period by concluding a collectively agreed 
minimum wage level which is declared to be 
generally binding. In the sector of other per-
sonal service activities (including hairdressing, 
laundering and dry- cleaning) the minimum wage in eastern Germany is likely to have 
contributed to a considerable increase in pay 
both in the run- up to its introduction and in 
early 2015. Part of this wage surge is due to 
generally binding sectoral agreements on a 
minimum wage. A sectoral generally binding 
minimum wage, which differentiated be-
tween east and west, entered into force in the hairdressing trade as early as November 2013 
and was increased further in August 2014. A 
minimum nationwide pay level of €8.50 per 
hour will apply from 1 August 2015. Sectoral 
generally binding minimum wages are also playing an important role in other industries 
such as temporary employment and land-
scape service activities.
Industries with a low level of coverage by col-
lective bargaining agreements, such as east 
German food services and security services, 
likewise posted very strong year- on- year Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
55

growth in double fi  gures in the fi  rst quarter of 
2015. In addition, rates of pay had already 
been increased relatively sharply in preceding 
quarters, which points to anticipatory effects 
of the national minimum wage. The accom-
modation and social work activities sectors, 
where collective bargaining agreements are 
few and far between, also saw a marked 
surge in earnings in the fi  rst quarter of 2015.
Overall, the results of the quarterly earning survey indicate that the introduction of the 
minimum wage has had a strong infl  uence on 
the wage structure. Low- skilled and employ-
ees in low- paid sectors in eastern Germany have been particularly affected as low- paid 
part- time workers are likely to have been in 
Germany as a whole, although no hourly earnings are available for these in the quar-
terly earnings survey. The growth in pay trig-
gered by the minimum wage in these areas at 
the lower end of the pay scale is so strong 
that it is also refl  ected in the average rates of pay. In an initial rough estimate, it is assumed 
that, without the introduction of the min-
imum wage, wage developments for full and part- time employees (excluding low- paid part- 
time workers) in eastern Germany in the three 
lower work categories would have been simi-lar to the average of the previous three years. 
However, wages in the upper two work cat-
egories also rose more sharply in the fi  rst quarter of 2015 than on an average of the 
past three years. This increase may have also 
affected the other three work categories to a 
similar extent and it cannot be attributed to 
the minimum wage. Adjusting additionally for 
this increase results in a wage- raising contri-
bution of some 1¾% for eastern Germany. Even assuming that the introduction of the 
minimum wage in western Germany had no 
impact whatsoever on wage developments 
among employees outside the low- paid part- 
time sector, a contribution of about ¼% to the increase in wages for Germany is calcu-lated. Projections based on the Socio- 
Economic Panel (SOEP) suggest that this fi  gure 
could roughly double if the impact on the earnings of low- paid part- time workers in Germany as a whole were also to be taken 
into account.Average gross hourly earnings 
in  selected economic sectors in 2015 Q1
*
Full- time employees
Percentage change in the quarter on a year earlier
Economic sector (classifi  cation) West East
Total 2.4 3.5
Manufacture of food products 3.9 11.5
Manufacture of textiles 4.7 8.1
Wholesale 1.7 3.8
Retail 1.2 3.7
Accommodation 5.4 9.5
Food services 1.9 12.6
Employment activities 2.1 3.9
Security and investigation activities 0.6 12.0
Services to buildings and landscape 
 activities 4.1 3.9
Residential care activities 2.8 5.4
Social work activities without  accommodation 2.5 5.0
Other personal service activities (hairdressing , beauty treatment, 
laundries , dry cleaners etc) – 1.5 9.8
Source: Calculations based on indices of the quarterly earnings survey of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, Fach-
serie 16, Reihe 2.2. * Production and services sectors, ex-cluding special payments.
Deutsche BundesbankAverage gross hourly earnings 
 according to performance group in 2015 Q1
*
Full- time and part- time employees 
(excluding low- paid part- time employees),
Percentage change in the quarter on a year earlier
Work categories West East
Total 1 1.8 4.2
Managerial employees 2.7 3.0
Senior specialists 1.9 3.2
Specialists
(with completed vocational training) 1.8 4.2
Semi- skilled workers 2.5 6.4
Unskilled workers 1.8 9.4
Source: Quarterly earnings survey of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, Fachserie 16, Reihe 2.1. * Production and services 
sectors, including special payments. 1 Percentage shifts in favour of lower work categories dampen the average rise in gross hourly earnings across all work categories.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
56

prices did not show a further decline, but went 
up slightly instead. On the whole, the year- on- 
year decline narrowed to -1.4% (excluding 
energy : -0.3%). The positive price trend in 
export  sales continued: year- on- year export 
prices rose 1.4% on the whole during the 
reporting  period, after 0.8% in the previous 
quarter. For the first time in three years, the 
terms of trade showed a perceptible deterior -
ation in the second quarter compared with the 
previous quarter, which was due to the primar -
ily oil- price- induced significant rise in import 
prices.
The pace of price inflation for domestic con -
struction work slowed down recently in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. Nevertheless, the year- 
on- year increase remained at 1.5%. Price 
movements in the case of both structural work 
and the finishing trades were negligible overall. 
Price inflation on the housing market has 
shown a moderate increase on the whole since 
the turn of 2014-15, following a period of 
calmness in the preceding year. One striking 
development of late has been the compara -
tively sharp rise in the prices of owner- occupied 
housing.
Consumer prices went up sharply in the second 
quarter by a seasonally adjusted 0.7%, after 
having fallen by 0.2% in the first three months 
of the year. Just under one- half of this increase 
was due to the recovery of crude oil prices in 
the meantime, resulting in a rise of just over 
2½% in energy prices, even though consumers 
are still paying 10% less for refined petroleum 
products than they were a year ago. Consumer 
price inflation excluding energy also went up to 
0.4%, after 0.3% and 0.2% in the two preced -
ing quarters. The prices of foodstuffs rose dis -
tinctly. The pace of price inflation for other 
goods accelerated markedly on the back of the 
euro’s depreciation. Year- on- year inflation 
stood at over 1% again for the first time since 
the end of 2012. Following the fairly sharp sea -
sonally adjusted price rises of the past few 
quarters, price inflation for services was more Rise in 
construction  and housing  prices
Sharp rise in 
consumer prices in the second quarter, …Export pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20159295100105110
97100105110
97100105 105110115
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
July97100105110
JulyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
57

moderate again in the second quarter.5 Further 
price adjustments stemming from the introduc -
tion of the general minimum wage are likely to 
have been on a very limited scale at the end of 
the period under review. The moderate upward 
trend in housing rents continued. Consumer 
prices as measured by the national consumer 
price index (CPI) went up by 0.5% overall in the 
second quarter compared with the previous 
year, after remaining unchanged in this three-  
month period; in the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), the corresponding 
figures  were +0.4%, compared with -0.1% in 
the first quarter.6
At the end of the first half of the year, year- on- 
year consumer price inflation declined again 
perceptibly on the back of declining crude oil 
prices. Excluding energy, the rate remained 
largely unchanged. In July, both the Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) and the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) stood at +1.0%. On the 
whole, however, the figures were +0.2% and 
+0.1% respectively. Should these lower crude 
oil prices become entrenched, the headline 
inflation  rate will probably hover around 0% in 
the coming months before rising again towards 
the end of the year, driven mainly by the base -
line effect in the energy component, which 
means that the underlying upward trend is 
likely to be more visible.
Orders received and outlook
As things stand, the conditions are currently in 
place for fairly strong economic growth in the 
second half of 2015, fuelled by both foreign 
and domestic demand. The upward tendency 
in the domestic demand components will 
feature  more prominently in the second half of 
the year – in contrast to the dynamics in the 
second quarter of 2015, which were domin -
ated by special factors. This will push up not 
only consumer spending, which remains 
buoyed by the highly favourable underlying 
setting, but also investment, particularly as en -
terprises that may soon be facing above-  average capacity utilisation levels are becoming 
increasingly likely to invest in capacity expan -
sion. Export business may benefit, first, from 
the ongoing recovery in the euro area. Second, 
the economic outlook for the United States 
and the United Kingdom, which are tradition -
ally major sale markets for German exports out -
side the euro area, is also comparatively favour -
able. The euro’s low external value will also 
help to boost exports to non- euro- area coun -
tries. But it should also be borne in mind that 
external demand  is currently facing downside 
risks, too, stemming largely from the emerging 
market economies.
The mixed signals coming from the global 
economy are consistent with the rather sub -
dued expansionary business and export expect -
ations of industry. According to the Ifo business 
survey, sentiment in the manufacturing sector 
has been somewhat more favourable since the 
second quarter than it was at the turn of the 
year, mainly because enterprises are rating their 
current situation more optimistically. In those 
sectors that are focused on the domestic econ -
omy, such as service providers, but also in the 
wholesale trade, there has, in fact, been in -
creasing optimism since the second quarter; in 
the retail trade and in the construction sector it 
has remained broadly unchanged at a good 
level.
Industrial activity received a boost from the 
strong inflow of new orders in the second 
quarter. The increase in new orders by a sea -
sonally adjusted 3% on the quarter more than 
offset the earlier setback in the winter months. 
The marked rise was attributable primarily to … but went 
down again of late on the back of plummeting crude oil prices
Further fairly 
strong economic growth to be expected  …… owing to greater level of confidence among enter-prises …
… and buoyant 
intake of new orders
5 The introduction of the new “purchaser principle” (ie 
whoever commissions the estate agent must pay the estate 
agent’s fee) in the rental housing market in June had a dis -
tinct dampening impact on the prices of services in the 
month of its introduction, although the effect on the quar -
terly average was marginal.
6 With the publication of the final figures for April, the 
Federal  Statistical Office revised the index values for the 
HICP from January 2015 onwards, which was necessary 
owing to a calculation error in the “health care services” 
sub- component. The annual HICP rate was consequently 
up by 0.1 percentage point in the first quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
58

export orders, which rose by 6%. Large orders 
from euro- area and non- euro- area countries 
also played a part in this, although growth was 
still very substantial leaving these orders aside. 
Demand from within the euro area picked up 
particularly strongly (+8¼%). Significantly more 
orders were also received from countries out -
side the euro area (+4½%), with the high level 
recorded at the end of 2014 almost being 
regained  even if large orders are excluded. 
Domestic  orders were down slightly compared 
with the first quarter (-¾%). Apart from the 
large orders which significantly increased the 
volume of orders in the preceding quarter, 
domestic  demand was, however, likewise 
clearly pointing upwards.
Capital goods producers benefited the most 
from the pick- up in demand in the second 
quarter (+4¼%). Very strong impulses were 
received   from abroad, although significantly 
more domestic orders were also received if 
large orders are not taken into account. The 
number of new orders for machinery grew par -
ticularly strongly (+4¾), with considerably 
greater demand from both foreign and domes -
tic enterprises (+5% and +3¾% respectively). 
Orders in the automotive industry rose very 
strongly owing to the increase in export de -
mand and, following a decline  in the first quar -
ter of the year, were up on their markedly 
elevated  level in the fourth quarter of 2014. 
Orders for computers, electronic and optical 
products as well as electrical equipment also 
showed an increase. Orders of other transport 
equipment experienced a marked rise, which 
was due primarily to an increase in foreign 
orders for ships, but also for railway vehicles. 
Demand for intermediate goods was also 
stronger again (+1%), although the increase in 
domestic orders was rather subdued. The con -
sumer goods industry also saw sharp growth in 
orders (+3¼%) after no more than a small 
increase  at the beginning of the year. This was 
due chiefly to foreign demand, but there was 
also a marked rise in the inflow of domestic 
orders.Capital and con-
sumer goods in strong demandDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Apr-
May
Apr-
May90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
59

Demand for construction work remains strong, 
even though the exceptionally high level of 
orders recorded in the first quarter could not 
be maintained in the first two months of the 
second quarter (more recent data are not yet 
available). This was due to a number of major 
orders in industrial and public sector construc -
tion received in the first quarter, which filled 
the order books of construction firms over an 
extended period of time. On the whole, the 
volume of construction orders received in the 
first five months of this year was up by an aver -
age of 6½% on the depressed level of the pre -
vious six months. Demand for residential con -
struction was on a stable upward trend path. 
On an average of April and May, the estimated 
volume costs of approved housing units in new 
and existing buildings were up by a seasonally 
adjusted 1% on the quarter, after going up by 1½% in the first quarter and by ½% in the final 
quarter of 2014.
In the second half of the year, private con -
sumption is likely to provide stronger impetus 
for economic activity again than it did in the 
second quarter. The recent increase in house -
hold’s real scope for expenditure constitutes a 
sound basis for this. For example, oil prices 
have fallen again significantly following a par -
tial recovery between January and May, and 
overall inflation is very low. Furthermore, sur -
veys by the consumer research institution, 
Gesell schaft für Konsumforschung  (GfK), show 
that, in the light of the favourable outlook for 
the labour market and pay, income expect -
ations have shown a further improvement on 
the earlier record high in the preceding quarter.Clear upward 
trend in construction  demand 
Private consumption  
still a mainstay 
of economic 
activity Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
The favourable development of public finances 
in Germany has continued thus far into the 
year; however, there are still a number of risks 
emanating, in particular, from the international 
environment. In the absence of any major dis -
ruptions, the general government surplus is 
expected  to remain relatively stable in 2015 
and 2016 at around ½% of gross domestic 
product (GDP), and the debt ratio is likely to fall 
further. Public finances are benefiting from the 
economic upswing.1 In addition, one- off pro -
ceeds from the recent frequency auction as 
well as declining interest expenditure are pro -
viding relief. This is obscuring the basic trend 
towards expansionary fiscal policy which, when 
taken in isolation, causes the balance to deteri -
orate. Factors behind this include the pension 
benefits package (which came into effect in 
mid-2014), additional expenditure on infra -
structure, education and research and on social 
benefits provided by central, state and local 
government as well as minor income tax cuts. 
Furthermore, the social security funds are likely 
to record significant growth in expenditure 
chiefly due to higher general pension increases 
and cost pressure in the health system.
At the end of 2014, the debt ratio amounted to 
74.9%,2 falling to 74.4% by the end of the first 
quarter of 2015. This was primarily due to 
nominal growth in GDP in the ratio’s denomin -
ator. The favourable expectations for the fiscal 
balance and for nominal growth in GDP indi -
cate that the ratio will continue to decline, and 
portfolio reductions at government- owned bad 
banks are set to bolster this trend. In light of 
current negotiations regarding the European 
Stability Mechanism’s (ESM) assistance pro -
gramme for Greece (see also the comments in 
the box on pages 62 to 66), it should be noted 
that – statistically – the ESM is regarded as an 
independent international institution. This 
means that the member states backing the ESM, who ultimately take the loan decisions 
and are liable therefor, are assigned their cap -
ital contributions provided in previous years but 
not any debt incurred. By contrast, the claims 
and debt associated with the bilateral loans 
and European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) 
loans granted thus far are directly attributed to 
the countries providing assistance. The risks for 
the individual countries inherent in the ESM 
loans are, however, not greatly mitigated by 
statistical shifts.3
According to central government’s projections, 
general government should achieve at least a 
balanced budget in the medium term, too, and 
cut its debt ratio to 61½% by the end of 2019. 
They envisage complying with the general gov -
ernment deficit limit as defined in the European 
Fiscal Compact as well as with central govern -
ment’s debt brake and maintaining distinct Little change in 
surplus this year and next despite fiscal loosening
Decline in debt 
ratioCentral govern-ment aims for at least balanced budget and safety margins in medium term
* The section entitled “General government budget” con -
cerns the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. The 
subsequent reporting on the budgets of central, state and 
local government and of the social security funds is based 
on the figures as defined in the government’s financial stat -
istics (which are generally in line with the budget accounts).
1 Pursuant to the ESCB’s cyclical adjustment procedure, the 
cyclical impact on the fiscal balance was almost neutral last 
year. By contrast, the cyclical adjustment procedure used 
for EU budgetary surveillance and for central government’s 
debt brake when drawing up the budget paints a much 
less favourable picture of the economic situation. Both pro -
cedures indicate that the cyclical impact will become more 
favourable going forward.
2 As part of the quarterly calculations, the debt ratio was 
revised upwards by 0.2 percentage point compared with 
the Maastricht return from April 2015 because student 
grants and loans as well as the funding thereof are now 
fully attributable to the public sector.
3 At the Euro Summit held in mid-  July, it was agreed to 
examine whether the deadlines for paying interest on and 
redeeming the bilateral loans and EFSF loans granted thus 
far could be extended should Greece be granted an ESM 
programme. Taken in isolation, if only the deadlines are 
changed, this would have no notable impact on the 
Maastricht  ratios as they currently stand. For the ESM, add -
itional capital contributions would inflate creditor coun -
tries’ debt levels due to the corresponding rise in the need 
for funding. Explicit debt relief or calls by the ESM for cap -
ital to cover credit defaults would probably have an impact 
on the deficit.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
61

Third assistance programme for Greece
The road to a third 
assistance programme
Following the introduction of the euro, Greece saw very unbalanced macroeco-
nomic and fi  scal developments, which were partially masked by inadequate statistics. In 
2010, following the outbreak of the fi  nan-
cial crisis, Greece virtually lost access to the 
capital markets. Since then, it has been 
granted extensive fi  scal fi  nancial assistance 
–  totalling over €200 billion, or around 115% of Greek gross domestic product 
(GDP) – via bilateral loans from other euro- area countries (€53 billion) as well as loans from the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (€131 billion and €20 billion, respect-
ively). Assistance was provided in order to 
enable the economic adjustment process to 
take place in as orderly a fashion as pos-sible, as well as to ward off risks to the  fi  nancial stability of the euro area as a 
whole. The solidarity was contractually tied 
to compliance with the conditionality agreed under the assistance programmes. 
This was intended to create a basis for sus-tainable macroeconomic and fi  scal develop-ments. In addition to this, the Greek bank-
ing system was granted liquidity assistance 
via the Eurosystem (see the box on pages 23 and 24).
The Greek debt burden has been sizeably 
reduced in recent years by restructuring the debt vis- à- vis private creditors as well as vis- 
à- vis other euro- area member states. For example, in the case of Greece’s private capital market debt, maturities were ex-
tended, the nominal value was lowered and 
interest rates were cut. The bilateral and EFSF loans were also subject to sizeable debt relief measures (while the IMF terms remained unchanged). Thus, Greece saw 
repeated cuts, and in some cases deferrals, in the interest it had to pay under the assis-tance programmes and the loan maturities 
were extended substantially. The interest rate terms on the loans are now more or 
less on a par with the very favourable terms 
of a country with a good credit rating. 
Owing to the extensive interest rate subsid-
ies, Greece’s general government interest 
expenditure came to 3.9% of GDP1 in 2014 
and was thus below the corresponding fi  g-
ures for Ireland, Italy and Portugal, despite 
Greece’s signifi  cantly higher debt ratio.
The second assistance programme of the 
euro- area countries was originally supposed 
to run until the end of 2014 and the IMF 
programme was scheduled to continue until 
March 2016. However –  as had already 
been the case under the fi  rst programme – 
there were repeated delays and missed  targets. Particularly elementary structural reforms needed for sustainable economic developments were not implemented on 
the agreed scale and within the envisaged 
timeframe. In spite of this, there was tan-gible progress, however. The general gov-ernment defi  cit was signifi  cantly reduced 
and the target set for the primary balance 
(fi  scal balance excluding interest expend-
iture) was exceeded in 2013. It was gener-
ally expected that the targets for the years 
thereafter could also be met. Furthermore, 
Greece was able to gradually regain trust 
on the capital markets.
However, as of mid-2014, the willingness to 
implement the programme waned signifi  -
cantly, even under the previous Greek gov-
ernment, and payment of further fi  nancial 
assistance tied to this was repeatedly post-
poned. Following the elections in January 
2015, the new government ultimately turned its back on the programme agree-ments. In some cases, the government 
1 As defi  ned in the national accounts, where a deferral 
does not reduce interest expenditure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
62

backtracked on previous reform measures 
and on- site checks concerning the imple-mentation of the programme measures were prevented. The Greek government 
called a referendum on the interim results 
of the negotiations on extending the second assistance programme and these 
were rejected by Greek voters.
In the fi  rst half of 2015, Greece’s banking system was still propped up by increasing amounts of emergency liquidity assistance 
from the Eurosystem, which fi  nanced strong capital outfl  ows. However, after the second 
programme expired without successful completion at the end of June, a further 
extension  of the emergency liquidity assis-
tance was not granted and capital controls 
became inevitable. With no programme and no capital market access, Greece 
defaulted  on payments to the IMF, in par-
ticular. Probably not least because of the extremely fragile state of the banking sys-tem and the ensuing discussion about a 
possible Grexit, on 12 July 2015 Greece and the other euro- area member states found a 
common basis for negotiations on a third 
assistance programme.
For the duration of the programme negoti-
ations, Greece will receive bridging pay-
ments in the form of short- term EFSM (European Financial Stabilisation Mechan-
ism) loans, which will initially total €7 billion and are primarily intended to settle the late 
payments to the IMF and on Eurosystem 
credit claims that have matured or are ma-
turing. The EFSM loans will be granted via 
the EU budget, with the euro- area member 
states having pledged to shield the other 
EU countries from risk. The prerequisite for 
the bridging payments and the ESM being 
given the mandate to negotiate a pro-
gramme was the Greek parliament passing 
several specifi  c reform measures and its 
general commitment to take further meas-
ures.The settlement of the outstanding pay-ments to the IMF means that one of the 
obstacles standing in the way of the latter’s 
participation in a third assistance pro-
gramme has been removed. Therefore, dur-
ing the course of further negotiations, the 
current IMF programme – which is still run-
ning – could potentially be replaced by a 
new IMF programme. However, further pre-
requisites, in addition to the settlement of 
the outstanding payments, are secured 
funding for the fi  rst 12 months of the pro-
gramme and the IMF certifying the sus-tainability of the recipient country’s public 
 fi  nances.
Proposed features of the 
third assistance programme
On 11 August 2015, it was announced that 
a fundamental technical agreement had 
been reached. As this report went to press, 
the process of endorsement by the member states (if necessary with the involvement of the national parliaments), as is required be-fore the fi  nancial assistance can be granted 
by the ESM, had not yet taken place. The 
application review found that the required 
level of funding amounts to between €82 
billion and €86 billion. This primarily com-
prises servicing outstanding claims from 
assis tance loans and outstanding payments 
to private creditors, building liquidity buf-
fers and spending on bank recapitalisation. The latter is estimated at up to €25 billion. 
The programme also envisages inter alia  
exten sive privatisation proceeds, which are 
set to total €50 billion over the term of the assistance loans.
With regard to structural measures, the 
goals comprise reforming the tax and social 
system, ambitious product market and 
 labour market reforms, making changes in 
the area of network industries and signifi  -
cantly bolstering public administration. Fur-thermore, banks are to be restructured and, in particular, the issue of what to do about 
non- performing loans is to be clarifi  ed. Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
63

Compared with the fi  gures contained in the 
common basis for entering into negoti-
ations, the targets for the primary balance 
have once again been lowered and are now 
likely to be set at a defi  cit of up to ¼% of 
GDP in 2015, followed by a surplus of at 
least ½% in 2016 and around 1¾% in 2017. 
The long- term primary surplus target of 
3½% of GDP is still on the cards from 2018 
onward. It is envisaged that the fi  rst tranche of the new programme will be paid once a fi  nal agreement has been adopted.
When the application for the programme was submitted, the European Commission 
carried out a preliminary calculation which, alongside the original ambitious targets for 
the primary balance, also contained inter alia a long- term projection for real eco-
nomic growth of nearly 2%.2 On this basis, 
the debt ratio under a new programme is forecast to come to 150% in 2022 and 
111% in 2030. By contrast, the IMF’s analy-
sis was based on less favourable develop-
ments with a debt ratio of 170% in 2022, 
and even this fi  gure was deemed to still be 
somewhat optimistic.3 However, the de-
tailed assumptions on which both prelimin-
ary calculations are based have not been 
presented and, if there are no other changes 
in the underlying conditions, the lowering of the targets for the primary balance is 
likely to have a negative impact on the pre-liminary calculations for the debt ratio.
Individual aspects of developments 
in Greece
When drawing up assistance programmes, 
the member states concerned must make 
various decisions, such as which condition-
alities they deem to be acceptable and to 
what extent risks should be assumed. In this context, economic analyses play an import-
ant role. However, these are fraught with 
uncertainty and the potential outcome also 
crucially hinges on the agreements being 
implemented. As European monetary union 
has been formed on a decentralised basis with individual member states having au-tonomy, it is particularly important that rules and agreements are complied with 
and have a binding force. Only then will a 
reliable framework exist in which medium 
to long- term agreements can also be made and ex ante assistance can be provided, for 
example through assumption of liability. If 
this is not the case, the basis for long- term 
agreements erodes. It is important not to 
lose sight of this, not least during the pro-
cess of crisis resolution, which entails polit-
ical constraints, requires short- term action 
and sometimes a need for pragmatic solu-
tions.
Before an ESM loan can be granted, it must 
inter alia be possible to confi  rm that the 
public fi  nances of the country receiving as-
sistance are sustainable. This should thus 
actually assure repayment of the assistance 
loans with the appropriate interest rate and maturity terms. The European Commission’s preliminary calculation in this regard, which 
was submitted to the Bundestag in July, concludes that there are serious concerns 
regarding the sustainability of Greek public fi  nances, but it does not certify an absence 
of sustainability. By contrast, the analysis submitted by the IMF fi  nds that Greece’s 
public debt “has become highly unsustain-
able”. It can “now only be made sustain-able through debt relief measures that go 
far beyond what Europe has been willing to 
consider so far.”4 The fact that these two 
assessments contradict each other empha-
sises that the task of determining the sus-
tainability of public fi  nances is by no means 
clear cut. It is based on numerous assess-
2 European Commission, Greece – request for stability 
support in the form of an ESM loan, 10 July 2015.
3 IMF, Greece – An Update of IMF Staff’s Preliminary 
Public Debt Sustainability Analysis, IMF Country Report No 15/ 186, 14 July 2015.4 In the event of an absence of sustainability, in prin-ciple the private creditors should initially be brought on board to reestablish sustainability. However, as the pri-vate sector has already been hit by relatively extensive debt restructuring measures in the case of Greece, this option has evidently been ruled out.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
64

ments regarding future developments, in-
cluding the government’s willingness to pay. However, in principle, any debt level 
can be rendered sustainable with the right 
interest rate and maturity terms. Thus, in an 
extreme case scenario, a loan with a zero 
interest rate and indefi  nite maturity would 
have no associated debt burden. Low inter-
est rates and long maturities for the new assistance loans and a corresponding ad-
justment of the terms for the existing loans 
can thus also make Greek public fi  nances 
sustainable. In economic terms, such inter-
est rate subsidies amount to a transfer, with the relief they provide for the recipient and the burden they place on the provider being 
no different from a reduction in the nom-
inal value of the debt (relief in the nominal value).
Compared with the original terms of the 
assis tance loans, Greece has already received  substantial debt relief and the interest rates 
are locked for relatively long periods, on a 
par with those for a highly- rated country. There are now discussions regarding 
whether the new loans should also be given 
very favourable terms over a very long 
period as it is assumed that Greece will not 
be able to return to the capital markets in 
the short to medium term, or at least only 
with very high premiums, which is not con-
sidered to be a viable option. Moreover, further maturity extensions and interest defer rals on the existing assistance loans 
are evidently also being considered. In this 
context, it should be taken into account that the interest burden will rise in the 
 future – even if it is tied to a largely risk- free 
interest rate level  – if the general market 
interest rates should rise again and there is 
a need for refi  nancing. Greece could be shielded from this by receiving very long- 
term loans at the current risk- free long- term interest rate. An even further reaching inter-
est rate subsidy would entail the currently even lower short or medium- term interest rate level being fi  xed over the long term. Greece’s interest expenditure would then probably be lower than the ESM’s refi  nan-
cing costs in the long term.
The level of the fi  nancing needs and scope 
of the transfer required (interest rate sub-
sidy or haircut) to ensure sustainability de-
pend not least on the size of the target pri-
mary surplus. At the beginning of the fi  rst 
assistance programme in 2010, a medium- 
term primary balance of 6% of GDP was 
still deemed to be an appropriate goal. However, the targets have gradually been lowered, and most recently they were re-peatedly cut during the negotiations on a third assistance programme. It will now 
probably be agreed that Greece only has to 
record a primary surplus of 3½% of GDP 
over the coming decades. The IMF evidently 
doubts that Greece can achieve this goal and be able or want to maintain it over a 
longer period of time. In light of the devel-
opments in Greece this year, these doubts 
are completely understandable. However, in 
principle, it seems that an ambitious pri-
mary surplus in Greece is appropriate and, 
moreover, in the past there have been vari-
ous examples of OECD countries recording 
high surpluses over longer periods of time. 
For instance, Belgium had an average pri-mary surplus of around 3½% of GDP be-tween the end of the 1980s and 2007. Given Greece’s extremely high debt level, the debt relief measures affecting private 
investors and the high assistance payments from the euro- area countries, an ambitious requirement seems by no means excessive.
Greece should comply with the require-ments of the Stability and Growth Pact in 
the medium term and record a structurally 
balanced budget overall. This would also 
 result in the debt ratio being reduced rela-
tively rapidly. If a balanced budget is re-quired, the primary surplus agreed in the programme determines the level of the 
interest burden. If the primary surplus does not exceed 3½%, a very low average inter-
est rate on the outstanding loans would 
have to be ensured by adjusting the interest Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
65

rate conditions so that interest expenditure 
does not surpass 3½% of GDP and the 
budget is balanced. If, for example, the debt ratio path assumed thus far by the European Commission in its sustainability analyses is taken, this would result in an 
average interest rate of barely over 2% in 
2020 and still only 3% in 2030.
5 Greece’s 
interest expenditure ratio is thus likely to be 
lower than in many other euro- area coun-
tries in the longer term. Against this back-
drop, too, ambitious goals would be rec-
ommendable and do not appear unattain-
able. If the structural reforms are imple-
mented, the primary surplus would be 
achieved during a period of ever improving macroeconomic conditions. Once the basic 
position has been achieved, there would 
also be no more need for further consolida-tion measures.
With regard to the potential privatisation proceeds, which could also contribute to fi  nan cing, it would seem that caution is 
called for given past experience. However, 
if the Greek economy makes a sustained 
 recovery, there could be a more favourable 
outlook in this regard. Revenue could po-
tentially be generated if the recapitalisation of the banking system puts fi  nancial institu-
tions back on a sound footing enabling them to be sold again in future. If Greek banks were currently actually solvent, it 
would be expected that the recapitalisation funds could be regained in full in the event of privatisation. However, there are likely to be grave doubts in this regard.
It is currently not yet possible to forecast to 
what extent the Greek banks will have to be 
recapitalised. In this context, in particular 
the issue of what to do about the very high 
level of non- performing loans on banks’ balance sheets will be of crucial import-ance. Greek credit institutions’ balance 
sheets should be cleaned up swiftly so as to strengthen the ability of the banking system 
to act as an intermediary. This is to be 
accompanied  inter alia by a reform of the insolvency law for private debtors, which should facilitate the provision of relief for excessive debt, while at the same time 
ensuring  that there is not a comprehensive exoneration of liability for existing assets to the detriment of banks. There will probably at most be a very limited bail- in of creditors 
and depositors and the potential for this 
has furthermore been considerably reduced 
by the massive outfl  ows of funds in recent 
months. Consequently, recapitalisation needs will have to be met to a greater 
extent  via public funds and there will be an increased need for transfers.
The agreement on a third assistance pro-
gramme had not yet been concluded in full 
as this report went to press. The starting position for a successful programme has 
deteriorated signifi  cantly during 2015. Time 
and confi  dence have been lost. Basic pre-requisites for a successful programme are 
that reforms are swiftly implemented, pav-
ing the way for a competitive economic 
model and a more effi   cient public adminis-tration, and that public fi  nances embark on a sustainable consolidation path. To achieve this, it is crucial to regain the trust of all par-
ties, and in particular investors need to be 
brought back on board. Alongside the 
 fi  nancial, product and labour markets, fur-
ther areas that have been listed for reform 
are the tax and social system, public admin-istration and the justice system. The insuffi   -
cient progress made under the previous Greek assistance programmes highlights the need to make sure that the condi-
tionalites are rigorously adhered to. In par-
ticular, the onus is crucially on the Greek government to bring about fundamental 
change.
5 Assuming nominal GDP growth of 4% from 2018 
onward. Alternatively, this interest expenditure ratio 
could be achieved by means of a haircut combined 
with higher interest rates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
66

safety margins.4 The Stability Council and its 
Advisory Board confirmed in June that they 
expect  compliance with the general govern -
ment deficit limit.5
As things currently stand, central government’s 
resolutions on budgetary and fiscal planning 
are in line with its objectives. Endeavours to 
maintain safety margins vis- à- vis the budget 
limits in good times are to be welcomed. 
Should unpleasant surprises occur, the required 
adjustment process can thus be somewhat 
milder without endangering the credibility of 
budgetary rules. At the same time, however, it 
is advisable to use the protracted demographic 
lull to rapidly cut the debt ratio to below 60%. 
The resulting containment of the interest bur -
den would create additional budgetary scope 
and strengthen the resilience of German public 
finances overall. All in all, given this background 
and the favourable economic outlook, the 
structural surpluses are appropriate. By con -
trast, calls that have been made in some quar -
ters to additionally boost the economies of 
other EU member states by launching a further 
fiscal demand stimulus in Germany appear 
unconvincing  owing, inter alia,  to the very 
limited effects that such a national stimulus 
programme would be likely to have on other 
countries.
Desirable measures, such as those aimed at 
maintaining a good public infrastructure or 
generally increasing potential growth do not 
require a further easing of the budgetary 
stance; instead, they can be implemented 
within the planned financial framework. Ultim -
ately, it is a question of setting the right prior -
ities and tapping the available efficiency re -
serves.6
In recent years, foreseeable budgetary scope 
has mainly been used to increase spending – 
for instance, on pensions. Should additional 
scope arise in the future, it would seem far 
more appropriate instead to consider easing 
the burden of taxes and social contributions, 
which are set to rise further in the face of growing demographic challenges. Thus the 
government could do more to counter income 
tax bracket creep, lower social contributions by 
financing non- insurance- related benefits out of 
general taxation or consider a more rapid re -
duction of the “solidarity surcharge”, for which 
the justification as a federal tax surcharge is be -
coming less and less apparent now that the 
special- purpose grants to the federal states in 
eastern Germany are being phased out.Structural sur-
plus appropriate and …
… no obstacle 
to growth- enhancing fiscal policy
Consider cuts in 
taxes and social security contri-butions should pleasant sur-prises continueTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 201501234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 The structural situation appears to again be too positive 
when calculated in accordance with the method of cyclical 
adjustment used for EU budgetary surveillance; however, 
there would, nevertheless, still be a safety margin even if it 
were calculated using the ESCB procedure.
5 The European Fiscal Compact provides for independent 
monitoring of compliance with the deficit ceiling. The 
Stability  Council, which comprises the central and state 
government finance ministers as well as the Federal Minis -
ter of Economics, has received an explicit legal mandate to 
this effect. The Stability Council is supported by an inde -
pendent Advisory Board. The Stability Council’s resolution 
on safeguarding the deficit ceiling as well as the statement 
by the Advisory Board can be found on the Stability Coun -
cil’s website (www.stabilitaetsrat.de).
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
Report, May 2015, pp 75-76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
67

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue7 came to 
6% in the second quarter of 2015 (see the 
table above and the chart on page 67). This 
was buoyed by the absence of one- off strains 
from the previous year as a result of refunding 
nuclear  fuel tax. However, even after adjust -
ment for this special effect, at 4½%, the rise in 
tax revenue was significant. One especially 
important  contributory factor here was that 
the development of gross wages and salaries 
per employee, which are of particular signifi -
cance in terms of bracket creep, was evidently 
still favourable thus driving up wage tax rev -
enue. A further factor pushing up the wage tax 
growth rate was that payments deducted from 
income, in particular for child benefit, grew 
slowly. By contrast, changes in tax legislation (above all, the increasing tax exemption of 
pension   expenditure) continued to generate 
slight shortfalls. At 4%, the increase in profit-  
related taxes was also significant. This was 
driven by withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains, corporation tax and assessed 
income tax, whereas receipts from non-  
assessed tax on earnings fell steeply. At 3%, the 
rise in turnover tax receipts was in line with 
expectations  for growth in macroeconomic 
reference  variables (in particular, private con -
sumption and private housing construction). By 
contrast, revenue from other consumption 
taxes was down by 3%, which is mainly attrib -
utable, on balance, to refunds for energy and 
electricity tax as annual consumption in 2014 
was lower than forecast.Dynamic rise 
in tax revenue in Q2 …
… due, inter 
alia, to absence 
of special effect  
from previous  yearTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2015 1,2Q2
2014 2015 2014 2015
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 284.5 300.1 + 15.6 + 5.5 + 3.7 144.4 153.2 + 8.7 +  6.1
of which
Wage tax 79.8 85.8 +  6.0 + 7.5 + 6.1 40.8 44.3 + 3.5 +  8.6
Profi  t-related taxes 3 48.4 50.1 +  1.8 + 3.6 + 2.5 24.5 25.5 + 1.0 +  4.1
Assessed income tax 23.8 25.5 +  1.7 + 7.1 + 6.4 12.0 12.3 + 0.4 +  3.0
Corporation tax 10.7 11.3 +  0.6 + 5.7 + 3.8 5.1 5.9 + 0.8 + 15.5
Investment income 
tax4 13.9 13.4 –  0.5 – 3.9 – 5.8 7.4 7.3 – 0.1 –  2.0
Turnover taxes 5 99.7 102.6 +  2.9 + 2.9 + 2.5 49.2 50.8 + 1.6 +  3.2
Energy tax 14.5 14.2 –  0.3 – 2.3 + 1.9 9.9 9.5 – 0.4 –  3.6
Tobacco tax 6.2 5.9 –  0.3 – 4.5 – 2.9 3.7 3.7 – 0.0 –  0.7
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2015. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant 
deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and 
import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
68

According to the official tax estimate from May, 
growth in tax receipts (including local govern -
ment taxes) for 2015 as a whole is expected to 
be solid (3½%). This growth primarily reflects 
underlying macroeconomic developments. 
Revenue shortfalls as a result of the legislative 
package on income tax8 passed in July are esti -
mated at only just under €1 billion for 2015. 
However, substantial shortfalls are now ex -
pected during the remainder of the year for 
revenue from corporation and local business 
tax in connection with various court rulings.9 
Yet revenue has recorded very positive growth 
of late. On balance, growth in revenue is thus 
likely to be roughly in line with the results of 
the tax estimate.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a high surplus of 
€14 billion in the second quarter of 2015 com -
pared with only €1 billion one year previously. 
Revenue rose very sharply by 11½% (€9 billion). 
At 7%, growth in tax receipts was also substan -
tial (€5 billion; €2 billion of which was due to 
the temporary refunding of nuclear fuel tax in 
2014). Furthermore, it seems that the lion’s 
share of the total revenue of €5 billion from the 
auction of frequency rights, which was con -
cluded on 19  June, has already been trans -
ferred to the central government budget.10 The 
expenditure side, in contrast, recorded a fall of 
5½% (€4 billion) overall. This was mainly due to 
the absence of a contribution to the ESM (the 
last payment of €4½ billion was made in spring 
2014). Moreover, interest expenditure again 
sustained a large decline (of €1½ billion).11 By 
contrast, personnel expenditure, current trans -
fers (especially to households) and transfers to 
state government continued to rise perceptibly.
As in the outcome of the previous year and in 
the original budget, the supplementary budget 
(which was approved at the end of May) does 
not envisage any net new borrowing for 2015 
as a whole (balanced budget). In a departure 
from the original budget, tax revenue is now expected to be €1½ billion higher and expend -
iture on debt servicing to be down by €2½ bil -
lion. The largest counterpart is the one- off 
transfer of €3½ billion to the new off-  budget 
entity for the promotion of investment by 
financially  weak local authorities.
However, the implementation of the budget is 
likely to be much more favourable than fore -
cast. The auction of frequency rights, for which 
no notable revenue was anticipated, has gen -All in all, 
development  expected  to be 
roughly in line with tax estimate 
Surplus shoots 
up in Q2 due to sharp growth in revenue and absence  of ESM 
contribution
2015 supple-
mentary budget balancedResult set to be much better than forecastCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities.  Not  adjusted  for  financial  transactions  or  cyclical effects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
2015
20142013Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201320152014€ billion
8 The main elements of this package are increases in basic 
tax allowance and child tax allowance as well as in child 
benefit in 2015 and 2016, and a shift of the income tax 
schedule to the right in 2016. See also Federal Ministry of 
Finance, Press Release No 26 from 10 July 2015.
9 According to the response of 15  July 2015 from the 
Federal  Government to a brief parliamentary enquiry from 
Die Linke party (Bundestag- Drucksache 18/ 5560), the rul -
ings have not yet been implemented.
10 For the frequency bands in the 700 MHz spectrum, 
one- third of the total amount of €1 billion is due on 1 July 
2016 and another third on 1 July 2017. The other payment 
obligations were due within five bank business days.
11 This was attributable, in particular, to declining provi -
sions for final payments for inflation- indexed Federal secur -
ities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
69

erated sizeable net relief for the central govern -
ment budget. Additional spending authorisa -
tions (to promote the extension of the broad -
band network) were given only up to the 
amount of revenue from a smaller share of the 
frequency bands (€1½ billion). Moreover, signs 
of additional unbudgeted relief are emerging. 
For instance, interest expenditure and – as a 
result of delays in delivery – spending on mili -
tary procurements may be lower and, as things 
currently stand, it is possible that tax revenue 
and refunds from the EU will be somewhat 
higher. This should then put the expected sur -
plus in the region of €5 billion, which would 
likely again be used for a larger- than- anticipated 
redemption payment to the Investment and 
Repayment Fund (2014: €½ billion).
The 2016 draft central government budget, ap -
proved by the Federal Cabinet at the start of 
July, also does not envisage any net borrowing. 
On balance, there were only minor adjustments 
compared with the benchmark figures from mid- March. The official tax estimate from May 
largely confirmed the tax revenue figures and 
there were also no notable revisions to interest 
expenditure.
Compared with the 2015 central government 
budget (including the supplementary budget), 
which contains one- off advance financing for 
the fund to promote municipal investment (1% 
of total expenditure in 2015), the draft budget 
for 2016 envisages significant growth in ex -
penditure (just over 3%, or €10½ billion). Chief 
drivers behind this growth are the rule- based 
extension of grants for pensions, measures for 
the future investment programme for 2016 to 
2018 announced at the end of 2014 and the 
reversal of cutting transfers to the health insur -
ance fund. In addition, there are plans for fur -
ther notable increases in spending on educa -
tion and research, development aid and trans -
port. Planned additional expenditure will be 
offset by higher tax revenue.2016 draft 
budget again without net new borrowingSteep growth in expenditure cushioned by higher tax revenue Central government’s medium-term fi  scal planning from 2015 to 2019 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2013Actual2014Target Supple-
ment 
2015Draft2016Fiscal plan
2017 2018 2019
Expenditure
1 307.8 295.9 301.6 312.0 318.8 326.3 333.1
of which
Investment 2 24.8 24.9 30.1 30.4 31.2 31.8 30.5
Revenue 1, 3 285.7 295.9 301.6 312.0 318.8 326.3 333.1
of which
Tax revenue 1 259.8 270.8 278.9 290.0 299.1 312.2 323.8
Net borrowing 22.1 – – – – – –
plus cyclical component 4 – 6.5 – 5.9 – 1.0 – 1.6 – 1.8 – 1.1 –
plus balance of fi  nancial transactions 5 – 4.6 – 2.4 1.4 . . . .
Fiscal balance of relevant off- budget entities
Energy and Climate Fund – 0.1 – 0.1 . . . . .
Reconstruction Assistance Fund 
(2013 fl  ood) 7.4 – 0.7 . . . . .
Fund to promote municipal investment – – . . . . .
Structural net borrowing 3.6 – 7.5 0.4 . . . .
as a percentage of GDP 6 0.1 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 
Memo itemStructural net borrowing
7
Upper limit according to Federal Ministry of Finance 33.2 26.6 18.6 10.2 10.6 10.9 11.3
1 After deducting supplementary central government grants, shares in energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 motor vehicle tax reform and consolidation assistance from 2011 onwards, which are all remitted to state government. 2 Excluding participating inter-
ests in the ESM. 3 Including proceeds from coin seigniorage. 4 Figures for 2013 and 2014 are taken from the 2014 budgetary accounts. 
For 2015 to 2019, as stated in central government’s 2015 spring forecast. 5 As defi  ned for the respective fi  scal year. 6 Nominal GDP in 
the year preceding the drafting of the budget (data for fi  scal plan years as stated in 2015 spring forecast). 7 The defi  cit reduction path 
from 2011 to 2015 is based on the June 2010 estimate of the starting structural defi  cit value for 2010 (2.2% of GDP) and a reduction of 
0.31% of GDP per year.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
70

After deduction of a calculated negative cyc -
lical burden of €1½ billion, a surplus of around 
€1½ billion is expected for the structural bal -
ance in 2016. However, provisions for an un -
favourable economic situation next year hardly 
seem comprehensible. Furthermore, no bur -
dens appear to have been included in the 
calculation  for the flood assistance fund and 
the fund to promote municipal investment 
(off- budget entities) even though these are 
expected   to record a deficit. This clashes with 
the fact that transfers from the flood assistance 
fund have been recorded on the revenue side 
of the central government budget as decreas -
ing the deficit. In structural terms, a notable 
deficit thus appears more plausible. The actual 
safety margin vis- à- vis the upper limit of 0.35% 
of GDP (€10 billion), which is to apply for the 
first time in 2016, is thus much lower than fore -
cast. However, it is possible that some develop -
ments will be more favourable than assumed in 
the budgetary figures.12
The financial plan up to 2019 envisages no net 
new borrowing for the central government 
budget throughout this period. As real GDP 
growth is expected to be slightly above the po -
tential growth rate, the economic outlook is 
continuing to brighten. Merely maintaining a 
balanced budget thus equates to a deterior -
ation in the structural balance. Compared with 
the financial plan from summer 2014, the 
stance has been relaxed such that the figures 
budgeted for debt servicing – which are at the 
most now nearly €10 billion lower  – do not 
have an impact on the balance. However, due 
to a lack of detail in the information on financial  
planning that has been presented thus far, it is 
not possible to conduct a more precise analysis 
of the structural development. For instance, 
there is no information about the extent of 
financial  transactions or on the off- budget 
entities  to be included under the debt brake. 
Furthermore, there has been no breakdown to 
date of the global items for revenue shortfalls 
and spending cuts included in the budget. 
However, the fact that the increase in overall 
revenue, in particular in 2019, is significantly lower than that for tax revenue indicates that a 
certain level of provisions has been made for 
potential burdens.
Central government’s off- budget entities that 
are summarised in the quarterly overviews by 
the Federal Ministry of Finance13 reported a 
slight deficit in the second quarter following a 
surplus of €½ billion one year previously. On 
balance, the deterioration resulted from the 
fact that the transfer to the special fund for 
provisions for final payments for inflation-  
indexed Federal securities due in mid-  April was 
negative in 2015 due to a decline in the refer -
ence price index by ½%. Outflows from the 
assistance  fund set up in summer 2013 to 
tackle flood damage were still down on the 
previous year. However, in particular, plans to 
reclaim €½ billion to compensate for transfers 
from turnover tax to state governments (in 
connection with soaring costs for asylum seek -
ers), which are included in central govern -
ment’s supplementary budget, could lead to 
higher spending during the remainder of the 
year. Nevertheless, for 2015 as a whole, relief is 
set to outweigh any burdens. In addition to the 
repayments to the Financial Market Stabilisa -
tion Fund in connection with the privatisation 
of the Pfandbrief bank, which has now taken 
place, this relief also includes advance finan -
cing provided to the municipal investment 
fund. By contrast, the special transfer from the 
central government budget to the Investment 
and Repayment Fund, which is expected at the 
close of the 2015 central government budget, 
may not have an impact on the fund until the 
following year (as was the case with the 2014 
central government budget outturn). Neverthe -
less, overall, the off- budget entities recorded 
here are likely to post a notably higher surplus 
than in 2014 (€4 billion) despite the absence of Structural 
balance  in draft 
budget too positive 
Relaxation of 
stance for finan-cial plan but lack of details makes precise analysis difficultOff- budget 
entities  record 
slight deficit in 
Q2; but signs of improvement for year as a whole
12 It is currently unclear whether the ruling by the Federal 
Constitutional Court against providing childcare support as 
a transfer by central government will constitute any net 
relief for the 2016 budget.
13 This notably does not include bad banks and entities 
keeping commercial accounts.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
71

the €2 billion transfer from the Bundesbank 
profit.
State government budgets14
In the second quarter of 2015, the surplus in 
the state governments’ core budgets was up 
significantly on the year (by €2 billion to just 
over €3 billion). The main reason for this was 
substantial growth in income (+5%, or €4 bil -
lion), which was again chiefly driven by dynamic  
growth in tax revenue (+6%, or €3½ billion). 
Income from public administrations also 
climbed steeply (+6½%, or €1 billion), while 
the proceeds from asset disposals fell following 
a larger transaction in 2014. Growth in expend -
iture came to 2½% (€2 billion). Not least due 
to a continued large rise in spending on pen -
sions, personnel expenditure recorded marked 
growth overall (+3%, or just under €1 billion). 
Even higher growth was recorded for other 
operating  expenditure (+8½%, or €½ billion), 
transfers to public administrations (+4½%, or 
€1 billion) and investment (+5½%, or €½ bil -
lion), while interest expenditure continued to 
fall sharply (-10%, or €½ billion).
The core budgets thus recorded a surplus of €3 
billion in the first six months of 2015. Accord -
ing to the forecast by the Federal Ministry of 
Finance published in mid-  July, state govern -
ment core budgets are expected to post slow 
growth in surpluses in the coming years, des -
pite expected spending growth, in particular 
for payments to administrations and on per -
sonnel. This development is being fostered by 
continued favourable macroeconomic condi -
tions promoting further clear growth in tax 
revenue   and the fact that interest expenditure 
is expected to fall up to 2017.
The budgetary situation of the individual states 
still varies greatly. At the beginning of June, the 
Stability Council confirmed that five states in 
receipt  of consolidation assistance fulfilled their 
obligation to reduce their deficit in 2014, too, 
and approved the disbursement of the envis -aged aid around the middle of the year. The 
Council also expects Berlin and Schleswig-  
Holstein – which were classed as in a state of 
budgetary emergency in 2012 – to complete 
their budgetary recovery procedures in 2016 on 
schedule. By contrast, in Bremen and Saarland, 
additional consolidation efforts are required 
and their budgetary recovery procedures are 
likely to be extended. Even though the min -
imum target of achieving a balanced (struc -
tural) budget by 2020 should easily be met by 
the vast majority of the states given the ex -
pected conditions, a number of challenges will 
have to be faced. While the east German states 
must find a way of compensating for the phas -
ing out of the special supplementary central 
government grants by then, the west German 
states, in particular, will have to shoulder a 
hefty rise in pension payments. It is therefore 
advisable to continue to follow a restrained 
spending policy. For this reason, too, it would 
be worth considering whether to create add -
itional scope on the revenue side as part of the 
upcoming reform of federal financial relations 
– for instance by implementing autonomous 
tax surcharges for income  taxation.
Social security funds15
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a slight surplus of just under €½ billion 
in the second quarter of 2015. The financial 
deterioration  on the previous year is thus 
around €2 billion, just as it was in the first quar -
ter. Total revenue went up by just under 3%. If 
the contribution rate had not been cut from Improvement of 
state govern-ment budgets in Q2, too, thanks to continued tax growth
Outlook still 
favourable  for 2015 and coming  years
Some states 
struggling to safeguard sustained  compliance  with debt brake even in good timesFurther clear deterioration  in Q2 due to pension benefits package
14 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2015 was analysed in the short articles in 
the Bundesbank’s July Monthly Report. These are the most 
recent data available.
15 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the first quarter 
of 2015 was analysed in the short articles of the Monthly 
Reports of June and July. These are the most recent data 
available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
72

18.9% to 18.7%, total revenue would have 
risen by almost 4%, which reflects the ongoing 
favourable employment and wage conditions. 
However, at almost 6%, the rise in expenditure 
was much sharper, which was primarily due to 
benefit increases in connection with the pen -
sion benefits package from the summer of 
2014 (in particular, the mothers’ pension and 
full pension at 63).
In mid-2015, pensions were raised by 2.1% in 
western Germany and 2.5% in eastern Ger -
many.16 Compared with the previous year (1.7% 
and 2.5%), this constitutes an acceleration for 
western Germany, where there is a far greater 
number of pensioners. However, during the 
remainder  of the year, the year-  on- year rise in 
expenditure is set to slow down as the second 
half of 2014 was notably marked by the pen -
sion benefits package. The stability of monthly 
expenditure since the start of the year indicates 
that climbing additional expenditure due to the 
full pension at 63 is likely to have been com -
pensated for by a fundamental trend in the 
other direction – for instance, continuing to 
gradually put up the general statutory retire -
ment age towards 67 and the fact that the 
demographic situation is currently still rather 
favourable. Additional expenditure has also 
been generated from the decision to include a 
second year of child raising for children born 
before 1992 (mothers’ pension), which is the 
component of the pension benefits package 
that creates by far the most expenditure. After 
a one- off hike in the fourth quarter of 2014, 
no  further extraordinary growth has been 
recorded  for this item.
When the contribution rate for 2015 was set, a 
deficit of €4 billion was still expected for the 
year as a whole. Now a much more favourable 
financial balance is on the cards. As a result, 
the legal requirement to bring the reserves 
back down to 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly 
expenditure by the end of the year will not be 
met. There are even doubts as to whether this 
requirement will be met by the end of 2016 as 
planned if the contribution rate remains un -changed. It is thus possible that the contribu -
tion rate will have to be cut again on 1 January 
2016.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
surplus of almost €1 billion in the second quar -
ter of 2015, which was just over €½ billion 
higher than at the same time last year. At 4½%, 
growth in contribution receipts was still sub -
stantial. However, the overall growth rate for Growth in 
expenditure  to slow down in H2
Further cut in 
contribution rate possible in 2016Further improvement  in Agency’s finances  in Q2Finances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015626466687072
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
16 As a result of the revision of the national accounts in 
the summer of 2014, the adjustment was around 1 per -
centage point lower. Gross wages and salaries per 
employee  were revised downwards by around 1% and this 
revised (smaller) figure for 2014 was compared with the 
unadjusted figure for 2013 for the pension adjustment. 
However, as pensions ultimately stay in line with the in -
come subject to contributions of persons in the statutory 
pension insurance scheme – which is not affected by the 
revision but for which the data are only available at a later 
date – a correspondingly higher pension increase will be 
made in 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
73

revenue was even higher still at almost 5%, 
mainly due to an even sharper rise in refunds of 
administrative costs by central government. On 
the expenditure side, the decreases in un -
employment benefit I (insurance- related bene -
fit; -3½%), insolvency benefit (-18½%) and sub -
sidisation for phased retirement (-36½%) con -
tinued and even picked up a little speed. By 
contrast, spending on active labour market 
policy  no longer fell, despite ongoing growth in 
employment. Mirroring the refunds on the rev -
enue side, growth in administrative expenditure was again steep (5½%). In the second quarter 
of 2015, total expenditure by the Federal Em -
ployment Agency was just over 2% lower than 
in the previous year.
The favourable financial developments re -
corded by the Federal Employment Agency 
reflect  the fact that the macroeconomic devel -
opments are doubly advantageous for un -
employment insurance. Growth in employment 
subject to social security contributions and in 
wages and salaries has considerably boosted 
contribution receipts. Furthermore, expenditure 
has been lower, especially for unemployment 
benefit  I. In this environment, the fact that 
spending on active labour market policy has 
stagnated in favour of recipients of unemploy -
ment benefit I is more likely to indicate that the 
policy stance is back on a somewhat more 
expansionary  course. For the year as a whole, 
the surplus is set to be much higher than fore -
cast in the budget plan (€½ billion, excluding 
the civil servants’ pension fund). In the coming 
years, the Federal Employment Agency’s re -
serves are likely to record a further increase. In 
good times, it is wholly appropriate to build up 
considerable reserves to ensure that the contri -
bution rate can be kept stable when the situ -
ation takes a turn for the worse. Before cutting 
the contribution rate (of currently 3.0%) con -
siderably for a sustained period of time, it must 
be ensured that the current labour market situ -
ation will continue in the future (as the struc -
tural norm). Irrespective of this, however, there 
is scope for cutting the contribution rate if non- 
insurance- related benefits, which are currently 
still financed using contributions to the Federal 
Employment Agency, were (again) to be covered 
using tax revenue from the central government 
budget.17Action required 
for current favourable  financial  situation  to continue 
Build up reserves 
when economy is buoyantFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central gov-
ernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 20157.58.08.59.09.5
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Revenue 1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total 
expenditure 2
17 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
evolution of labour market- related government expend -
iture in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2015, pp 13-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2015  
74

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  79•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 1 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2015
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2013          Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 2.9
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.2 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.1 2.4 1.3 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.16 0.29 2.6         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.1 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.4
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.25 0.32 2.2         June 5.4 2.4 1.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 0.08 0.24 2.0
         July 5.6 2.5 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.8 2.7 2.1 2.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.02 0.19 1.7         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct 6.2 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 6.9 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5         Dec 7.9 3.7 3.7 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan 8.9 4.0 3.8 3.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 9.1 4.1 4.1 4.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 10.0 4.6 4.7 4.7 0.7 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.05 0.03 0.8
         Apr 10.5 4.9 5.3 5.0 1.0 0.2 − 3.2 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.2 5.0 5.0 5.1 1.3 0.5 − 3.2 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.8 5.3 5.0 ... 1.4 0.3 − 3.1 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2013          Oct 
+ 20,817 + 20,717 + 41,492 − 11,817 + 8,850 + 4,364 + 40,910 − 816 1.3635 102.5 99.0
         Nov + 22,993 + 21,521 + 28,168 + 21,572 − 52,469 + 4,279 + 54,950 − 164 1.3493 102.2 98.8
         Dec + 32,940 + 16,715 + 107,252 + 28,971 + 15,169 + 2,908 + 58,823 + 1,381 1.3704 103.4 100.0
2014          Jan − 3,698 + 3,678 − 24,683 − 9,198 − 41,571 − 361 + 23,756 + 2,691 1.3610 103.0 99.5
         Feb + 5,340 + 19,088 + 651 − 957 − 55,006 + 2,055 + 55,001 − 442 1.3659 103.2 99.6         Mar + 21,406 + 22,173 + 79,726 + 20,723 + 42,391 + 3,432 + 12,927 + 253 1.3823 104.3 100.6
         Apr + 12,991 + 19,248 − 6,266 + 8,879 + 27,100 + 2,825 − 45,467 + 397 1.3813 104.2 100.4
         May + 1,605 + 20,533 + 2,381 − 1,357 − 65,510 + 4,532 + 64,238 + 477 1.3732 103.6 99.5         June + 17,513 + 20,523 + 91,376 − 5,385 + 6,566 + 2,414 + 88,232 − 451 1.3592 102.7 98.7
         July + 27,186 + 26,272 + 28,153 + 7,136 + 24,359 + 4,959 − 7,607 − 693 1.3539 102.3 98.2
         Aug + 11,198 + 10,715 + 7,018 − 2,147 + 6,667 + 4,460 − 3,240 + 1,277 1.3316 101.5 97.5         Sep + 28,535 + 25,154 + 55,315 + 19,418 + 53,331 + 10,866 − 26,373 − 1,927 1.2901 99.9 95.9
         Oct + 29,055 + 29,419 + 39,297 + 12,328 + 47,072 + 6,424 − 27,016 + 487 1.2673 99.1 95.0
         Nov + 19,887 + 25,034 + 62,061 + 15,183 + 20,347 + 1,201 + 24,317 + 1,013 1.2472 99.0 94.9         Dec + 35,788 + 26,443 − 40,379 − 44,875 + 28,460 + 2,554 − 27,954 + 1,436 1.2331 99.0 94.8
2015          Jan + 6,352 + 11,559 − 91,410 − 10,722 − 79,921 + 7,105 − 9,353 + 1,480 1.1621 95.2 91.1
         Feb + 14,318 + 26,654 − 13,648 + 32,161 − 46,097 + 9,692 − 13,651 + 4,247 1.1350 93.3 89.5         Mar + 33,818 + 28,963 + 96,216 + 63,590 − 5,217 + 10,536 + 27,024 + 284 1.0838 90.6 86.9
         Apr + 21,980 + 29,093 − 9,333 − 12,420 + 52,725 + 4,587 − 50,327 − 3,897 1.0779 89.7 p 86.1
         May + 3,412 + 23,191 + 26,155 + 26,321 + 14,704 + 4,513 − 17,753 − 1,630 1.1150 91.6 p 87.9         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1213 92.3 p 88.5
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0996 91.3 p 87.5
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2012 − 0.8 0.1 0.4 4.7 − 1.4 0.2 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 2.8 4.8
2013 − 0.4 0.3 0.1 1.6 − 1.1 0.7 − 3.9 0.2 − 1.7 4.2
2014 0.8 1.1 1.6 2.1 − 0.4 0.2 0.8 4.8 − 0.4 2.4
2014          Q1 1.1 1.3 2.6 0.5 − 0.2 0.6 − 0.5 4.1 − 0.1 2.8
         Q2 0.8 1.0 1.0 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.3 7.0 − 0.6 2.3
         Q3 0.8 1.0 1.2 2.4 − 0.5 0.1 2.0 3.7 − 0.4 2.4
         Q4 0.9 1.1 1.6 3.0 − 0.4 0.2 1.2 6.0 − 0.6 2.1
2015          Q1 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 − 0.4 0.9 0.2 6.5 0.1 1.9
         Q2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2012 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 6.3 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.9 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 0.4
2014 0.8 1.0 1.3 2.4 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 2.3 20.9 − 0.5 − 0.9
2014          Q1 1.3 3.3 3.0 − 1.4 − 3.4 − 0.9 − 2.5 13.5 0.6 − 2.0
         Q2 0.9 2.1 0.9 2.4 − 2.0 − 2.1 − 3.1 22.8 0.0 − 0.2
         Q3 0.6 0.0 0.7 3.2 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.2 21.6 − 1.4 − 0.8
         Q4 0.3 − 1.4 0.7 5.3 − 1.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 25.9 − 1.4 − 0.7
2015          Q1 1.6 0.0 0.7 2.4 − 3.8 1.7 2.2 24.9 − 0.2 1.6
         Q2 ... ... p 1.7 − 2.0 − 3.1 1.0 ... p 9.7 1.0 5.7
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2012 79.2 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 71.8 70.8
2013 78.4 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 71.6 72.0
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2014          Q2 80.1 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 81.3 67.7 − 73.5 72.0
         Q3 80.3 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.5 70.4 − 73.6 71.5
         Q4 80.5 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 73.9 73.3
2015          Q1 81.0 79.7 84.8 71.2 78.6 81.9 69.2 − 74.6 71.3
         Q2 81.2 79.8 84.4 70.7 79.1 82.6 67.7 − 76.1 72.2
         Q3 81.1 80.0 84.0 72.7 79.0 82.8 63.5 − 75.5 71.4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2012 11.4 7.6 5.4 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.0
2013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.9
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015          Jan 11.3 8.6 4.6 6.3 9.1 10.4 25.9 10.1 12.3 9.9
         Feb 11.2 8.6 4.8 6.1 9.2 10.3 25.9 10.0 12.4 9.9
         Mar 11.2 8.7 4.7 6.2 9.3 10.3 25.9 9.8 12.6 9.9
         Apr 11.1 8.6 4.8 6.6 9.4 10.2 25.6 9.8 12.4 ...
         May 11.1 8.6 4.8 6.5 9.4 10.2 25.0 9.7 12.5 ...
         June 11.1 8.6 4.8 ... 9.5 10.2 ... 9.7 12.7 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.3
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2014 8 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015          Feb 9 − 0.3 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.4 0.1 0.0
         Mar − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 0.0 0.5
         Apr 0.0 0.4 0.3 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 0.6
         May 0.3 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.1 0.3 − 1.4 0.2 0.2 1.2
         June 0.2 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 − 1.1 0.4 0.2 0.7
         July e 0.2 ... 0.1 0.1 ... 0.2 − 1.3 ... 0.3 − 0.2
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2012 − 3.6 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 4.8 − 8.7 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 2.9 − 2.9 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 4.1 − 12.3 − 5.8 − 2.9 − 0.7
2014 − 2.4 − 3.2 0.6 0.6 − 3.2 − 4.0 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 3.0 − 1.4
 
General government debt 10
 
2012 89.1 103.8 79.5 9.7 52.9 89.6 156.9 121.7 123.1 40.9
2013 90.9 104.4 77.3 10.1 55.8 92.3 175.0 123.2 128.5 38.2
2014 92.0 106.5 74.9 10.6 59.3 95.0 177.1 109.7 132.1 40.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. justed data. 3  ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for wor-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual king-day variations. 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- January, April, July and October. 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
3.8 − 0.7 2.5 − 1.1 0.8 − 4.0 1.6 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 2.4 2012
3.3 4.4 2.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 1.6 1.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 20132.9 5.6 3.5 1.0 0.4 0.9 2.4 2.6 1.4 − 2.3 2014
3.3 5.4 3.6 0.0 0.8 0.7 2.3 2.1 0.7 − 3.4 2014          Q1
3.4 3.2 3.4 1.2 0.5 0.8 2.6 2.9 1.1 − 1.7          Q2
2.7 5.2 3.0 1.2 0.3 1.6 2.4 3.2 1.7 − 2.1          Q3
2.5 8.5 4.2 1.6 − 0.2 0.5 2.4 2.4 2.1 − 1.9          Q4
1.3 4.9 4.0 2.5 0.4 1.8 3.1 2.9 2.9 0.4 2015          Q1
1.2 ... ... ... 0.4 ... ... ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production1,4
 
3.7 − 5.6 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 8.0 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.6 2012
3.3 − 4.1 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 5.2 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 20130.2 6.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 0.8 1.8 3.7 1.7 1.3 − 0.9 2014
− 6.4 7.4 − 7.7 − 6.9 2.1 3.2 6.9 0.3 1.6 − 2.9 2014          Q1
4.7 5.6 − 8.8 − 1.9 0.9 2.6 5.3 1.6 2.3 0.3          Q2
− 0.6 5.9 − 5.4 0.4 − 0.2 1.8 2.3 2.7 0.8 − 0.3          Q3
3.5 5.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 0.6 − 0.2 0.6 2.3 0.5 − 0.8          Q4
3.5 0.7 4.0 3.9 2.0 0.3 5.6 4.8 1.7 − 0.2 2015          Q1
3.9 ...
p 7.5 p − 4.5 ... 1.7 4.2 p 4.3 3.1 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
72.1 76.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 77.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 2012
73.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 77.1 78.3 73.3 49.3 201374.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
75.1 64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 79.1 79.5 74.1 54.1 2014          Q2
75.1 65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 83.2 80.8 75.3 54.5          Q3
75.1 66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 81.1 81.2 76.9 54.5          Q4
74.4 66.4 80.5 80.6 84.1 78.0 81.0 85.1 78.1 54.9 2015          Q1
74.4 65.6 78.7 82.3 84.2 77.6 79.1 83.4 77.2 60.3          Q2
73.6 69.0 77.2 82.2 84.4 77.7 86.2 83.6 77.6 56.4          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
13.4 5.1 6.3 5.8 4.9 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 201211.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 201310.7 6.0 5.9 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.4 5.8 6.0 7.2 5.6 13.7 12.3 9.2 23.4 16.3 2015          Jan 9.2 5.8 5.9 7.1 5.5 13.5 12.1 9.2 23.1 16.4          Feb 
9.0 5.8 5.7 7.0 5.6 13.2 12.0 9.3 22.9 16.3          Mar 
8.9 5.7 5.6 7.0 5.9 12.8 12.0 9.2 22.7 16.0          Apr 
8.2 5.7 5.6 6.9 6.1 12.4 11.9 9.2 22.6 16.0          May
8.5 5.7 5.5 6.9 6.0 12.4 11.8 9.2 22.5 16.2          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.2 2.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 1.5 − 0.3 0.6 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8 2015          Feb − 1.1 0.1 0.5 − 0.3 0.9 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.4          Mar 
− 0.6 0.0 1.4 0.0 0.9 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.7          Apr 
− 0.1 0.4 1.3 0.7 1.0 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.7          May
− 0.2 0.5 1.1 0.5
p 1.0 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 0.0 − 2.1          June
− 0.2 0.2 1.2 0.8 ... 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.7 0.0 − 2.4          July
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 3.1 0.1 − 3.6 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 5.6 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 10.3 − 5.8 2012− 2.6 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 2.6 − 14.9 − 6.8 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 0.6 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.9 − 4.9 − 5.8 − 8.8 2014
 
General government debt 10
 
39.8 21.9 67.4 66.5 81.5 125.8 52.1 53.7 84.4 79.5 201238.8 24.0 69.2 68.6 80.9 129.7 54.6 70.3 92.1 102.2 201340.9 23.6 68.0 68.8 84.5 130.2 53.6 80.9 97.7 107.5 2014
seasonally adjusted. 7  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation 10  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition); Euro-area aggregate and
based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. member states: European Central Bank, Germany: Federal Statistical Office and
8  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 9  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. Bundesbank calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Nov − 18.9 7.6 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.2 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.4
         Dec − 182.0 −107.0 − 38.6 − 75.0 − 73.1 78.0 − 85.8 − 163.8 − 11.4 − 8.9 − 0.5 − 9.8 7.7
2014          Jan 43.5 − 18.9 9.5 62.4 42.6 9.0 125.0 116.0 − 1.1 − 2.7 0.1 − 12.4 13.9
         Feb − 5.1 − 9.2 − 16.4 4.1 12.3 32.5 16.1 − 16.4 − 11.9 − 5.9 0.1 − 11.3 5.2
         Mar 7.7 6.1 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.6 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.4
         Apr − 6.1 − 6.2 − 17.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 64.8 74.2 − 24.9 − 31.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 7.4         May − 25.7 − 36.4 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.6 37.0 − 14.6 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.0         June 9.3 23.6 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.3 − 34.0 − 103.4 − 15.4 − 10.6 − 1.4 − 22.3 18.8
         July − 25.9 − 15.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.2 61.1 34.0 − 6.8 − 12.4 0.6 − 10.3 15.2         Aug − 45.7 − 51.0 − 15.6 5.3 15.9 − 1.3 − 5.8 − 4.5 0.2 − 5.0 1.3 − 5.9 9.8         Sep 34.8 26.2 − 14.5 8.6 9.2 − 25.0 − 17.7 7.3 − 6.0 − 16.5 0.3 − 12.0 22.1
         Oct 5.0 − 24.0 − 9.0 29.0 23.1 10.4 − 4.0 − 14.4 − 37.0 − 13.9 − 0.2 − 26.5 3.6
         Nov 33.7 25.6 5.5 8.1 5.2 60.2 76.5 16.3 − 13.3 1.1 − 0.4 − 13.1 − 0.9
         Dec − 47.1 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 36.0 − 44.0 − 0.4 − 109.0 − 108.5 − 37.7 − 1.0 2.3 − 40.2 1.1
2015          Jan 92.3 18.6 4.6 73.7 51.9 − 16.1 194.5 210.5 − 5.9 − 13.9 0.5 − 8.1 15.7
         Feb 8.9 19.7 2.4 − 10.7 − 0.9 − 24.3 − 19.1 5.2 − 23.9 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 9.6 − 4.3
         Mar 77.5 42.4 − 3.1 35.1 31.8 11.7 − 29.4 − 41.1 − 21.1 − 12.7 − 1.3 − 21.6 14.5
         Apr 45.2 8.2 13.5 37.0 32.5 − 58.9 38.3 97.2 − 46.6 − 22.7 − 2.1 − 15.4 − 6.4
         May 25.1 4.2 − 5.8 20.9 35.6 26.9 − 56.3 − 83.2 − 22.4 − 7.7 − 1.7 − 24.2 11.2
         June 16.4 − 11.1 − 26.3 27.5 28.9 50.5 − 96.7 − 147.2 − 8.7 − 11.8 − 1.2 − 12.3 16.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.5 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.8 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.7 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.9 − 11.4 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 2.8 0.5
         Sep 10.2 6.2 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 2.5 − 3.2 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.5 1.5
         Oct 5.3 − 4.2 − 4.5 9.5 2.4 16.5 10.9 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.1
         Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8
         Dec − 15.5 1.5 5.4 − 17.1 − 10.0 − 5.7 − 33.1 − 27.4 − 17.5 − 7.3 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.2
2015          Jan 28.5 13.0 7.0 15.4 6.5 − 57.6 52.2 109.8 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.0 1.8 0.8
         Feb 9.4 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.9 − 11.1 − 13.9 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.3 2.3
         Mar 15.2 9.6 8.4 5.6 7.2 − 12.1 − 19.0 − 7.0 − 15.3 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 9.1 − 0.1
         Apr 17.3 3.3 0.7 14.0 4.9 7.7 33.9 26.3 − 13.2 − 10.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4
         May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.9 − 14.5 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4
         June − 0.9 − 2.6 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.1 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.4 1.9 3.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
18.4 − 11.9 − 28.4 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 3.7 − 1.1 − 4.0 2013          Nov 
− 49.3 − 26.3 − − 17.0 15.2 13.7 17.9 − 4.2 − 0.2 1.7 − 15.5 − 12.8 − 12.9          Dec 
20.4 37.7 − − 4.5 − 39.7 − 36.5 − 13.6 − 23.0 − 15.6 12.5 − 6.9 25.3 − 0.9 2014          Jan 
36.9 − 13.6 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.1 − 0.8 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.3 3.0 − 12.3 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 12.8 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 6.8 − 26.8 27.9 38.2 5.3 32.9 − 7.9 − 2.4 − 8.9 5.4 − 11.9          Apr 
33.1 − 50.1 − 63.8 57.8 54.9 7.1 47.8 1.0 1.9 − 13.9 − 4.1 8.6          May
26.4 51.1 − 16.6 23.1 44.4 6.4 38.0 − 19.4 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.4          June
− 23.1 2.4 − 28.8 15.0 10.3 9.4 0.9 6.4 − 1.6 2.7 16.9 − 7.3          July
− 46.4 − 48.2 − 47.5 40.7 34.9 2.0 32.8 3.5 2.4 2.9 3.7 2.4          Aug 
− 6.1 22.8 − − 0.8 14.7 33.4 0.3 33.1 − 12.8 − 5.8 − 18.3 − 11.6 6.0          Sep 
− 6.5 33.8 − 25.2 8.8 38.3 3.5 34.8 − 20.6 − 8.9 25.6 14.6 − 4.3          Oct 
25.9 − 11.4 − 92.7 90.5 100.6 6.2 94.4 − 14.5 4.4 − 2.7 5.6 0.6          Nov 
− 46.5 17.4 − 19.3 30.6 50.8 23.8 27.0 − 17.8 − 2.4 − 13.8 − 17.7 20.3          Dec 
80.8 − 44.1 − 45.5 25.0 53.6 − 2.7 56.3 − 37.0 8.3 23.7 20.2 − 4.6 2015          Jan 
− 28.6 − 8.7 − 45.8 21.8 27.5 4.1 23.3 − 8.5 2.8 36.5 8.7 1.9          Feb 
22.6 54.0 − 33.7 57.2 53.4 7.7 45.7 − 5.4 9.2 1.8 − 9.5 − 7.1          Mar 
− 43.3 − 33.4 − 109.6 74.0 88.3 8.8 79.5 − 16.3 2.0 − 16.9 20.9 6.3          Apr 
44.1 − 1.8 − 32.1 65.3 94.5 6.6 87.8 − 34.2 5.0 − 5.4 − 8.1 − 6.1          May
14.1 51.5 − 10.1 44.0 67.8 10.6 57.2 − 24.0 0.2 − 22.4 − 17.8 7.8          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 2013          Nov 
2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.5 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.0 3.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.7 0.0 0.6          Sep 
− 1.3 6.5 3.2 0.8 18.2 25.6 − 9.3 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.4          Oct 
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8          Nov 
− 1.3 12.2 3.6 5.0 − 14.6 − 18.1 8.2 2.2 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.6          Dec 
6.3 − 59.5 2.4 − 0.8 24.9 26.3 − 5.1 − 1.1 3.4 0.0 1.4 2015          Jan 
− 6.7 − 11.4 2.1 0.8 28.6 23.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.0 2.3          Feb 
2.9 10.3 2.3 2.2 5.2 5.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.8          Mar 
− 2.7 5.0 2.2 1.8 35.9 29.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 3.8 − 0.1 4.1          Apr 
1.4 − 4.7 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1          May
2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.2 5.6 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          May 26,371.6 16,728.1 13,249.1 10,992.1 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9
         June 25,926.2 16,691.6 13,200.4 10,975.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,675.6 16,573.2 13,113.1 10,895.5 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,648.0 16,161.5 12,802.4 10,649.6 1,360.8 792.1 3,359.1 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,487.3 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,041.7 16,241.9 12,803.5 10,640.4 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,680.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,985.6 16,222.0 12,771.6 10,635.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,671.5 4,092.2
         Mar 24,905.6 16,233.6 12,772.9 10,638.7 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,638.6 4,033.4
         Apr 25,042.7 16,233.3 12,767.4 10,647.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,697.2 4,112.3
         May 25,173.8 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.8 4,186.0
         June 25,131.3 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,751.1 4,170.9
         July 25,303.6 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,853.0 4,274.6
         Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,873.0 16,228.5 12,673.2 10,631.9 1,273.0 768.2 3,555.3 1,132.4 2,422.9 4,979.6 4,664.9
2015          Jan 26,922.5 16,393.0 12,750.3 10,697.4 1,275.8 777.1 3,642.7 1,158.3 2,484.3 5,398.6 5,130.9
         Feb 26,859.9 16,416.0 12,778.0 10,714.7 1,278.1 785.2 3,638.0 1,143.5 2,494.4 5,392.8 5,051.2
         Mar 27,242.8 16,511.4 12,830.2 10,764.3 1,273.5 792.4 3,681.2 1,148.2 2,533.0 5,467.6 5,263.8
         Apr 26,904.6 16,527.1 12,820.0 10,743.0 1,269.4 807.7 3,707.1 1,152.4 2,554.7 5,406.7 4,970.8
         May 26,741.7 16,543.6 12,828.5 10,755.6 1,267.8 805.1 3,715.1 1,138.0 2,577.1 5,400.2 4,797.9
         June 26,184.5 16,511.4 12,794.4 10,756.7 1,247.1 790.6 3,717.0 1,136.1 2,580.9 5,250.8 4,422.3
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.6 3,696.6 2,931.7 2,527.7 143.6 260.3 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.5 3,728.6 2,948.2 2,536.5 142.2 269.4 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.5 3,739.6 2,954.1 2,542.4 142.3 269.4 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.4 3,758.4 2,967.2 2,546.4 144.1 276.7 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.5 1,207.5
         Apr 6,203.1 3,772.8 2,967.1 2,546.0 135.6 285.5 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.7 3,771.0 2,972.4 2,555.9 135.0 281.5 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.9 3,767.3 2,967.5 2,557.3 133.3 276.9 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5 2013          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,900.4 10,351.8 10,401.3 4,310.6 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.1 10,348.6 10,399.4 4,304.6 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.2 10,338.5 10,382.8 4,307.7 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,966.6 10,355.6 10,399.0 4,332.6 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.4 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.1 10,350.7 10,394.3 4,364.8 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.1 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,020.7 10,387.2 10,425.8 4,414.7 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,050.7 10,387.6 10,424.2 4,447.5 1,104.4 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,022.8 10,378.1 10,420.0 4,448.9 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,156.9 10,547.3 10,629.2 4,746.2 1,090.1 399.6 2,218.6 2,087.7 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,302.7 10,590.5 10,692.3 4,834.5 1,074.0 389.0 2,213.6 2,093.0 88.2 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,286.2 10,598.2 10,694.8 4,853.8 1,039.3 389.0 2,231.3 2,094.5 87.0          Feb 
990.9 11,356.3 10,635.3 10,744.5 4,908.3 1,040.0 384.7 2,222.0 2,103.7 85.7          Mar 
999.8 11,343.0 10,672.8 10,770.9 4,963.0 1,030.5 377.9 2,196.5 2,119.3 83.8          Apr 
1,006.4 11,441.0 10,718.9 10,812.3 5,040.4 1,002.1 373.8 2,189.8 2,124.0 82.2          May
1,017.0 11,468.2 10,725.2 10,824.1 5,091.7 978.7 370.8 2,177.4 2,124.3 81.1          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8 2013          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.9 3,062.6 1,569.1 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,209.0 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 444.5 437.7 455.7 2,721.4 2,076.4
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 466.2 459.7 436.0 2,695.8 2,061.8
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 417.1 411.3 434.8 2,656.5 2,031.2
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9
         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.5 287.7 404.8 2,586.5 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.8 279.3 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 306.7 295.2 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7
         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 293.9 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7
         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.9 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8
         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9
         Dec 220.4 307.3 138.0 96.9 11.5 39.6 16.3 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.6 2,476.7 1,812.3
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 135.0 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.7 5.4 321.5 311.3 438.6 2,501.8 1,793.2
         Feb 272.1 319.3 142.2 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.2 5.3 358.1 348.0 447.3 2,498.7 1,778.7
         Mar 294.7 317.1 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 20.0 5.3 360.3 354.1 437.8 2,492.5 1,762.2
         Apr 251.4 320.7 145.1 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.2 5.1 343.0 335.3 458.7 2,461.8 1,743.1
         May 295.5 333.2 157.4 97.1 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 337.8 331.2 450.5 2,443.6 1,718.4
         June 309.6 334.6 157.5 97.7 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 315.2 311.8 432.7 2,432.1 1,705.0
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
62.9 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.3 2,377.8 − 54.6 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,856.7 7,467.3 111.9 2013          May
66.1 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.9 2,335.9 − 63.2 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.1 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.1 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.3 2,365.2 − 59.0 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.6 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,309.4 2,340.0 − 62.6 3,953.9 − 5,444.5 9,249.4 9,852.3 7,310.4 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,474.4 2,384.6 − 44.8 4,108.0 − 5,418.6 9,224.2 9,854.7 7,354.6 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,428.5 2,405.2 − 31.4 4,039.0 − 5,427.9 9,235.1 9,866.7 7,337.6 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,392.4 2,422.0 − 30.0 3,981.3 − 5,461.0 9,273.8 9,879.1 7,344.7 106.1          Mar 
37.8 32.6 2,474.0 3,463.5 2,433.5 − 23.1 4,060.2 − 5,498.8 9,301.1 9,903.1 7,324.3 104.5          Apr 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,477.3 2,426.9 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,556.5 9,362.8 9,970.8 7,313.8 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,375.2 2,456.9 − 50.4 4,138.9 − 5,600.8 9,386.0 9,986.6 7,300.5 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,438.4 2,469.0 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,611.4 9,402.4 10,016.6 7,300.4 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
63.1 42.9 2,370.8 3,562.7 2,466.8 − 40.3 4,557.9 − 5,956.2 9,679.2 10,312.1 7,187.8 112.3          Dec 
58.4 42.3 2,401.1 3,906.0 2,560.2 − 96.5 5,009.2 − 6,038.3 9,744.6 10,401.9 7,308.4 110.6 2015          Jan 
58.3 43.3 2,397.1 3,933.6 2,551.4 − 114.6 4,916.0 − 6,067.4 9,742.7 10,423.1 7,312.2 109.1          Feb 
51.5 44.3 2,396.7 3,964.9 2,578.5 − 67.9 5,129.5 − 6,128.1 9,809.8 10,468.4 7,327.4 109.5          Mar 
55.3 45.8 2,360.7 3,993.0 2,546.1 − 76.8 4,836.1 − 6,194.8 9,874.1 10,567.0 7,231.8 107.6          Apr 
53.2 42.1 2,348.3 3,948.2 2,554.7 − 71.8 4,631.3 − 6,293.4 9,944.9 10,605.0 7,219.9 110.0          May
57.2 44.7 2,330.1 3,775.1 2,537.4 − 70.1 4,276.9 − 6,356.5 9,983.4 10,608.4 7,172.0 112.2          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 − 2013          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase programme and the Eurosystem’s securitiesthe Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following other banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the Euro-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a system and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the accountingsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan − 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
value
of the euro banknotes in circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 euro
ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the
remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference
likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation”
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2014 Nov                28 2,053.9 334.5 264.3 83.6 180.6 28.8 18.7 18.7 −
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 334.5 267.5 83.7 183.8 27.5 18.2 18.2 −
                              12 2,034.7 334.5 266.3 81.2 185.1 27.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              19 2,134.8 334.5 265.9 80.3 185.6 27.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              26 2,150.2 334.5 266.1 80.3 185.8 28.7 19.4 19.4 −
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 343.8 273.5 81.5 192.0 28.7 19.7 19.7 −
                                9 2,168.8 343.9 272.6 81.5 191.2 32.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,158.2 343.9 273.0 81.3 191.7 33.2 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 2,159.8 343.9 274.9 81.3 193.6 32.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 2,182.0 343.9 273.7 81.3 192.5 35.5 18.6 18.6 −
         Feb                  6 2,150.2 343.9 273.1 79.9 193.2 34.2 19.8 19.8 −
                              13 2,153.1 343.9 273.8 79.7 194.1 36.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              20 2,167.8 343.9 275.7 79.7 195.9 35.4 20.7 20.7 −
                              27 2,155.8 343.9 278.5 79.4 199.1 33.0 22.0 22.0 −
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 343.9 277.4 79.5 197.9 35.1 22.9 22.9 −
                              13 2,142.1 343.8 279.8 80.8 199.0 35.1 24.3 24.3 −
                              20 2,157.8 343.8 279.3 77.4 201.9 33.1 24.9 24.9 −
                              27 2,250.8 343.8 281.4 77.4 204.1 31.2 24.8 24.8 −
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 384.0 306.2 83.5 222.7 37.4 22.3 22.3 −
                              10 2,349.0 384.0 305.3 83.4 221.9 38.4 22.6 22.6 −
                              17 2,344.1 384.0 303.0 83.4 219.6 39.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              24 2,360.8 384.0 303.6 83.4 220.2 39.1 20.3 20.3 −
2015 May                  1 2,372.6 384.0 304.5 83.4 221.1 38.4 20.7 20.7 −
                                8 2,377.9 384.0 302.8 83.1 219.8 39.5 21.1 21.1 −
                              15 2,388.6 384.0 301.5 82.3 219.2 39.5 21.2 21.2 −
                              22 2,402.6 384.0 302.4 82.3 220.1 38.9 21.0 21.0 −
                              29 2,416.7 384.0 302.7 82.3 220.4 39.6 21.7 21.7 −
         June                  5 2,428.3 384.0 302.5 82.3 220.2 39.6 21.5 21.5 −
                              12 2,442.1 384.0 303.8 82.3 221.5 40.8 22.1 22.1 −
                              19 2,451.9 384.0 304.2 81.9 222.3 40.3 21.0 21.0 −
                              26 2,539.5 384.0 306.7 82.2 224.5 38.7 21.8 21.8 −
         July                  3 2,497.0 364.5 292.8 80.5 212.3 38.4 20.1 20.1 −
                              10 2,508.2 364.5 292.1 80.5 211.6 38.8 21.0 21.0 −
                              17 2,519.0 364.5 290.6 80.5 210.2 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              24 2,525.2 364.5 289.4 78.4 210.9 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              31 2,536.6 364.5 287.8 78.5 209.4 40.5 20.3 20.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
513.8 114.3 398.8 − − 0.7 − 58.1 570.2 204.2 366.1 26.7 238.8 2014 Nov                28
491.1 98.0 392.9 − − 0.1 − 58.2 574.8 207.5 367.2 26.7 239.7          Dec                  5
484.2 105.2 378.9 − − 0.1 − 54.6 579.9 211.5 368.4 26.7 241.9                               12
579.4 99.0 480.4 − − 0.0 − 58.0 585.9 215.5 370.4 26.7 237.2                               19
592.5 119.2 473.3 − − 0.0 − 58.7 587.5 216.9 370.6 26.7 236.1                               26
629.7 156.1 473.3 − − 0.3 0.0 60.4 592.4 217.2 375.2 26.7 241.0 2015 Jan                  2
585.6 112.3 473.3 − − 0.0 0.0 58.4 593.2 218.9 374.3 26.7 235.4                                 9573.8 114.0 459.1 − − 0.7 − 59.0 594.6 220.7 373.9 26.7 234.5                               16
572.1 125.3 445.3 − − 1.6 − 58.7 599.6 224.7 374.9 26.7 232.5                               23
579.6 163.8 415.6 − − 0.2 − 62.1 603.4 227.1 376.3 26.7 238.4                               30
557.1 151.8 404.8 − − 0.5 0.0 64.6 601.0 226.6 374.4 26.7 229.9          Feb                  6500.2 104.5 395.4 − − 0.2 − 116.3 606.5 229.4 377.1 26.7 229.8                               13
502.5 122.1 379.2 − − 1.2 0.0 121.9 610.1 231.5 378.6 26.7 231.0                               20488.7 165.4 323.0 − − 0.3 0.0 124.9 611.6 234.2 377.4 26.7 226.6                               27
470.9 147.9 323.0 − − 0.0 0.0 121.4 613.9 237.1 376.7 26.7 222.8          Mar                  6
465.3 141.8 323.0 − − 0.5 0.0 120.6 624.0 249.4 374.6 26.7 222.4                               13465.6 142.4 323.0 − − 0.2 − 117.7 643.4 268.8 374.6 26.7 223.3                               20
538.3 120.5 417.6 − − 0.2 0.0 121.3 662.6 287.0 375.6 26.7 220.7                               27
521.2 103.6 417.6 − − 0.1 − 124.1 679.3 300.7 378.6 26.7 232.8          Apr                  2
525.9 108.3 417.6 − − 0.1 − 121.0 690.8 312.7 378.1 26.7 234.3                               10
514.1 96.6 417.6 − − 0.0 − 121.7 701.8 325.0 376.8 26.7 232.5                               17
513.3 95.7 417.6 − − 0.0 − 123.6 717.5 339.8 377.7 26.7 232.6                               24
517.3 108.5 408.7 − − 0.0 − 127.1 724.9 350.8 374.1 25.7 229.9 2015 May                  1
504.0 95.2 408.7 − − 0.1 − 128.6 742.3 367.2 375.1 25.7 229.8                                 8
499.5 90.6 408.7 − − 0.1 − 130.3 757.9 384.0 373.9 25.7 229.1                               15
497.2 88.4 408.7 − − 0.1 − 131.5 771.7 398.0 373.8 25.7 230.1                               22
495.5 100.1 395.4 − − 0.1 − 131.6 787.0 413.5 373.4 25.7 228.9                               29
488.0 92.5 395.4 − − 0.1 − 135.1 802.8 428.9 373.9 25.7 229.1          June                  5
485.8 90.4 395.4 − − 0.1 − 133.2 816.9 442.2 374.7 25.7 229.8                               12
485.4 89.7 395.4 − − 0.4 − 136.9 824.9 451.2 373.7 25.7 229.5                               19
555.6 88.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 134.7 839.2 465.1 374.1 25.7 233.2                               26
544.1 76.4 467.1 − − 0.6 − 134.9 845.1 477.6 367.5 25.7 231.5          July                  3
541.8 74.5 467.1 − − 0.2 − 137.0 857.5 491.9 365.6 25.6 229.9                               10
542.7 75.5 467.1 − − 0.1 − 139.4 866.2 505.2 361.0 25.6 228.5                               17
542.6 75.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 139.7 875.2 514.7 360.5 25.2 227.4                               24
543.6 80.0 463.5 − − 0.1 − 138.2 888.2 528.3 360.0 25.2 228.3                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5 2013          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2014 Nov                28 2,053.9 981.0 244.1 208.3 35.8 − − 0.0 4.7 − 92.3 56.1 36.2
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 988.9 205.8 177.8 28.0 − − 0.0 4.8 − 107.7 71.0 36.8
                              12 2,034.7 992.6 215.2 188.7 26.5 − − 0.0 4.8 − 92.3 64.8 27.5
                              19 2,134.8 1,003.8 284.0 245.1 38.9 − − − 4.9 − 106.8 80.6 26.3
                              26 2,150.2 1,017.2 300.0 256.4 43.5 − − − 4.9 − 93.0 66.4 26.6
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 1,017.1 364.5 302.8 61.7 − − 0.0 6.2 − 71.9 43.9 28.0
                                9 2,168.8 1,006.9 316.1 242.4 73.7 − − 0.0 6.3 − 84.9 56.9 28.0
                              16 2,158.2 1,001.4 288.9 223.3 65.6 − − 0.0 6.9 − 94.7 64.9 29.8
                              23 2,159.8 1,002.3 243.8 189.3 54.5 − − 0.0 5.7 − 114.7 81.0 33.7
                              30 2,182.0 1,004.2 264.5 227.4 36.6 − − 0.6 5.6 − 111.4 76.3 35.2
         Feb                  6 2,150.2 1,004.7 269.5 233.7 35.8 − − 0.0 5.4 − 88.4 55.2 33.2
                              13 2,153.1 1,005.6 272.3 226.9 45.4 − − 0.0 5.4 − 91.8 56.0 35.8
                              20 2,167.8 1,005.0 271.4 229.3 42.0 − − 0.0 5.3 − 110.2 70.5 39.7
                              27 2,155.8 1,007.0 272.0 235.0 37.1 − − − 5.3 − 97.4 52.4 45.0
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 1,009.7 254.0 206.6 47.5 − − − 5.3 − 101.5 56.2 45.3
                              13 2,142.1 1,010.8 268.0 222.7 45.2 − − − 5.2 − 101.5 55.8 45.7
                              20 2,157.8 1,010.9 275.2 229.6 45.7 − − 0.0 5.2 − 118.1 67.2 51.0
                              27 2,250.8 1,012.9 356.6 293.0 63.6 − − − 5.4 − 130.0 81.3 48.6
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 1,024.8 349.2 263.3 85.9 − − 0.0 5.6 − 126.6 68.4 58.2
                              10 2,349.0 1,021.0 364.9 276.8 88.0 − − 0.1 5.6 − 132.1 75.0 57.1
                              17 2,344.1 1,018.1 373.6 282.6 90.6 − − 0.4 5.5 − 126.0 67.3 58.7
                              24 2,360.8 1,018.4 355.6 269.4 86.2 − − 0.0 5.5 − 159.8 101.5 58.3
2015 May                  1 2,372.6 1,026.6 407.8 300.2 107.6 − − 0.0 5.4 − 112.7 50.3 62.4
                                8 2,377.9 1,027.3 407.5 299.0 108.5 − − − 5.5 − 116.4 54.4 62.0
                              15 2,388.6 1,028.9 407.3 306.3 101.1 − − − 5.5 − 132.5 70.0 62.5
                              22 2,402.6 1,027.6 396.6 303.6 93.0 − − 0.0 5.5 − 157.0 92.1 65.0
                              29 2,416.7 1,032.0 415.1 316.2 98.9 − − 0.0 5.2 − 147.4 82.8 64.6
         June                  5 2,428.3 1,035.0 424.8 322.8 102.1 − − 0.0 5.3 − 146.1 82.9 63.3
                              12 2,442.1 1,034.1 450.9 354.1 96.7 − − 0.1 5.6 − 135.4 72.9 62.5
                              19 2,451.9 1,036.1 421.3 339.8 81.4 − − 0.1 5.5 − 175.4 110.5 64.9
                              26 2,539.5 1,039.0 475.7 389.3 86.3 − − 0.1 5.2 − 204.0 137.6 66.4
         July                  3 2,497.0 1,047.4 504.8 392.2 112.5 − − 0.1 5.0 − 164.1 98.4 65.8
                              10 2,508.2 1,050.6 507.3 383.4 123.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 165.0 96.9 68.1
                              17 2,519.0 1,052.5 533.2 414.4 118.6 − − 0.2 5.2 − 145.0 74.4 70.6
                              24 2,525.2 1,052.4 503.8 386.5 117.1 − − 0.1 5.3 − 181.4 120.3 61.1
                              31 2,536.6 1,057.0 549.5 412.4 137.0 − − 0.1 5.2 − 141.7 75.9 65.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
39.9 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 219.5 − 315.5 94.0 2014 Nov                28
39.7 1.5 6.1 6.1 − 55.5 218.5 − 315.5 94.0          Dec                  5
40.5 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 216.9 − 315.5 94.0                               12
46.9 1.3 7.0 7.0 − 55.5 214.9 − 315.5 94.0                               19
47.2 1.3 6.8 6.8 − 55.5 214.8 − 315.5 94.0                               26
46.9 1.3 5.5 5.5 − 56.4 220.9 − 330.9 94.4 2015 Jan                  2
50.8 2.4 5.0 5.0 − 56.4 214.5 − 330.9 94.7                                 9
60.3 1.7 6.5 6.5 − 56.4 215.9 − 330.9 94.7                               16
86.7 1.6 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 216.0 − 330.9 95.2                               23
84.4 1.5 7.3 7.3 − 56.4 220.4 − 330.9 95.2                               30
75.9 1.5 5.7 5.7 − 56.4 216.4 − 330.9 95.5          Feb                  6
71.5 2.0 7.6 7.6 − 56.4 214.2 − 330.9 95.5                               13
65.4 1.9 7.0 7.0 − 56.4 218.9 − 330.9 95.5                               20
62.5 2.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.4 220.1 − 330.9 95.5                               27
57.5 2.1 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 215.6 − 330.9 95.5          Mar                  6
54.9 1.8 7.2 7.2 − 56.4 210.0 − 330.9 95.5                               13
47.9 2.1 7.0 7.0 − 56.4 208.6 − 330.9 95.5                               20
45.0 1.9 7.1 7.1 − 56.4 208.7 − 330.9 95.9                               27
38.8 1.8 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 219.8 − 403.3 96.0          Apr                  2
39.6 1.9 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 216.1 − 403.3 96.0                               10
37.4 1.9 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 214.1 − 403.3 96.0                               17
36.5 1.8 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 215.5 − 403.3 96.1                               24
34.7 2.3 7.1 7.1 − 60.7 216.0 − 403.3 96.1 2015 May                  1
33.8 2.2 8.1 8.1 − 60.7 217.0 − 403.3 96.1                                 8
28.1 2.1 7.1 7.1 − 60.7 217.0 − 403.3 96.1                               15
28.3 2.4 7.0 7.0 − 60.7 218.1 − 403.3 96.0                               22
28.7 2.3 7.8 7.8 − 60.7 218.1 − 403.3 96.0                               29
30.6 2.1 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 215.9 − 403.3 96.8          June                  5
28.8 2.5 7.3 7.3 − 60.7 216.7 − 403.3 96.8                               12
28.8 2.3 6.6 6.6 − 60.7 213.6 − 403.3 98.5                               19
29.6 2.3 6.4 6.4 − 60.7 215.0 − 403.3 98.4                               26
32.0 2.0 5.7 5.7 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4          July                  3
36.8 2.3 5.2 5.2 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4                               10
40.2 2.3 4.9 4.9 − 59.5 210.5 − 367.4 98.4                               17
38.0 2.5 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 211.2 − 367.4 98.4                               24
38.2 3.0 3.9 3.9 − 59.5 212.7 − 367.4 98.4                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0 2013          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2013          Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4
         Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.6 15.4 2,107.0 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 524.6 363.3 161.3 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.6 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.5 15.4 2,096.3 1,578.2 1,195.7 382.4 518.2 362.5 155.7 3,698.4 3,275.9 2,681.1 2,397.4         Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.7 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.3 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,694.2 2,407.4         June 7,800.6 15.3 2,041.4 1,562.9 1,199.0 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,692.1 2,413.0
 Changes 3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.3 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.1 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2013          Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec − 169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1
         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 27.7 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.2 10.2 9.6 9.6 7.1         Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 54.1 3.6 − 53.3 − 33.9 − 28.0 − 6.0 − 19.4 − 18.4 − 1.0 − 15.5 − 12.7 2.9 − 0.82015          Jan 278.4 − 3.8 75.6 46.7 46.9 − 0.2 28.9 26.3 2.6 28.5 21.9 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 11.8 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 10.6 12.1 5.8 8.3
         Mar 86.5 0.1 23.5 28.4 27.5 0.9 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 6.1 4.4 6.9 1.0
         Apr − 63.7 0.6 − 14.0 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.9 5.8 − 0.9 11.3 11.9 3.3 − 0.2
         May − 92.6 0.3 − 9.6 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.1 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.3 2.7 9.0         June − 200.9 − 1.1 − 55.4 − 20.6 − 10.7 − 9.9 − 34.8 − 31.7 − 3.0 − 9.1 − 6.7 − 1.6 6.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.6 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2 2013          Sep 264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6          Sep 
270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 276.6 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8          Dec 
285.4 588.6 336.7 251.9 423.2 273.3 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,136.5 885.6 1,180.2 2015          Jan 
283.7 594.9 339.8 255.1 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,128.8 880.6 1,122.6          Feb 290.7 592.7 339.0 253.7 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.3 872.6 1,196.3          Mar 
293.5 601.1 347.6 253.5 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.8 585.1 336.3 248.8 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May279.1 579.7 332.5 247.2 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
Changes 3
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1 2013          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov − 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 4.0 − 0.2 4.2 − 12.8 − 17.7 − 17.4          Sep 
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 3.7 − 15.6 − 7.2 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 − 30.9 − 33.1 42.1          Dec 
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 1.0 2.5 5.5 0.6 4.9 53.7 49.4 124.4 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.2 − 7.8 − 57.6          Feb 
5.8 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 1.5 1.6 2.8 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 16.9 − 24.3 73.7          Mar 3.6 8.6 8.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 2.8 − 0.5 0.5 − 1.0 32.6 34.1 − 94.3          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.2 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 32.6 − 35.2 − 102.8          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2013          Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.6 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,114.1 1,530.7 976.8 292.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.5 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.3 3,220.8 3,126.5 1,543.4 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,800.6 1,304.3 1,090.5 213.9 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
 Changes 4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2013          Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec − 169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 27.7 − 13.1 − 8.4 − 4.7 0.4 − 1.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 4.5 0.6 0.1 0.9 3.2         Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 54.1 − 25.6 − 5.4 − 20.2 − 1.3 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 7.3 2.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.42015          Jan 278.4 54.4 23.1 31.3 13.8 5.2 14.5 − 8.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.1 2.2 2.5
         Feb − 70.0 − 14.9 − 4.3 − 10.7 5.9 12.1 12.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7
         Mar 86.5 10.9 − 1.2 12.0 − 4.6 − 8.0 − 1.9 − 4.0 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.2 1.8
         Apr − 63.7 − 11.7 − 15.4 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.6 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.7 18.8 25.8 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.6         June − 200.9 − 39.1 − 13.0 − 26.0 − 5.9 − 8.4 2.4 − 9.1 − 5.5 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.8 1.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8 2013          Sep 39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6          Sep 
40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 18.0 12.7 6.8 3.5 1,103.7 44.2 614.3 543.2 1,256.2 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,104.3 44.7 610.1 557.4 1,188.7          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.5 1,263.6          Mar 
41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
Changes 4
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.2 2014
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2 2013          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.7 0.0 − 4.4 0.8 5.7 − 2.6 − 10.9          Sep 
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 13.5 − 1.9 − 31.8 − 6.2 30.6          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.4 1.2 3.4 0.0 8.1 4.0 63.5 3.9 131.3 2015          Jan − 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 7.0 − 3.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 5.7 13.6 − 68.4          Feb − 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 6.5 1.2 6.4 5.4 75.3          Mar 
0.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.9 0.6 − 98.2          Apr 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.8 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 12.3 − 2.8 − 39.7 − 1.8 − 100.6          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2015          Jan 1,805 8,176.3 100.0 2,703.8 2,095.0 595.2 3,962.2 383.7 2,786.9 0.6 782.9 129.1 1,281.2
         Feb 1,805 8,112.3 103.1 2,684.1 2,082.2 589.4 3,971.7 389.7 2,791.5 0.6 782.1 128.2 1,225.1
         Mar 1,804 8,223.7 131.2 2,675.6 2,071.4 590.0 3,989.0 389.2 2,796.6 0.5 793.9 128.7 1,299.3
         Apr 1,804 8,134.2 127.3 2,673.5 2,075.9 584.1 4,001.3 406.5 2,794.0 0.6 792.6 128.7 1,203.4
         May 1,803 8,053.5 130.5 2,656.1 2,063.1 580.3 3,995.2 397.2 2,804.8 0.6 784.6 129.9 1,141.9
         June 1,798 7,848.3 148.3 2,566.7 1,985.1 570.1 3,966.1 380.7 2,799.4 0.5 775.6 129.2 1,038.0
Commercial banks 6
2015          May 273 3,175.0 64.7 1,086.7 993.8 90.7 1,133.2 207.8 683.9 0.3 236.0 66.2 824.3
         June 273 3,033.7 81.4 1,028.1 938.2 88.6 1,111.5 191.4 684.5 0.3 228.8 66.1 746.4
   Big banks 7
2015          May 4 2,025.2 20.8 666.4 621.3 44.2 493.1 112.8 252.3 0.2 125.2 57.2 787.7
         June 4 1,881.9 23.2 616.5 573.0 43.4 473.5 97.0 250.7 0.1 121.6 57.2 711.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2015          May 162 878.9 25.6 246.7 201.9 44.2 569.2 73.8 396.7 0.2 98.1 7.4 30.0
         June 162 875.1 36.7 236.0 192.2 43.2 566.7 71.7 398.7 0.2 95.4 7.4 28.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2015          May 107 270.9 18.3 173.6 170.5 2.4 70.8 21.3 34.9 − 12.7 1.6 6.7
         June 107 276.7 21.6 175.7 172.9 2.0 71.3 22.6 35.2 − 11.8 1.6 6.5
Landesbanken
2015          May 9 1,060.3 10.4 341.8 240.1 99.5 557.1 64.6 379.8 0.1 111.6 11.5 139.3
         June 9 1,039.1 11.2 335.8 236.8 96.9 552.7 63.4 377.8 0.1 110.0 11.4 128.0
Savings banks
2015          May 416 1,128.8 16.7 210.0 80.4 129.2 871.3 51.8 676.9 0.1 142.3 14.5 16.3
         June 416 1,125.1 17.4 203.5 75.3 127.8 873.8 53.1 677.1 0.1 143.4 14.4 16.1
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2015          May 2 291.0 1.6 160.2 127.6 32.6 67.0 12.6 22.8 0.0 31.2 14.4 47.8
         June 2 281.8 0.4 158.4 126.2 32.2 67.6 13.3 22.9 0.0 31.2 14.2 41.1
Credit cooperatives
2015          May 1,046 793.4 11.4 168.1 55.1 112.8 580.3 32.5 456.4 0.1 91.2 14.6 19.0
         June 1,042 793.4 11.9 164.5 52.4 111.9 583.3 33.5 458.0 0.1 91.7 14.6 19.0
Mortgage banks
2015          May 17 384.7 0.2 87.4 59.3 27.8 281.1 5.3 209.7 − 66.2 0.6 15.3
         June 16 373.6 2.1 81.8 54.9 26.7 275.2 5.0 205.8 − 64.4 0.4 14.0
Building and loan associations
2015          May 21 213.4 0.0 62.9 45.1 17.8 144.8 1.5 122.2 . 21.1 0.3 5.4
         June 21 213.3 0.0 62.5 44.8 17.6 145.5 1.5 122.8 . 21.2 0.3 5.1
Special purpose banks
2015          May 19 1,006.9 25.5 538.9 461.6 70.0 360.4 21.1 253.1 − 84.9 7.8 74.4
         June 19 988.3 23.8 532.0 456.6 68.4 356.5 19.7 250.5 − 84.8 7.8 68.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2015          May 141 950.7 37.9 367.3 324.2 41.3 435.7 71.3 242.4 0.2 117.5 6.2 103.7
         June 141 947.3 52.2 359.8 319.1 39.6 434.8 74.0 242.8 0.2 113.6 6.1 94.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2015          May 34 679.8 19.6 193.7 153.7 38.9 364.8 50.1 207.5 0.2 104.8 4.6 97.0
         June 34 670.6 30.7 184.1 146.2 37.6 363.5 51.4 207.7 0.2 101.9 4.5 87.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,829.3 513.6 1,315.7 3,389.5 1,679.2 304.7 711.8 74.2 615.9 536.6 77.9 1,182.1 464.4 1,311.0 2015          Jan 
1,806.0 480.1 1,325.9 3,401.4 1,692.5 308.5 709.0 83.9 615.4 537.5 76.0 1,194.6 466.7 1,243.5          Feb 1,847.0 547.6 1,299.3 3,385.3 1,680.0 311.2 707.2 65.7 613.2 536.6 73.7 1,204.4 468.6 1,318.3          Mar 
1,847.4 511.5 1,335.8 3,406.1 1,719.3 306.5 697.8 76.9 610.7 536.3 71.8 1,191.1 470.8 1,218.8          Apr 
1,817.0 522.0 1,295.0 3,424.2 1,740.0 310.5 693.5 76.9 609.2 536.5 70.9 1,180.9 473.6 1,157.7          May1,761.5 492.8 1,268.6 3,392.3 1,727.8 296.7 690.1 55.3 607.5 536.1 70.1 1,162.2 478.1 1,054.1          June
Commercial banks 6
785.5 315.1 470.3 1,289.0 781.0 180.9 193.3 56.6 111.4 98.6 22.5 147.1 162.2 791.2 2015          May756.2 295.8 460.4 1,258.6 761.6 169.8 194.0 35.6 110.6 98.3 22.6 146.9 162.2 709.8          June
Big banks 7
525.0 217.2 307.8 561.7 314.3 103.3 69.2 54.7 69.2 67.0 5.8 106.9 97.3 734.3 2015          May487.2 190.3 296.9 539.4 299.9 96.4 68.7 35.4 68.8 66.7 5.7 106.6 97.1 651.5          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
146.9 44.8 102.0 587.3 376.4 57.7 95.7 1.8 41.8 31.3 15.6 39.6 56.1 49.0 2015          May150.4 52.1 98.3 580.5 372.7 54.4 96.2 0.2 41.5 31.4 15.7 39.6 56.3 48.3          June
Branches of foreign banks
113.6 53.1 60.5 140.0 90.3 19.8 28.4 − 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.6 8.8 7.9 2015          May118.6 53.5 65.1 138.6 89.0 19.1 29.1 − 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.7 8.8 10.0          June
Landesbanken
310.1 65.7 244.4 299.2 121.3 52.9 110.9 17.6 14.0 10.7 0.1 249.2 56.2 145.6 2015          May302.8 65.9 236.9 302.1 127.7 51.2 109.2 17.2 13.9 10.6 0.1 242.8 56.2 135.4          June
Savings banks
145.1 16.4 128.7 833.4 464.5 22.2 15.0 − 296.5 258.4 35.3 15.0 91.6 43.6 2015          May
142.3 18.0 124.2 830.9 463.7 21.4 15.0 − 296.1 258.5 34.7 15.2 94.4 42.4          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
143.5 41.6 101.9 31.9 11.6 8.2 9.9 1.7 − − 2.2 52.9 15.6 47.1 2015          May
140.4 39.6 100.8 31.9 12.4 7.5 9.8 1.9 − − 2.2 52.4 15.7 41.4          June
Credit cooperatives
101.8 5.2 96.7 588.7 340.8 31.9 19.2 − 186.9 168.4 9.8 8.1 61.9 32.9 2015          May101.7 6.6 95.1 588.6 342.1 31.6 18.9 − 186.4 168.3 9.6 7.8 64.2 31.1          June
Mortgage banks
88.6 7.7 80.8 144.6 8.7 8.9 126.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 115.0 16.6 20.0 2015          May86.1 6.2 79.8 142.0 8.3 8.7 124.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 110.7 15.8 19.0          June
Building and loan associations
23.4 2.8 20.6 163.3 0.5 0.6 161.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 2.7 9.5 14.4 2015          May23.1 3.2 19.9 163.4 0.6 0.6 160.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 2.7 9.6 14.5          June
Special purpose banks
218.9 67.5 151.5 74.1 11.6 5.0 57.5 1.0 − − . 591.0 59.9 62.9 2015          May209.0 57.5 151.4 74.8 11.3 5.9 57.6 0.5 − − . 583.8 60.0 60.6          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
259.4 104.7 154.7 508.4 341.9 56.6 78.3 11.4 21.8 21.4 9.9 23.5 50.0 109.4 2015          May270.2 114.3 155.9 500.3 335.1 55.5 78.2 8.1 21.7 21.3 9.8 24.4 50.2 102.3          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
145.7 51.6 94.2 368.4 251.6 36.8 49.9 11.4 21.4 21.1 8.8 22.9 41.2 101.5 2015          May151.7 60.8 90.8 361.6 246.1 36.4 49.1 8.1 21.3 21.1 8.7 23.7 41.3 92.3          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4
         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.4 442.1
         Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9
         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.3 2,697.0 0.3 1.8 448.1
         July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8
         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
         Oct 15.2 61.8 1,493.6 1,126.5 0.0 2.3 364.8 1.6 3,169.0 2,711.8 0.3 1.2 455.7
         Nov 15.4 52.8 1,486.8 1,121.2 0.0 2.3 363.3 1.6 3,178.9 2,719.7 0.3 0.9 458.1
         Dec 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015          Jan 15.2 69.3 1,490.7 1,128.5 0.0 2.7 359.4 1.7 3,191.5 2,725.6 0.4 1.1 464.5
         Feb 15.2 69.7 1,486.0 1,125.7 0.0 3.1 357.2 1.6 3,205.1 2,736.8 0.4 1.3 466.6
         Mar 15.2 97.5 1,488.9 1,127.0 0.0 3.2 358.6 1.6 3,212.0 2,738.7 0.3 1.5 471.5
         Apr 15.9 91.7 1,473.6 1,117.3 0.0 3.4 352.8 1.6 3,221.1 2,745.0 0.4 1.5 474.2
         May 16.1 95.0 1,466.4 1,114.3 0.0 3.5 348.6 1.6 3,207.9 2,743.3 0.3 1.7 462.5
         June 15.1 115.4 1,424.2 1,082.1 0.0 3.3 338.8 1.6 3,200.4 2,745.2 0.3 2.4 452.5
Changes *
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.7
         Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
         July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
         Oct + 0.1 − 19.0 + 5.1 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Nov + 0.2 − 9.0 − 6.9 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.4
         Dec + 3.6 + 28.5 − 60.8 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 11.7 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
2015          Jan − 3.8 − 12.0 + 63.8 + 62.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 26.4 + 15.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 10.5
         Feb − 0.0 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 11.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.1         Mar + 0.1 + 27.8 + 3.0 + 1.4 − + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.9
         Apr + 0.6 − 5.7 − 15.3 − 9.7 − + 0.2 − 5.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8
         May + 0.3 + 3.3 − 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 13.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 11.7         June − 1.1 + 20.4 − 42.1 − 32.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,131.6 149.1 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,144.5 166.2 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.2 155.7 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
− 26.5 95.2 1,122.7 149.1 973.6 0.0 11.5 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 606.1 68.6 31.1          Oct 
− 26.5 95.1 1,116.1 155.8 960.2 0.0 11.5 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 605.3 66.5 31.1          Nov − 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9          Dec 
− 26.1 93.1 1,137.9 174.9 963.1 0.0 11.3 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 606.6 64.7 30.8 2015          Jan 
− 26.2 92.3 1,133.5 169.2 964.3 0.0 11.3 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 606.1 63.8 30.8          Feb − 25.9 92.3 1,134.4 178.0 956.4 0.0 11.2 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 603.9 63.0 30.7          Mar 
− 25.8 92.5 1,117.5 163.4 954.0 0.0 11.2 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 601.5 61.9 30.2          Apr 
− 25.7 92.8 1,103.0 164.4 938.6 0.0 11.1 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 600.0 61.0 30.2          May− 25.3 92.5 1,090.2 161.7 928.4 0.0 11.1 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 598.3 60.4 29.6          June
Changes *
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 17.1 − 4.4 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 19.2 + 13.8 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5          June
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.6 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 6.7 + 12.1 − − 0.3 + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 6.8 − 13.4 − − 0.0 + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.0 − 28.0 + 23.0 − + 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.4 − 1.2 + 26.1 + 47.1 − 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 2015          Jan 
− + 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.4 − 5.6 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 8.8 − 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 17.0 − 14.6 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.3 − 14.4 + 1.0 − 15.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6
         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
         Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3
         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
         July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2
         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
         Oct 0.2 1,119.6 878.5 628.7 249.8 8.6 232.5 1.1 738.3 429.8 110.3 319.5 7.7 300.8
         Nov 0.2 1,151.0 907.8 658.2 249.7 8.7 234.5 1.1 749.8 433.9 113.5 320.4 8.3 307.6
         Dec 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015          Jan 0.2 1,213.2 966.6 684.2 282.4 10.9 235.7 1.1 770.7 445.3 117.5 327.8 7.0 318.4
         Feb 0.2 1,198.1 956.6 687.3 269.3 9.3 232.2 1.1 766.7 444.5 115.7 328.9 6.6 315.5
         Mar 0.3 1,186.6 944.4 654.9 289.5 10.9 231.4 1.1 777.0 447.4 113.2 334.2 7.2 322.4
         Apr 0.2 1,199.9 958.7 675.5 283.1 10.0 231.3 1.1 780.2 455.7 124.6 331.1 6.1 318.4
         May 0.3 1,189.7 948.9 665.0 284.0 9.1 231.7 1.1 787.3 459.0 127.1 331.8 6.3 322.0
         June 0.3 1,142.5 903.1 617.1 286.0 8.1 231.3 1.1 765.7 435.1 104.4 330.7 7.5 323.1
Changes *
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
         Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2
         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
         July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 23.9 + 24.7 + 23.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.9 − 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.2
         Nov + 0.0 + 32.4 + 29.3 + 30.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 6.0
         Dec − 0.0 − 33.1 − 30.7 − 44.4 + 13.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 20.8 − 23.1 − 20.2 − 2.9 − 1.9 + 4.1
2015          Jan + 0.0 + 62.4 + 57.8 + 50.3 + 7.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 20.6 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 17.1 − 12.0 + 2.2 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 3.6 − − 5.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.2
         Mar + 0.0 − 24.0 − 24.5 − 39.9 + 15.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.1
         Apr − 0.0 + 25.3 + 26.1 + 27.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 14.3 + 12.7 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.9
         May + 0.0 − 17.8 − 17.3 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.9         June + 0.0 − 41.3 − 40.1 − 44.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 20.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
14.6 37.8 597.5 289.0 308.5 220.4 88.2 0.1 260.0 137.5 122.5 62.6 59.9 1.3          Oct 
14.7 37.6 627.5 301.3 326.3 238.4 87.8 0.1 258.6 132.1 126.5 65.7 60.8 1.3          Nov 14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7          Dec 
14.0 35.8 691.4 338.7 352.6 260.2 92.5 0.1 260.9 141.4 119.5 59.2 60.3 0.7 2015          Jan 
14.0 35.7 672.5 310.8 361.7 269.4 92.3 0.1 263.7 143.1 120.7 61.8 58.9 0.8          Feb 14.1 36.1 712.5 369.6 342.9 256.1 86.9 0.1 253.6 131.2 122.4 64.7 57.7 0.9          Mar 
13.8 36.0 729.9 348.1 381.8 297.3 84.5 0.1 265.1 146.9 118.2 62.3 55.9 0.9          Apr 
13.8 36.8 714.0 357.6 356.4 270.8 85.7 0.1 265.4 142.7 122.7 70.8 51.9 0.9          May13.6 36.4 671.4 331.2 340.2 256.3 83.9 0.1 240.5 127.7 112.8 61.6 51.2 0.9          June
Changes *
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 − 0.7 − − 0.3 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 30.0 + 12.2 + 17.8 + 18.1 − 0.3 − − 1.4 − 5.4 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 2.1 − 22.0 − 25.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 39.3 − 19.8 − 19.5 − 18.4 − 1.1 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 68.7 + 56.0 + 12.8 + 11.5 + 1.3 − + 35.9 + 26.3 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 2015          Jan 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 20.1 − 28.2 + 8.1 + 8.6 − 0.5 − + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 + 32.7 + 56.4 − 23.8 − 17.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 12.6 − 13.0 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 2.0 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.0 + 25.2 − 17.7 + 42.9 + 44.3 − 1.3 − + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 20.1 + 8.0 − 28.1 − 28.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 4.8 + 3.9 + 8.2 − 4.3 − 0.0          May− 0.2 − 0.3 − 39.2 − 25.0 − 14.1 − 12.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 23.9 − 14.5 − 9.3 − 8.9 − 0.5 + 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7
         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.7 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
         Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5
         June 3,147.3 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
         July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6
         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.3 220.9 220.3 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.7
         Oct 3,169.0 2,712.1 265.6 212.6 211.8 0.8 53.0 52.5 0.5 2,903.4 2,364.9
         Nov 3,178.9 2,720.0 265.7 214.6 214.1 0.4 51.1 50.7 0.4 2,913.3 2,375.5
         Dec 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015          Jan 3,191.5 2,726.0 267.9 214.7 214.0 0.7 53.1 52.8 0.4 2,923.7 2,388.4
         Feb 3,205.1 2,737.1 275.8 218.9 217.8 1.0 57.0 56.7 0.2 2,929.2 2,391.5
         Mar 3,212.0 2,739.0 278.1 220.4 219.4 1.0 57.7 57.1 0.6 2,933.9 2,399.1
         Apr 3,221.1 2,745.4 284.0 216.6 215.7 1.0 67.3 66.8 0.5 2,937.1 2,403.4
         May 3,207.9 2,743.6 272.4 215.8 214.7 1.1 56.6 55.9 0.7 2,935.5 2,407.1
         June 3,200.4 2,745.5 279.3 223.9 222.6 1.3 55.4 54.3 1.1 2,921.1 2,396.9
Changes *
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.5
         Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.0 − 4.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.1
         July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4
         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
         Oct + 4.1 + 4.7 − 4.7 − 8.3 − 8.5 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 4.1
         Nov + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 9.8 + 10.7
         Dec − 11.7 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 6.8 − 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.6 + 5.1
2015          Jan + 26.4 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.9
         Feb + 13.5 + 11.2 + 8.0 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 3.1
         Mar + 7.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 7.6
         Apr + 9.1 + 6.4 + 5.9 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.3
         May − 13.1 − 1.6 − 11.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 3.8
         June − 7.5 + 1.9 + 6.9 + 8.1 + 7.9 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 14.4 − 10.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 
2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May
2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 
2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 534.0 277.8 32.3 245.5 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
2,167.0 251.8 1,915.3 197.8 24.4 538.6 280.7 34.5 246.3 257.9 − 2.1          Oct 
2,175.1 252.6 1,922.5 200.5 24.3 537.7 280.1 33.8 246.3 257.6 − 2.1          Nov 
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1          Dec 
2,175.2 252.5 1,922.7 213.2 24.0 535.3 284.0 32.7 251.3 251.3 − 2.1 2015          Jan 
2,179.6 251.4 1,928.1 212.0 24.1 537.7 283.1 32.7 250.4 254.6 − 2.1          Feb 
2,180.6 251.7 1,928.9 218.6 23.8 534.8 281.9 32.3 249.5 252.9 − 2.1          Mar 
2,182.1 250.5 1,931.7 221.3 23.7 533.7 280.8 29.5 251.3 252.9 − 2.1          Apr 
2,192.6 253.2 1,939.4 214.5 23.6 528.4 280.4 29.5 250.9 248.0 − 2.1          May
2,190.4 251.4 1,939.0 206.5 23.3 524.2 278.3 28.7 249.5 246.0 − 2.0          June
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May
− 4.0 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.1 + 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 7.8 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2015          Jan 
+ 4.4 − 1.1 + 5.4 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.4 − −          Feb 
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.6 − 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 10.6 + 2.8 + 7.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.9 − − 0.0          May
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.0 − − 0.1          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2013 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          June 2,367.1 1,181.3 1,166.6 940.0 226.7 1,288.3 320.9 129.1 98.1 59.9 124.3 47.0 68.7 104.7
         Sep 2,380.6 1,187.9 1,177.1 945.6 231.5 1,293.2 322.9 127.1 98.7 60.3 125.9 47.8 69.4 110.2         Dec 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Mar 2,400.0 1,229.7 1,192.0 987.3 204.7 1,305.7 329.9 127.4 99.6 60.9 125.0 48.2 70.0 129.2
         June 2,413.0 1,234.8 1,205.1 992.0 213.1 1,309.4 334.8 128.1 99.4 61.4 123.3 49.1 67.1 130.2
 Short-term lending
2013 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          June 222.6 − 8.6 − 8.6 186.1 4.3 36.3 6.2 12.8 41.5 4.0 6.6 22.3
         Sep 220.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 184.2 4.3 34.5 5.6 12.7 42.9 4.0 6.3 25.6
         Dec 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Mar 219.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 184.4 3.9 34.7 6.0 13.0 42.3 3.9 6.3 25.6
         June 222.6 − 8.3 − 8.3 188.4 4.2 35.5 5.5 12.9 41.5 4.3 6.0 27.7
 Medium-term lending
2013 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          June 248.9 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.2 12.8 24.7 5.4 9.3 16.9 4.1 11.5 35.5
         Sep 250.3 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 12.7 24.5 5.6 9.7 16.9 4.2 11.7 35.9
         Dec 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Mar 251.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 179.1 13.2 24.6 5.3 10.0 16.4 4.2 11.7 39.4
         June 251.4 − 35.7 − 35.7 177.8 13.6 24.3 5.2 10.2 16.1 4.3 11.5 39.2
 Long-term lending
2013 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          June 1,895.6 1,181.3 1,122.8 940.0 182.9 926.1 303.8 68.1 86.5 37.8 66.0 38.9 50.7 46.9         Sep 1,910.0 1,187.9 1,133.4 945.6 187.8 932.4 305.8 68.2 87.5 38.0 66.0 39.6 51.4 48.8         Dec 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Mar 1,928.9 1,229.7 1,149.0 987.3 161.7 942.2 312.9 68.1 88.4 38.0 66.3 40.1 52.1 64.2
         June 1,939.0 1,234.8 1,161.1 992.0 169.1 943.3 317.0 68.3 88.8 38.3 65.7 40.5 49.7 63.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2014          Q2 + 11.2 + 1.3 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.4         Q3 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 4.6 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 3.7         Q4 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 8.3 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 17.9 + 4.0 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 15.6 + 1.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 4.1
         Q2 + 13.3 + 4.7 + 12.6 + 7.5 + 5.1 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 1.7
 Short-term lending
2014          Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.6         Q3 − 2.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.6
2015          Q1 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Q2 + 3.3 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 2.1
 Medium-term lending
2014          Q2 + 1.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3         Q3 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3         Q4 + 1.6 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 0.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 − 0.2 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
 Long-term lending
2014          Q2 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 2.5 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4         Q3 + 14.2 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7         Q4 + 14.5 + 8.5 + 9.9 + 8.3 + 1.6 + 8.6 + 3.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 2.6
2015          Q1 + 9.4 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 6.8 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6
         Q2 + 10.2 + 4.7 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 4.1 + 1.3 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5 2013
656.5 192.8 39.1 176.4 388.0 49.6 1,065.5 842.3 223.2 148.7 11.8 13.3 3.5 2014          June
653.8 192.3 38.0 175.4 389.3 49.1 1,074.2 850.7 223.5 149.3 11.9 13.2 3.5          Sep 644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8          Dec 
645.3 188.6 33.8 173.5 390.9 48.2 1,080.0 858.2 221.8 150.0 11.3 14.4 3.9 2015          Mar 
650.7 190.9 34.8 174.6 393.1 48.1 1,089.6 866.8 222.8 151.6 11.0 14.1 3.5          June
Short-term lending
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0 2013
56.5 8.8 7.8 12.6 28.0 7.2 35.7 4.2 31.5 1.7 11.8 0.9 0.0 2014          June
52.6 8.5 6.3 12.2 27.3 6.9 35.3 4.1 31.2 1.6 11.9 0.8 0.0          Sep 52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0          Dec 
52.6 8.3 5.9 11.1 27.2 6.6 34.4 3.8 30.6 2.1 11.3 0.7 0.0 2015          Mar 
54.9 8.6 6.9 10.9 27.0 6.6 33.7 4.1 29.5 1.9 11.0 0.6 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0 2013
68.8 10.4 7.2 20.5 31.7 3.6 72.2 22.5 49.7 44.6 − 0.5 0.0 2014          June
68.2 9.9 7.2 20.0 32.0 3.6 73.1 22.5 50.6 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.6 9.7 7.2 19.1 31.9 3.5 72.1 22.1 50.1 45.0 − 0.5 0.0 2015          Mar 
66.9 9.9 7.0 19.4 32.1 3.6 73.2 22.0 51.2 46.2 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5 2013
531.2 173.6 24.2 143.3 328.3 38.8 957.6 815.6 142.0 102.3 − 12.0 3.5 2014          June
533.0 173.8 24.5 143.2 330.0 38.6 965.8 824.1 141.7 102.2 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7          Dec 
525.1 170.5 20.7 143.3 331.8 38.1 973.5 832.3 141.2 102.9 − 13.2 3.9 2015          Mar 
528.8 172.4 20.8 144.3 333.9 37.9 982.7 840.6 142.1 103.6 − 13.0 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 5.2 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q2− 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Q3
+ 8.4 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 4.2 + 6.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2          Q4
+ 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 4.9 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.6 + 8.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q2− 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
+ 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q2
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q2
+ 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 8.3 + 7.9 + 0.4 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 5.7 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − + 0.3 + 0.3          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.2 − 0.3          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2014          July 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 264.3 681.1 28.0 653.1 604.4 69.2 31.3 27.9 2.7
         Aug 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 265.6 679.7 28.2 651.5 605.9 68.4 31.3 27.6 2.3
         Sep 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 262.0 679.9 28.2 651.7 606.5 69.4 31.2 27.4 2.8
         Oct 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 252.2 676.0 28.1 647.8 606.1 68.6 31.1 27.2 1.9
         Nov 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 250.6 676.1 29.2 646.9 605.3 66.5 31.1 26.6 1.7
         Dec 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015          Jan 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 253.1 666.4 28.6 637.8 606.6 64.7 30.8 25.8 3.2
         Feb 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 254.3 664.0 29.3 634.7 606.1 63.8 30.8 23.7 3.6
         Mar 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 254.0 662.0 30.8 631.1 603.9 63.0 30.7 23.4 3.6
         Apr 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 251.8 653.4 31.3 622.1 601.5 61.9 30.2 23.3 4.0
         May 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 247.2 653.2 32.3 620.9 600.0 61.0 30.2 23.2 2.2
         June 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 242.7 650.2 32.9 617.4 598.3 60.4 29.6 23.1 2.2
Changes*
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2014          July + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Aug + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4         Sep + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Oct + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 9.8 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8
         Nov + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2         Dec + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.7 − 6.7 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
2015          Jan + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.6
         Feb + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.3         Mar − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.2 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3
         May + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8         June − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2014          July 187.1 47.4 134.6 86.5 48.0 5.9 42.2 3.5 1.7 29.5 4.7 1.7
         Aug 189.7 51.1 133.4 85.3 48.1 5.9 42.1 3.4 1.8 29.5 4.7 1.1
         Sep 189.2 47.8 136.1 88.3 47.8 5.7 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.4 4.6 1.6
         Oct 178.4 44.6 128.4 80.6 47.9 5.8 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.8
         Nov 182.6 46.6 130.7 82.3 48.3 6.4 42.0 3.5 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.5
         Dec 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015          Jan 184.5 50.7 127.6 84.0 43.6 7.4 36.1 3.8 2.4 29.1 4.8 2.2
         Feb 186.8 52.4 128.0 85.4 42.7 8.0 34.7 3.8 2.6 29.0 2.9 2.4
         Mar 187.3 52.9 127.8 84.9 42.9 9.1 33.8 3.8 2.7 28.9 2.8 2.4
         Apr 185.0 52.3 126.1 83.1 43.0 9.2 33.8 3.8 2.8 28.8 2.8 2.8
         May 191.9 58.6 126.5 82.9 43.6 9.6 34.0 3.9 2.9 28.7 2.8 1.3
         June 193.8 57.8 129.1 84.7 44.3 9.7 34.7 3.8 3.2 28.3 2.8 1.4
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2014          July − 2.8 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8         Aug + 2.6 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Sep − 0.6 − 3.4 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Oct − 10.7 − 3.1 − 7.7 − 7.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Nov + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         Dec − 0.3 + 4.1 − 5.1 + 1.2 − 6.3 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
2015          Jan − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.4 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2         Mar + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 6.9 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6         June + 1.8 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.72014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2014          July 2,886.8 1,407.6 810.9 177.8 633.1 22.1 610.9 600.9 67.5 1.9 23.2 1.0
         Aug 2,901.9 1,421.0 811.9 180.3 631.6 22.3 609.4 602.4 66.6 1.8 22.9 1.3         Sep 2,903.4 1,427.1 805.8 173.7 632.1 22.4 609.6 603.1 67.5 1.8 22.7 1.2
         Oct 2,918.9 1,449.9 799.7 171.6 628.1 22.3 605.8 602.6 66.7 1.8 22.6 1.1
         Nov 2,933.8 1,471.3 796.0 168.3 627.7 22.8 604.9 601.8 64.6 1.8 22.0 1.2         Dec 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2015          Jan 2,944.1 1,487.2 791.9 169.0 622.8 21.2 601.6 602.8 62.3 1.8 21.0 1.1
         Feb 2,950.9 1,497.1 790.3 169.0 621.3 21.3 600.0 602.3 61.2 1.8 20.9 1.2         Mar 2,944.4 1,495.9 788.2 169.1 619.1 21.7 597.4 600.1 60.2 1.8 20.6 1.2
         Apr 2,955.9 1,520.0 779.1 168.7 610.4 22.1 588.3 597.7 59.1 1.4 20.5 1.2
         May 2,966.9 1,538.7 773.9 164.4 609.6 22.7 586.9 596.2 58.0 1.4 20.4 0.9         June 2,957.9 1,542.3 763.8 157.9 605.9 23.2 582.7 594.6 57.2 1.4 20.3 0.8
Changes*
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2014          July + 10.6 + 14.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Aug + 15.1 + 13.4 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Sep + 1.6 + 6.1 − 6.1 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Oct + 15.5 + 22.8 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 15.0 + 21.5 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1         Dec + 2.0 − 4.3 + 5.0 + 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 12.6 + 21.8 − 6.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 6.6 + 9.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Mar − 6.5 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Apr + 11.5 + 24.2 − 9.1 − 0.4 − 8.7 + 0.4 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 10.9 + 18.7 − 5.1 − 4.3 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 8.8 + 3.6 − 10.0 − 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2014          July 1,000.1 434.5 543.7 108.7 435.0 9.3 425.6 7.5 14.5 1.8 17.2 1.0
         Aug 1,004.8 438.0 544.5 111.5 433.0 9.5 423.5 7.5 14.8 1.8 17.1 1.3
         Sep 1,011.6 449.5 538.4 105.8 432.6 9.3 423.3 7.5 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.2
         Oct 1,014.9 458.3 532.8 104.2 428.6 9.5 419.1 7.6 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.1
         Nov 1,008.1 456.6 529.2 100.9 428.2 10.6 417.7 7.4 14.9 1.8 16.7 1.2
         Dec 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015          Jan 1,013.7 467.2 524.8 102.7 422.1 10.3 411.9 6.8 14.8 1.8 16.2 1.1
         Feb 1,008.7 464.6 522.4 102.3 420.2 10.3 409.9 6.8 14.7 1.8 16.2 1.2
         Mar 1,007.9 465.9 520.4 102.7 417.7 10.4 407.2 7.0 14.7 1.8 16.0 1.2
         Apr 1,007.8 474.3 511.9 102.9 408.9 10.6 398.3 7.0 14.6 1.4 16.0 1.2
         May 1,006.3 477.1 507.6 100.0 407.6 11.2 396.5 7.0 14.5 1.4 16.0 0.9
         June 997.9 476.9 499.5 95.6 403.9 11.7 392.2 7.1 14.4 1.3 16.0 0.8
Changes*
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2014          July + 3.6 + 6.5 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
         Aug + 4.7 + 3.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep + 6.8 + 11.5 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct + 3.3 + 8.9 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov − 6.8 − 1.7 − 3.7 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1         Dec + 1.3 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 5.7 + 10.1 − 4.3 − 1.5 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Feb − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Mar − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Apr − 0.2 + 8.5 − 8.5 + 0.2 − 8.8 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 1.5 + 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2         June − 8.3 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015          Jan 1,930.4 1,020.0 990.3 176.0 678.7 135.6 29.7 267.1 252.9 26.4 184.6 41.9
         Feb 1,942.3 1,032.5 1,002.7 176.8 689.2 136.7 29.8 267.9 253.2 26.6 184.7 41.9
         Mar 1,936.4 1,030.0 999.4 172.2 690.1 137.0 30.6 267.8 253.4 27.0 184.5 41.9
         Apr 1,948.1 1,045.7 1,015.4 177.0 699.9 138.5 30.3 267.2 252.8 27.2 183.8 41.8
         May 1,960.6 1,061.6 1,030.5 178.8 711.3 140.4 31.1 266.3 252.0 26.9 183.5 41.6
         June 1,960.0 1,065.4 1,033.8 176.9 716.6 140.3 31.5 264.4 250.2 26.5 182.4 41.3
Changes*
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2015          Jan + 6.9 + 11.7 + 10.2 + 2.6 + 5.7 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Feb + 11.8 + 12.5 + 12.4 + 0.8 + 10.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Mar − 5.8 − 2.5 − 3.3 − 4.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Apr + 11.7 + 15.7 + 16.0 + 4.8 + 9.8 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1
         May + 12.5 + 15.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1
         June − 0.5 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 1.9 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015          Jan 184.5 12.7 4.1 3.0 5.5 0.1 14.6 42.4 13.0 12.9 15.8 0.7 14.0
         Feb 186.8 8.9 2.7 2.7 3.5 0.1 14.6 46.7 12.7 17.0 16.3 0.7 14.0
         Mar 187.3 9.2 2.9 2.8 3.4 0.1 14.6 49.9 14.3 18.6 16.3 0.7 13.9
         Apr 185.0 9.4 2.9 3.0 3.4 0.1 14.6 48.6 13.0 18.6 16.3 0.8 13.8
         May 191.9 9.5 3.0 3.0 3.4 0.1 14.6 45.0 12.6 15.4 16.3 0.7 13.7
         June 193.8 10.9 3.5 4.1 3.3 0.1 14.3 47.6 13.3 17.2 16.4 0.7 13.6
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2015          Jan − 2.2 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Mar + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr − 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 6.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
14.2 66.4 200.7 11.0 189.7 596.0 586.5 9.5 47.4 0.0 4.8 − 2015          Jan 
14.6 66.7 201.2 11.1 190.1 595.5 586.0 9.5 46.5 0.0 4.7 −          Feb 
14.4 66.4 201.4 11.3 190.1 593.1 583.6 9.5 45.5 0.0 4.6 −          Mar 
14.4 65.7 201.5 11.5 190.0 590.7 581.2 9.5 44.5 0.0 4.5 −          Apr 
14.3 64.4 201.9 11.5 190.4 589.1 579.7 9.4 43.5 0.0 4.4 −          May
14.2 62.4 202.0 11.5 190.5 587.5 578.2 9.3 42.8 0.0 4.3 −          June
Changes*
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2015          Jan 
+ 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.0 − − 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
− 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
− 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 2014
41.6 20.1 10.1 6.9 4.6 0.4 87.8 13.4 58.0 15.5 0.9 − 2015          Jan 
44.6 22.6 10.1 7.1 4.7 0.4 86.5 14.3 55.5 15.8 0.9 −          Feb 
44.1 21.9 10.0 7.3 4.8 0.4 84.1 13.8 53.5 15.9 0.9 −          Mar 
44.0 22.1 9.7 7.3 4.9 0.4 83.1 14.3 51.8 16.0 0.9 −          Apr 
49.4 26.6 10.3 7.5 5.0 0.3 88.2 16.4 54.3 16.5 1.0 −          May
47.6 24.8 10.0 7.7 5.1 0.4 87.8 16.2 53.5 17.0 1.0 −          June
Changes*
+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013
+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014
− 6.4 − 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2015          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 1.3 + 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Feb − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 5.4 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 −          May
− 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015          Feb 615.4 606.1 530.0 396.6 76.1 62.8 9.3 7.5 0.2 76.0 63.8 50.1 12.2
         Mar 613.2 603.9 529.1 394.2 74.8 61.4 9.3 7.4 0.2 73.7 63.0 49.7 10.7
         Apr 610.7 601.5 528.9 392.7 72.6 59.2 9.2 7.4 0.2 71.8 61.9 49.0 9.9
         May 609.2 600.0 529.0 389.1 71.0 57.4 9.2 7.5 0.2 70.9 61.0 48.6 9.9
         June 607.5 598.3 528.7 380.4 69.7 56.0 9.2 7.5 0.2 70.1 60.4 48.3 9.7
Changes*
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2015          Feb − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Mar − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 1.4
         Apr − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.8
         May − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.0
         June − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.8 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015          Feb 1,159.2 279.2 28.4 394.9 91.9 107.7 1.9 27.3 5.4 1,024.2 0.8 0.2 35.4 1.2
         Mar 1,168.8 268.5 28.7 403.2 95.7 113.0 2.1 29.6 5.2 1,026.1 0.9 0.2 35.7 1.2
         Apr 1,154.2 258.7 28.9 396.0 94.5 112.5 2.4 27.4 5.5 1,014.3 0.5 0.2 36.9 1.2
         May 1,143.9 254.3 29.5 396.2 93.4 112.5 2.6 24.0 5.6 1,007.4 0.5 0.2 37.0 1.2
         June 1,125.1 248.2 28.4 388.6 86.3 104.2 2.5 23.2 5.4 997.8 0.3 0.2 37.1 1.2
Changes*
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2015          Feb + 11.3 − 6.8 + 2.0 + 13.7 + 11.4 + 12.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.3 −
         Mar + 9.6 − 10.7 + 0.2 + 8.4 + 3.7 + 5.3 + 0.2 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
         Apr − 14.6 − 9.8 + 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 11.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.3 −
         May − 10.3 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 6.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0         June − 18.7 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 7.6 − 7.1 − 8.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 9.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015          Apr 21 213.0 45.6 0.0 17.4 17.9 88.4 17.3 20.9 2.0 21.6 158.2 4.7 2.7 9.5 7.8
         May 21 213.4 45.1 0.0 17.8 17.6 88.7 17.4 21.1 2.0 21.4 158.5 4.9 2.7 9.5 8.2         June 21 213.3 44.9 0.0 17.6 17.3 89.6 17.4 21.2 2.0 21.1 158.4 4.9 2.7 9.6 8.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Apr 12 148.2 28.4 − 9.8 12.9 69.0 14.7 8.7 1.3 18.0 104.2 4.5 2.7 6.4 5.1         May 12 148.3 28.1 − 9.8 12.7 69.2 14.8 8.9 1.3 17.9 104.4 4.5 2.7 6.4 5.1         June 12 148.1 27.8 − 9.7 12.5 70.0 14.8 9.0 1.3 17.3 104.7 4.5 2.7 6.4 5.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Apr 9 64.9 17.2 0.0 7.7 5.0 19.3 2.6 12.1 0.7 3.6 54.0 0.2 − 3.1 2.7         May 9 65.1 17.0 0.0 8.0 4.9 19.5 2.6 12.2 0.7 3.5 54.0 0.4 − 3.1 3.1         June 9 65.2 17.1 0.0 8.0 4.8 19.6 2.6 12.2 0.7 3.8 53.8 0.4 − 3.2 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015          Apr 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.8 3.1 3.9 1.7 0.5 0.7 0.5 1.5 15.7 8.6 0.8 0.0
         May 2.4 0.0 0.8 4.1 2.4 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.4 16.2 8.7 0.8 0.0
         June 2.3 0.0 0.9 4.5 2.3 3.7 1.5 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 16.5 8.5 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Apr 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.6 2.2 3.1 1.3 0.5 0.6 0.5 1.2 10.9 4.9 0.6 0.0
         May 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.9 1.6 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.1 11.1 4.9 0.6 0.0         June 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.3 1.6 2.8 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.4 11.5 5.0 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Apr 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.6 0.2 0.0         May 0.9 0.0 0.5 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 5.0 3.7 0.2 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.6 1.2 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.6 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2014          Aug 56 206 1,876.9 539.9 525.2 170.6 354.5 14.7 564.0 454.2 14.1 440.1 109.8 773.0 468.6
         Sep 56 206 1,826.4 503.6 488.5 154.1 334.4 15.2 615.9 500.5 13.7 486.8 115.4 706.9 487.0
         Oct 56 205 1,910.0 525.1 509.5 154.7 354.9 15.6 609.9 494.0 13.5 480.5 115.9 775.0 509.7
         Nov 56 205 1,982.6 540.6 525.7 173.6 352.1 14.9 616.5 499.1 14.0 485.1 117.3 825.5 549.8
         Dec 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015          Jan 54 202 2,269.7 609.8 593.0 222.4 370.7 16.8 656.5 532.1 14.6 517.5 124.4 1,003.3 714.1
         Feb 53 202 2,152.9 589.9 573.2 208.7 364.5 16.7 666.9 539.4 14.7 524.7 127.5 896.1 626.0
         Mar 53 200 2,175.3 602.0 585.8 218.5 367.3 16.2 668.1 547.7 14.9 532.8 120.4 905.2 660.9
         Apr 53 200 2,127.8 622.4 606.5 210.0 396.5 15.9 660.4 535.8 14.8 521.0 124.6 845.1 588.5
         May 53 200 2,109.5 630.1 613.5 198.6 414.9 16.6 650.5 521.1 14.7 506.4 129.4 828.9 576.7
Changes *
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2014          Sep − − − 80.5 − 51.9 − 52.1 − 16.5 − 35.5 + 0.2 + 39.6 + 35.9 − 0.4 + 36.2 + 3.7 − 68.2 + 18.4
         Oct − − 1 + 82.2 + 20.6 + 20.1 + 0.6 + 19.6 + 0.4 − 6.3 − 6.7 − 0.2 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 67.9 + 22.7
         Nov − − + 73.4 + 15.4 + 16.0 + 19.0 − 3.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 5.4 + 1.7 + 50.5 + 40.1
         Dec − − − 75.7 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 27.6 − 29.6 + 1.4 − 32.1 − 33.9 − 0.1 − 33.8 + 1.8 − 42.8 + 2.2
2015          Jan − 2 − 3 + 294.7 + 38.7 + 39.0 + 21.1 + 17.9 − 0.4 + 39.0 + 38.9 + 0.7 + 38.2 + 0.1 + 217.1 + 162.1
         Feb − 1 − − 122.8 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 13.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 + 6.5 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 107.4 − 88.0
         Mar − − 2 − 7.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 10.1 − 0.8 − 13.0 − 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 9.2 + 7.1 + 34.8
         Apr − − − 21.6 + 31.9 + 31.9 − 8.5 + 40.5 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 6.1 − 58.9 − 72.4
         May − − − 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 11.4 + 12.4 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 20.6 − 0.1 − 20.5 + 3.7 − 16.1 − 16.7
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2014          Aug 31 70 407.3 169.4 148.8 89.7 59.1 20.5 170.8 136.6 21.5 115.1 34.2 67.1 −
         Sep 30 66 399.3 166.3 146.7 90.3 56.4 19.6 169.1 136.1 21.5 114.6 33.1 63.9 −
         Oct 29 64 393.2 160.0 143.0 88.7 54.3 17.0 173.6 139.5 21.5 118.0 34.0 59.6 −
         Nov 29 64 395.0 155.5 138.1 84.7 53.4 17.4 174.5 140.1 21.4 118.7 34.3 65.1 −
         Dec 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015          Jan 28 63 410.8 164.8 147.7 86.7 61.0 17.1 181.3 148.0 22.5 125.5 33.4 64.7 −
         Feb 28 63 405.8 161.7 146.7 85.2 61.5 15.0 183.5 150.7 22.4 128.3 32.8 60.6 −
         Mar 28 63 412.4 163.5 148.5 86.9 61.6 15.0 187.0 154.5 22.4 132.1 32.6 61.8 −
         Apr 27 62 404.1 161.8 147.0 85.9 61.1 14.8 184.1 152.7 22.3 130.4 31.5 58.2 −
         May 27 62 406.3 165.5 151.2 88.4 62.8 14.3 185.7 155.1 22.1 132.9 30.6 55.0 −
Changes *
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2014          Sep − 1 − 4 − 11.8 − 5.5 − 4.2 + 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 3.2 −
         Oct − 1 − 2 − 6.4 − 6.5 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 4.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.0 − 4.3 −
         Nov − − + 1.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 5.4 −
         Dec − 1 − 1 − 8.2 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 −
2015          Jan − − + 13.8 + 6.5 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 −
         Feb − − − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 4.1 −
         Mar − − + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 1.2 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 − 4.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 −
         May − − + 0.1 + 2.7 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 3.2 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2015
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,093.1 727.8 370.2 357.6 365.3 23.7 19.3 4.4 341.6 139.0 41.7 603.0 473.2 2014          Aug 
1,027.4 691.8 364.7 327.1 335.6 22.5 18.1 4.4 313.1 139.3 42.1 617.7 493.4          Sep 
1,077.6 733.8 390.9 342.8 343.9 22.1 17.7 4.5 321.7 133.3 41.9 657.2 517.3          Oct 
1,099.5 753.2 411.7 341.5 346.3 21.8 17.3 4.4 324.5 132.7 42.9 707.6 555.5          Nov 1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5          Dec 
1,172.6 800.9 443.0 357.9 371.8 23.5 18.4 5.2 348.3 133.2 46.4 917.4 718.3 2015          Jan 
1,161.1 786.5 436.9 349.6 374.6 24.1 18.9 5.2 350.5 139.4 47.8 804.6 625.6          Feb 1,153.3 781.8 424.9 356.9 371.5 24.9 19.6 5.3 346.6 145.8 48.4 827.7 661.5          Mar 
1,189.2 819.1 428.2 390.9 370.1 24.4 19.0 5.3 345.7 142.2 47.7 748.8 586.8          Apr 
1,191.2 822.8 425.5 397.2 368.4 22.5 17.1 5.4 345.9 144.3 48.2 725.9 574.7          May
Changes *
− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014
− 87.0 − 48.1 − 5.6 − 42.5 − 39.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 37.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 20.2 2014          Sep 
+ 49.4 + 41.4 + 26.2 + 15.1 + 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.3 + 39.0 + 23.9          Oct 
+ 22.2 + 19.3 + 20.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 50.9 + 38.2          Nov − 65.6 − 20.5 + 4.6 − 25.1 − 45.1 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 43.9 − 4.2 + 2.4 − 8.2 + 2.0          Dec 
+ 94.4 + 42.7 + 26.7 + 16.0 + 51.7 + 2.9 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 48.8 + 4.8 + 1.2 + 194.2 + 160.7 2015          Jan 
− 15.5 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 10.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2 + 1.4 − 114.8 − 92.7          Feb − 27.6 − 15.6 − 11.9 − 3.7 − 11.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 12.8 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 13.5 + 35.8          Mar 
+ 53.4 + 47.1 + 3.3 + 43.8 + 6.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 70.6 − 74.6          Apr 
− 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 22.9 − 17.4          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
311.3 178.6 98.5 80.1 132.7 19.9 14.8 5.1 112.8 20.3 28.2 47.5 − 2014          Aug 
304.5 173.6 99.1 74.6 130.9 20.5 15.2 5.3 110.4 19.4 27.6 47.8 −          Sep 
302.4 175.5 99.4 76.1 126.9 19.7 14.3 5.5 107.2 16.1 26.4 48.2 −          Oct 
304.2 179.1 100.6 78.5 125.2 20.6 14.5 6.1 104.6 16.1 26.3 48.4 −          Nov 
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 −          Dec 
311.9 183.0 104.6 78.4 128.9 19.7 14.4 5.4 109.2 19.4 26.5 53.0 − 2015          Jan 
310.6 183.8 105.1 78.7 126.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 108.7 17.8 26.7 50.8 −          Feb 
316.1 182.7 102.1 80.6 133.4 18.5 13.3 5.2 114.9 17.6 27.1 51.6 −          Mar 
313.7 179.1 99.3 79.8 134.5 14.9 13.1 1.8 119.7 16.4 26.2 47.9 −          Apr 
320.5 185.9 102.2 83.7 134.6 14.0 12.3 1.8 120.6 13.4 26.9 45.5 −          May
Changes *
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
− 9.7 − 6.7 + 0.6 − 7.3 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 2014          Sep 
− 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 −          Oct 
+ 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 −          Nov 
− 9.1 − 6.7 + 0.5 − 7.2 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 −          Dec 
+ 9.7 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 2.5 − 2015          Jan 
− 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.3 −          Feb 
+ 2.6 − 2.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 −          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 3.4 + 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.9 −          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 5.8 + 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.8 − 3.0 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2015
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2009 10,530.2 210.6 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 8 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015          Apr 11,079.8 110.8 110.3 303.4 193.1 0.0
         M ay ......
         June 11,275.0 112.7 112.3 381.4 269.1 0.0
         July p 11,320.1 113.2 112.7 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2009 2,507,906 23.8 50,158 49,971 50,297 326 0
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 8 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015          Apr 3,017,869 27.2 30,179 30,004 102,839 72,835 47
         M ay .......
         June 3,094,166 27.4 30,942 30,768 122,759 91,991 0
         July p 3,113,332 27.5 31,133 30,960 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Special purpose Regional institutions
Maintenance Regional banks banks and build- of credit cooperatives
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and and credit ing and loan
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks cooperatives Mortgage banks associations beginning in 1 
2009 11,165 7,885 1,461 18,040 9,400 652 1,368
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,914 556 1,409
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 10,230 601 1,531
2012 8 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 5,262 248 871
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,479 239 906
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2015          Apr 6,182 5,039 1,608 9,926 5,917 220 1,112
         M ay .......
         June 6,299 5,227 1,848 10,064 5,939 220 1,171
         July p 6,418 5,237 1,768 10,144 5,987 225 1,181
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and depo- money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are sits with building and loan associa- of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but tions) with agreed maturities of up Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 to 2 years to banks in non-euro-
years requirements area countries to 2 years institution beginning in 1 
2009 1,473,296 6,814 309,908 572,127 145,759
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 8 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015          Apr 1,965,955 2,498 351,053 602,245 96,119
         May . . . . .
         June 1,999,213 3,265 394,364 598,057 99,265
         July p 2,024,341 1,908 393,322 596,917 96,849
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of allowance. 8The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, was 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012 ,i t
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve has stood at 1%. 9Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance,
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years is 1%. including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required reserves of the
4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2015
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2015 July                   8 74,463 74,463 0.05−−−7
         July                 15 75,537 75,537 0.05−−−7
         July                 22 75,150 75,150 0.05−−−7
         July                 29 80,023 80,023 0.05−−−7
         Aug                  5 71,007 71,007 0.05−−−7
         Aug                12 69,674 69,674 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2015 May                28 40,425 40,425 2 ... − − − 91
         June                 24 73,789 73,789 0.05−−− 1,190
         June                 25 17,269 17,269 2 ... − − − 98
         July                 30 21,752 21,752 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2015          Jan − 0.05 − 0.04 0.01 0.06 0.15 0.22 0.30
         Feb − 0.04 − 0.03 0.00 0.05 0.13 0.19 0.26
         Mar − 0.05 − 0.04 − 0.01 0.03 0.10 0.15 0.21
         Apr − 0.07 − 0.08 − 0.03 0.00 0.07 0.12 0.18
         May − 0.11 − 0.11 − 0.05 − 0.01 0.06 0.10 0.17
         June − 0.12 − 0.12 − 0.06 − 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.16
         July − 0.12 − 0.13 − 0.07 − 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.17
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          June 0.83 95,671 1.95 226,527 0.44 84,165 2.82 19,989
         July 0.80 95,197 1.94 225,989 0.42 85,704 2.75 19,674
         Aug 0.78 94,384 1.92 225,881 0.40 86,373 2.71 19,536
         Sep 0.75 93,703 1.90 225,992 0.39 83,870 2.69 19,601
         Oct 0.73 92,778 1.89 225,657 0.38 83,587 2.65 19,663
         Nov 0.71 92,016 1.87 225,585 0.38 83,312 2.60 19,554
         Dec 0.67 92,021 1.85 227,138 0.36 80,954 2.59 19,152
2015          Jan 0.66 89,436 1.82 226,464 0.35 79,358 2.52 18,930
         Feb 0.64 89,570 1.81 226,183 0.33 79,398 2.44 18,974
         Mar 0.62 89,298 1.79 225,561 0.32 78,982 2.36 19,063
         Apr 0.59 88,530 1.77 224,767 0.30 79,019 2.29 18,947
         May 0.57 86,761 1.76 224,571 0.30 77,340 2.26 19,282
         June 0.54 84,513 1.75 224,246 0.29 74,356 2.22 19,331
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          June 3.14 5,762 2.90 28,112 3.81 986,700 7.98 59,098 4.92 76,099 4.91 308,827
         July 3.06 5,812 2.87 28,148 3.79 989,997 7.86 56,579 4.89 76,766 4.88 309,761
         Aug 3.06 5,667 2.84 28,220 3.77 994,510 7.72 55,731 4.86 77,128 4.87 309,772
         Sep 3.05 5,630 2.82 28,295 3.74 997,116 7.91 58,107 4.84 77,166 4.84 308,303
         Oct 3.00 5,766 2.78 28,278 3.72 1,000,934 7.73 56,716 4.81 77,707 4.84 308,423
         Nov 2.87 5,631 2.74 28,396 3.70 1,004,378 7.62 54,676 4.78 77,140 4.81 308,879
         Dec 2.87 5,179 2.71 28,208 3.67 1,010,175 7.52 56,685 4.79 76,940 4.81 304,322
2015          Jan 2.85 5,263 2.68 28,082 3.64 1,008,817 7.57 55,840 4.76 76,665 4.77 303,620
         Feb 2.79 5,119 2.65 27,981 3.62 1,011,149 7.57 55,246 4.74 76,178 4.75 304,176
         Mar 2.79 5,188 2.62 27,863 3.59 1,012,369 7.62 57,477 4.71 76,470 4.72 303,927
         Apr 2.72 5,144 2.59 27,828 3.56 1,015,337 7.51 56,137 4.66 77,262 4.67 304,710
         May 2.69 5,138 2.56 27,817 3.53 1,019,301 7.47 55,239 4.62 77,540 4.64 306,013
         June 2.68 5,138 2.52 27,829 3.50 1,022,711 7.60 56,758 4.58 77,789 4.62 305,095
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          June 3.32 138,116 2.81 129,524 3.21 582,780
         July 3.16 133,446 2.76 129,959 3.18 583,339
         Aug 3.15 131,893 2.75 130,271 3.17 585,897
         Sep 3.17 132,902 2.69 129,887 3.14 584,473
         Oct 3.08 130,017 2.64 131,515 3.10 586,281
         Nov 3.06 132,058 2.61 131,532 3.08 588,938
         Dec 3.01 128,996 2.56 128,825 3.05 574,492
2015          Jan 2.98 129,835 2.54 129,362 3.02 575,205
         Feb 2.97 132,522 2.52 128,329 3.00 577,591
         Mar 3.00 132,002 2.50 127,655 2.96 577,082
         Apr 2.98 129,602 2.46 126,479 2.93 578,295
         May 2.91 130,402 2.45 128,043 2.91 580,567
         June 2.89 134,316 2.43 127,063 2.88 580,587
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          June
0.31 963,948 0.63 9,355 0.97 704 1.37 1,569 0.80 528,104 0.88 76,049
         July 0.26 972,397 0.53 9,984 0.86 778 1.27 1,583 0.76 527,278 0.85 76,712
         Aug 0.26 982,182 0.54 8,010 0.90 734 1.14 1,289 0.72 527,851 0.85 77,648
         Sep 0.25 976,579 0.51 8,576 0.88 704 1.19 1,266 0.70 527,990 0.83 78,170
         Oct 0.23 990,310 0.51 8,687 0.96 657 1.09 1,134 0.66 527,680 0.80 77,990
         Nov 0.23 1,013,535 0.51 8,021 0.87 719 1.19 1,173 0.63 527,234 0.77 77,625
         Dec 0.22 1,007,229 0.37 9,654 0.79 749 1.13 1,266 0.61 530,260 0.75 76,202
2015          Jan 0.22 1,017,766 0.53 8,558 0.87 856 1.08 1,305 0.58 528,544 0.73 77,361
         Feb 0.20 1,030,249 0.53 7,278 0.71 886 1.07 1,131 0.54 529,378 0.70 76,071
         Mar 0.17 1,027,392 0.39 8,124 0.81 771 1.01 1,049 0.51 528,471 0.65 74,766
         Apr 0.16 1,043,564 0.34 7,663 0.77 653 0.94 952 0.48 528,261 0.61 72,608
         May 0.16 1,058,904 0.36 5,630 0.74 657 0.94 884 0.47 528,271 0.58 71,013
         June 0.15 1,062,688 0.29 6,525 0.70 703 0.88 880 0.46 527,952 0.56 69,688
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          June
0.15 314,270 0.19 22,920 0.55 472 0.89 893
         July 0.13 320,536 0.18 18,623 0.52 371 0.94 511
         Aug 0.12 326,545 0.17 14,610 0.52 191 0.78 319
         Sep 0.11 336,903 0.17 13,164 0.42 312 0.88 401
         Oct 0.10 345,504 0.17 13,179 0.49 972 0.68 435
         Nov 0.09 343,396 0.14 12,414 0.55 1,973 0.51 595
         Dec 0.09 344,692 0.15 16,156 0.48 781 1.36 931
2015          Jan 0.08 337,454 0.15 13,140 0.47 398 0.47 654
         Feb 0.07 333,734 0.17 12,552 0.67 437 0.48 584
         Mar 0.07 337,419 0.15 15,096 0.33 775 0.45 863
         Apr 0.06 343,035 0.11 15,562 0.36 612 0.46 660
         May 0.06 342,155 0.12 10,161 0.33 1,010 0.55 634
         June 0.06 342,358 0.20 10,204 0.43 484 0.41 512
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          June
2.48 6,755 . . 2.13 3,687 3.27 922 2.75 2,146 2.34 2,452 3.38 710 2.74 1,494
         July 2.35 8,352 . . 1.94 4,672 3.21 1,167 2.69 2,513 2.13 3,006 3.33 893 2.65 1,631
         Aug 2.44 5,980 . . 2.15 3,298 3.35 742 2.58 1,940 2.27 2,147 3.48 586 2.56 1,349         Sep 2.30 7,724 . . 1.99 4,484 3.26 830 2.55 2,410 2.08 2,794 3.39 648 2.48 1,610
         Oct 2.18 7,758 . . 1.82 4,560 3.08 963 2.51 2,235 1.93 2,825 3.27 722 2.46 1,538
         Nov 2.27 6,061 . . 2.01 3,202 3.01 796 2.38 2,063 2.02 2,226 3.18 603 2.33 1,358         Dec 2.11 8,817 2.15 2,843 1.80 4,820 2.86 1,162 2.33 2,835 1.95 3,191 3.00 881 2.32 1,810
2015          Jan 2.20 7,282 2.11 3,232 1.91 4,042 2.92 1,027 2.39 2,213 2.05 2,683 3.05 784 2.31 1,457
         Feb 2.04 6,019 2.00 2,014 1.73 3,259 2.85 797 2.23 1,963 1.91 1,916 3.06 570 2.12 1,302         Mar 2.08 8,382 2.03 3,008 1.81 4,242 2.89 1,121 2.17 3,019 1.94 2,718 3.02 869 2.17 1,968
         Apr 2.03 7,162 1.92 2,656 1.77 3,917 2.83 934 2.15 2,311 1.94 2,381 2.97 737 2.07 1,602
         May 1.95 6,519 1.91 2,062 1.69 3,364 2.78 815 2.03 2,340 1.96 1,983 2.92 617 1.95 1,628         June 1.95 8,378 2.02 2,713 1.69 4,213 2.74 998 2.05 3,167 2.01 2,452 2.84 771 2.04 2,119
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          June 6.78 6.68 6,879 . . 4.93 344 5.32 2,867 7.91 3,668
         July 6.79 6.69 7,662 . . 5.00 389 5.30 3,184 7.93 4,089
         Aug 6.60 6.49 6,380 . . 4.87 349 5.16 2,709 7.75 3,322
         Sep 6.48 6.38 6,608 . . 4.72 366 5.07 2,833 7.64 3,409
         Oct 6.47 6.38 7,152 . . 4.73 369 5.01 3,055 7.67 3,728
         Nov 6.37 6.28 6,057 . . 4.69 331 4.99 2,581 7.51 3,145
         Dec 6.01 5.94 5,371 7.85 847 4.22 383 4.89 2,448 7.21 2,540
2015          Jan 6.47 6.38 7,032 7.70 1,519 4.82 358 4.99 2,774 7.52 3,900
         Feb 6.50 6.42 7,275 7.69 1,431 4.74 301 5.08 2,808 7.45 4,166
         Mar 6.08 6.01 8,735 6.98 1,593 4.84 370 4.81 3,556 6.99 4,809
         Apr 6.18 6.11 8,169 7.01 1,553 5.00 326 4.94 3,104 6.95 4,739
         May 6.31 6.24 7,346 7.46 1,458 5.08 304 4.94 2,839 7.20 4,203
         June 6.37 6.29 8,007 7.63 1,547 4.83 327 4.98 3,211 7.33 4,469
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          June . 3.88 239 . . 3.38 35 4.28 129 3.42 75
         July . 3.91 248 . . 2.90 43 4.53 129 3.43 76
         Aug . 4.04 197 . . 3.32 21 4.37 122 3.59 54
         Sep . 3.84 217 . . 2.76 28 4.39 123 3.27 66
         Oct . 3.74 244 . . 2.76 33 4.22 138 3.27 73
         Nov . 3.85 215 . . 3.15 25 4.34 122 3.24 68
         Dec . 3.46 233 . . 3.13 27 3.96 124 2.81 82
2015          Jan . 3.34 236 . . 2.77 36 3.72 120 3.02 80
         Feb . 3.10 258 . . 3.01 25 3.76 117 2.46 116
         Mar . 3.33 276 . . 3.04 29 3.78 149 2.73 98
         Apr . 3.15 280 . . 2.58 28 3.77 138 2.53 114
         May . 3.30 226 . . 2.86 23 3.69 128 2.78 75
         June . 3.11 301 . . 2.86 35 3.59 156 2.50 110
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          June 2.59 2.55 15,574 . . 2.44 2,572 2.27 1,980 2.53 6,219 2.73 4,803
         July 2.50 2.46 19,021 . . 2.43 3,029 2.18 2,488 2.45 7,704 2.61 5,800
         Aug 2.46 2.41 15,858 . . 2.53 2,427 2.13 1,907 2.37 6,205 2.50 5,319
         Sep 2.34 2.30 16,458 . . 2.39 2,214 2.04 1,945 2.28 6,630 2.39 5,669
         Oct 2.28 2.25 17,938 . . 2.33 2,681 2.03 2,077 2.19 7,208 2.35 5,972
         Nov 2.20 2.17 16,120 . . 2.32 2,253 1.83 1,979 2.11 6,201 2.28 5,687
         Dec 2.17 2.13 18,500 2.23 3,583 2.22 2,762 1.96 2,015 2.09 7,445 2.19 6,278
2015          Jan 2.15 1.96 19,769 1.80 6,334 2.23 2,606 1.95 2,006 2.02 6,927 1.83 8,230
         Feb 2.01 1.96 17,048 2.16 3,701 2.28 2,199 1.87 1,753 1.86 6,492 1.99 6,604
         Mar 1.92 1.88 21,134 2.05 4,817 2.19 2,760 1.88 2,118 1.77 7,693 1.88 8,563
         Apr 1.91 1.87 20,486 1.94 4,301 2.11 2,640 1.83 1,935 1.70 7,330 1.95 8,581
         May 1.81 1.77 19,549 1.95 4,229 2.20 2,315 1.84 1,754 1.61 7,123 1.78 8,357
         June 1.89 1.85 24,028 1.98 5,330 2.11 2,798 1.81 2,197 1.72 9,297 1.92 9,736
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          June . 2.49 7,010 . . 2.35 969 2.16 962 2.48 2,830 2.71 2,249
         July . 2.40 8,812 . . 2.37 1,205 2.09 1,289 2.39 3,568 2.56 2,750
         Aug . 2.34 7,249 . . 2.51 887 2.03 946 2.30 2,895 2.45 2,521
         Sep . 2.23 7,374 . . 2.39 843 1.93 957 2.18 2,960 2.35 2,614
         Oct . 2.18 8,147 . . 2.33 1,027 1.91 1,060 2.11 3,264 2.31 2,796
         Nov . 2.05 7,543 . . 2.22 916 1.58 1,157 2.02 2,858 2.23 2,612
         Dec . 2.06 8,434 . . 2.23 1,060 1.80 1,024 2.01 3,345 2.15 3,005
2015          Jan . 1.79 10,246 . . 2.16 1,063 1.82 1,061 1.93 3,426 1.60 4,696
         Feb . 1.89 8,025 . . 2.31 895 1.69 945 1.77 3,166 1.96 3,019
         Mar . 1.79 9,735 . . 2.12 1,130 1.68 1,050 1.69 3,663 1.82 3,892
         Apr . 1.87 9,786 . . 2.07 1,083 1.59 1,021 1.63 3,549 2.09 4,133
         May . 1.68 9,274 . . 2.16 879 1.56 849 1.54 3,669 1.74 3,877
         June . 1.76 11,133 . . 2.02 1,096 1.59 1,090 1.65 4,502 1.84 4,445
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          June
9.46 44,696 9.53 38,374 15.53 3,657 4.70 69,615 4.71 69,358
         July 9.37 42,604 9.42 36,390 15.48 3,630 4.50 65,960 4.52 65,707
         Aug 9.27 41,864 9.37 35,283 15.46 3,721 4.45 65,743 4.46 65,562
         Sep 9.40 44,311 9.51 37,656 15.43 3,783 4.51 66,516 4.52 66,287
         Oct 9.27 42,611 9.34 36,051 15.44 3,770 4.45 62,839 4.46 62,600
         Nov 9.20 40,795 9.22 34,390 15.44 3,788 4.36 64,435 4.38 64,185
         Dec 9.20 42,857 9.27 36,194 15.42 3,815 4.31 63,192 4.33 62,988
2015          Jan 9.22 41,793 9.23 35,380 15.45 3,799 4.31 63,695 4.32 63,497
         Feb 9.22 41,287 9.24 34,873 15.42 3,786 4.24 66,274 4.25 66,045
         Mar 9.21 43,126 9.25 36,566 15.39 3,817 4.21 66,465 4.22 66,233
         Apr 9.10 41,749 9.16 35,136 15.44 3,751 4.15 64,534 4.17 64,316
         May 8.99 41,166 9.03 34,577 15.44 3,755 4.09 65,569 4.10 65,334
         June 9.01 43,158 9.06 36,404 15.28 3,864 4.08 68,156 4.09 67,925
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          June 2.04 57,877 . . 2.97 7,766 3.64 923 2.61 1,041 1.72 40,152 2.36 2,439 2.47 5,556
         July 1.98 65,104 . . 2.78 8,177 3.36 1,417 2.57 1,272 1.68 46,449 2.51 2,271 2.60 5,518
         Aug 1.89 46,871 . . 2.77 6,155 3.28 1,125 2.48 1,081 1.57 32,347 2.13 1,894 2.40 4,269         Sep 1.91 59,512 . . 2.76 7,508 3.27 1,240 2.38 1,129 1.64 42,008 2.35 1,720 2.25 5,907
         Oct 1.86 64,549 . . 2.66 8,157 3.19 1,363 2.33 1,186 1.57 44,153 2.50 3,154 2.17 6,536
         Nov 1.87 48,253 . . 2.72 6,787 3.18 1,115 2.19 1,073 1.57 32,338 2.54 1,669 2.04 5,271         Dec 1.87 72,853 1.94 21,021 2.75 7,808 3.01 1,630 2.19 1,648 1.63 48,092 2.06 3,080 2.04 10,595
2015          Jan 1.67 66,661 1.60 27,284 2.62 7,524 3.09 1,283 1.42 3,073 1.45 45,278 1.90 2,366 1.88 7,137
         Feb 1.59 53,118 1.43 18,293 2.69 6,474 3.04 1,123 2.02 1,159 1.28 37,674 1.63 1,526 1.97 5,162         Mar 1.73 62,691 1.76 20,557 2.67 8,150 2.94 1,516 1.98 1,510 1.49 41,003 1.63 2,066 1.75 8,446
         Apr 1.68 57,793 1.68 21,847 2.53 7,621 3.00 1,359 1.89 1,344 1.43 40,212 1.75 1,671 1.89 5,586
         May 1.66 50,883 1.63 16,561 2.60 6,817 2.91 1,277 1.87 1,334 1.38 33,591 1.92 1,496 1.75 6,368         June 1.71 68,795 1.86 19,609 2.60 8,010 2.87 1,487 1.99 1,733 1.43 44,095 1.90 2,647 1.95 10,823
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          June 2.25 9,427 . . 2.89 934 2.57 98 2.48 325 2.09 5,264 2.39 1,238 2.24 1,568
         July 2.24 13,499 . . 2.56 1,231 2.48 178 2.46 417 2.02 9,087 2.62 892 2.90 1,694
         Aug 2.17 7,240 . . 2.79 799 2.40 105 2.37 286 1.92 4,449 2.58 938 2.43 663         Sep 2.12 9,969 . . 2.70 908 2.39 115 2.25 325 1.97 6,516 3.06 515 2.04 1,590
         Oct 2.02 13,859 . . 2.43 1,148 2.35 136 2.27 347 1.77 9,522 3.44 848 2.35 1,858
         Nov 1.94 7,869 . . 2.68 822 2.30 79 2.03 323 1.72 4,873 2.21 695 2.10 1,077         Dec 1.86 14,470 . . 2.54 1,023 2.36 184 2.02 470 1.72 8,250 1.95 1,274 1.89 3,269
2015          Jan 1.64 16,136 . . 2.36 1,101 2.52 141 1.13 2,270 1.70 8,979 1.76 821 1.49 2,824
         Feb 1.83 7,345 . . 2.66 791 2.44 101 1.79 409 1.70 4,714 2.13 172 1.72 1,158         Mar 1.78 11,957 . . 2.52 935 2.42 128 1.76 502 1.77 6,868 1.72 658 1.55 2,866
         Apr 1.76 10,572 . . 2.35 981 2.62 123 1.61 440 1.66 7,028 2.08 406 1.75 1,594
         May 1.84 7,214 . . 2.61 735 2.51 102 1.68 479 1.71 4,202 2.05 427 1.77 1,269         June 1.82 11,337 . . 2.60 789 2.51 133 1.84 561 1.63 6,208 1.90 677 1.94 2,969
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.3 2,164.2 540.7 318.4 283.8 224.6 670.4 63.6 62.7 72.1
2014 2,423.8 2,346.7 522.3 386.9 292.8 231.0 783.2 66.1 64.5 77.1
2013          Q2 2,195.8 2,127.1 554.5 302.8 279.8 224.8 638.8 62.1 64.2 68.7
         Q3 2,214.6 2,144.2 547.3 308.4 283.1 224.5 654.7 62.8 63.4 70.4
         Q4 2,236.3 2,164.2 540.7 318.4 283.8 224.6 670.4 63.6 62.7 72.1
2014          Q1 2,296.8 2,223.5 542.3 336.3 286.8 226.0 703.1 65.5 63.4 73.3
         Q2 2,340.9 2,267.0 538.6 353.5 288.1 226.9 731.3 65.5 63.3 73.9
         Q3 2,378.3 2,303.2 530.3 373.5 289.0 227.7 753.1 65.7 64.0 75.1
         Q4 2,423.8 2,346.7 522.3 386.9 292.8 231.0 783.2 66.1 64.5 77.1
2015          Q1 2,548.3 2,470.3 517.8 421.2 300.2 248.1 847.3 68.8 66.9 78.0
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,741.0 1,694.6 382.9 271.4 256.9 211.1 462.4 59.2 50.9 46.4
2014 1,884.3 1,835.3 367.8 330.4 265.3 215.8 542.8 61.4 52.0 48.9
2013          Q2 1,716.4 1,672.3 397.9 259.9 253.6 211.9 438.5 57.9 52.7 44.1
         Q3 1,727.7 1,682.3 390.1 264.3 256.2 211.3 450.1 58.5 51.7 45.4
         Q4 1,741.0 1,694.6 382.9 271.4 256.9 211.1 462.4 59.2 50.9 46.4
2014          Q1 1,790.4 1,743.4 382.0 288.8 259.6 212.2 488.3 61.1 51.4 47.0
         Q2 1,823.4 1,776.1 378.0 303.1 260.9 212.9 509.0 61.0 51.2 47.4
         Q3 1,853.3 1,805.0 371.7 319.3 262.0 213.4 525.7 61.1 51.7 48.3
         Q4 1,884.3 1,835.3 367.8 330.4 265.3 215.8 542.8 61.4 52.0 48.9
2015          Q1 1,988.8 1,939.5 362.9 360.8 272.4 232.1 592.9 64.1 54.2 49.4
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 495.3 469.5 157.8 47.0 27.0 13.5 208.1 4.4 11.8 25.7
2014 539.6 511.4 154.6 56.5 27.5 15.2 240.5 4.6 12.5 28.2
2013          Q2 479.4 454.8 156.6 43.0 26.2 13.0 200.2 4.2 11.6 24.6
         Q3 486.9 461.9 157.2 44.1 26.8 13.2 204.6 4.3 11.7 25.0
         Q4 495.3 469.5 157.8 47.0 27.0 13.5 208.1 4.4 11.8 25.7
2014          Q1 506.4 480.1 160.3 47.5 27.2 13.8 214.8 4.5 12.0 26.3
         Q2 517.5 491.0 160.6 50.4 27.2 14.0 222.3 4.5 12.1 26.5
         Q3 525.0 498.2 158.6 54.2 27.1 14.2 227.4 4.5 12.2 26.8
         Q4 539.6 511.4 154.6 56.5 27.5 15.2 240.5 4.6 12.5 28.2
2015          Q1 559.5 530.9 155.0 60.3 27.7 16.1 254.3 4.7 12.7 28.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013 2,236.3 16.9 81.7 197.7 1,792.9 1,516.1 276.8 70.5 76.6
2014 2,423.8 17.3 85.6 202.7 1,883.1 1,594.2 288.8 73.3 161.8
2013          Q2 2,195.8 17.8 80.3 172.1 1,757.4 1,480.6 276.8 71.3 96.8
         Q3 2,214.6 16.5 81.7 177.0 1,771.9 1,495.8 276.1 70.8 96.7
         Q4 2,236.3 16.9 81.7 197.7 1,792.9 1,516.1 276.8 70.5 76.6
2014          Q1 2,296.8 16.3 83.3 191.3 1,826.3 1,540.1 286.2 72.0 107.5
         Q2 2,340.9 16.2 83.8 184.1 1,843.6 1,557.5 286.1 72.3 141.0
         Q3 2,378.3 17.6 84.3 188.0 1,857.4 1,570.7 286.7 72.6 158.4
         Q4 2,423.8 17.3 85.6 202.7 1,883.1 1,594.2 288.8 73.3 161.8
2015          Q1 2,548.3 17.7 89.3 241.0 1,938.3 1,634.7 303.6 76.0 186.0
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,741.0 16.9 77.5 188.7 1,337.8 1,061.4 276.4 68.7 51.3
2014 1,884.3 17.3 81.2 193.4 1,400.1 1,111.8 288.4 71.4 120.8
2013          Q2 1,716.4 17.8 76.2 164.5 1,317.4 1,041.0 276.4 69.5 70.9
         Q3 1,727.7 16.5 77.6 169.1 1,326.3 1,050.6 275.7 69.0 69.1
         Q4 1,741.0 16.9 77.5 188.7 1,337.8 1,061.4 276.4 68.7 51.3
2014          Q1 1,790.4 16.3 79.0 182.8 1,365.2 1,079.4 285.8 70.2 76.9
         Q2 1,823.4 16.2 79.5 175.8 1,376.7 1,091.1 285.6 70.4 104.8
         Q3 1,853.3 17.6 80.0 179.5 1,386.1 1,099.9 286.2 70.7 119.3
         Q4 1,884.3 17.3 81.2 193.4 1,400.1 1,111.8 288.4 71.4 120.8
2015          Q1 1,988.8 17.7 84.8 230.3 1,445.0 1,141.9 303.1 74.0 137.0
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 495.3 − 4.2 8.9 455.1 454.6 0.5 1.8 25.3
2014 539.6 − 4.4 9.3 482.9 482.4 0.5 2.0 41.0
2013          Q2 479.4 − 4.1 7.6 440.1 439.6 0.4 1.8 25.9
         Q3 486.9 − 4.1 7.9 445.6 445.1 0.4 1.8 27.5
         Q4 495.3 − 4.2 8.9 455.1 454.6 0.5 1.8 25.3
2014          Q1 506.4 − 4.2 8.5 461.1 460.6 0.5 1.9 30.6
         Q2 517.5 − 4.3 8.3 466.9 466.4 0.5 1.9 36.2
         Q3 525.0 − 4.3 8.5 471.2 470.8 0.5 1.9 39.1
         Q4 539.6 − 4.4 9.3 482.9 482.4 0.5 2.0 41.0
2015          Q1 559.5 − 4.5 10.7 493.3 492.8 0.5 2.0 49.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing pro- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
visions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2015
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 54,952 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,370 − 1,139 − 42,017 − 3,573 44,450 56,092
2013 − 9,340 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 92,275 23,033 − 25,778 − 12,708 61,521 − 32,374
2014 68,533 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 100,493 49,539 − 12,128 − 11,951 73,618 18,994
2014          Aug 10,406 14,890 4,695 − 1,327 11,523 − 4,485 − 5,222 − 2,744 − 1,666 − 812 15,628
         Sep 7,891 − 7,661 − 4,017 − 218 − 3,426 15,551 15,169 7,579 − 373 7,963 − 7,279
         Oct 5,342 − 2,321 − 6,304 − 1,626 5,609 7,663 6,756 − 5,699 − 981 13,436 − 1,414
         Nov 20,323 2,177 − 4,561 − 305 7,044 18,145 10,445 8,392 − 660 2,713 9,877
         Dec − 23,629 − 23,897 − 7,257 227 − 16,867 268 − 4,942 − 15,489 27 10,520 − 18,687
2015          Jan 23,198 12,020 9,062 2,258 700 11,178 1,533 11,589 − 736 − 9,320 21,665
         Feb 18,624 8,157 4,938 5,576 − 2,357 10,467 25,502 − 4,119 681 28,940 − 6,879
         Mar 12,043 − 5,223 − 3,851 2,007 − 3,379 17,266 26,677 2,266 12,589 11,822 − 14,635
         Apr 8,386 4,097 6,508 3,328 − 5,740 4,289 8,469 − 15,908 11,397 12,980 − 83
         May 936 − 506 − 13,628 1,127 11,994 1,442 8,063 − 9,509 13,328 4,244 − 7,127
         June − 23,998 − 25,695 − 10,836 − 3,872 − 10,987 1,697 − 3,612 − 13,948 11,393 − 1,057 − 20,386
  
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 17,426 5,120 12,306 16,126 10,259 5,867 1,300
2013 29,243 10,106 19,137 24,322 11,991 12,331 4,921
2014 45,491 18,778 26,713 33,307 17,078 16,229 12,184
2014          Aug − 1,413 291 − 1,704 − 2,860 − 2,003 − 857 1,447
         Sep 4,140 4,218 − 78 − 3,667 1,111 − 4,778 7,807
         Oct − 1,951 1,221 − 3,172 − 8,030 − 4,565 − 3,465 6,079
         Nov − 270 245 − 515 2,412 2,047 365 − 2,682
         Dec 11,881 189 11,692 12,527 7,310 5,217 − 646
2015          Jan 735 78 657 6,696 7,111 − 415 − 5,961
         Feb 3,393 117 3,276 − 3,057 − 5,160 2,103 6,450
         Mar 388 49 339 − 5,103 8,523 − 13,626 5,491
         Apr 2,706 1,751 955 7,164 6,803 361 − 4,458
         May 11,766 155 11,611 9,720 − 5,586 15,306 2,046
         June 4,525 1,277 3,248 − 6,485 − 4,057 − 2,428 11,010
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2014          Nov 105,190 67,032 2,191 315 50,578 13,948 6,956 31,202 −
         Dec 98,708 66,890 731 928 50,249 14,981 6,515 25,303 −
2015          Jan 139,925 90,524 3,485 795 63,247 22,996 6,550 42,851 −
         Feb 129,489 87,976 3,401 1,493 64,175 18,907 7,601 33,912 −
         Mar 128,867 81,088 3,531 1,598 56,183 19,775 11,000 36,779 −
         Apr 125,845 74,835 2,844 1,159 50,226 20,605 15,536 35,474 −
         May 88,059 53,509 1,616 914 39,135 11,844 4,488 30,062 −
         June 89,201 56,164 3,128 627 38,323 14,085 4,311 28,726 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2014          Nov 32,395 15,177 1,117 212 8,119 5,728 3,878 13,340 −
         Dec 27,575 11,748 731 858 2,963 7,195 3,729 12,098 −
2015          Jan 44,986 19,854 3,185 400 9,064 7,205 2,400 22,733 −
         Feb 34,715 15,495 2,581 887 4,767 7,260 3,704 15,516 −         Mar 31,221 12,771 2,374 1,548 1,548 7,301 6,717 11,733 −
         Apr 49,360 22,094 2,813 663 10,892 7,726 11,404 15,862 −
         May 20,791 6,990 1,285 414 1,219 4,072 2,200 11,601 −         June 30,382 16,718 3,061 524 8,526 4,608 1,715 11,949 −
Net sales  6 
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2014          Nov 5,589 − 3,094 1,248 − 3,078 − 444 − 818 312 8,372 −
         Dec − 27,860 − 12,169 − 734 − 1,623 − 4,150 − 5,662 523 − 16,214 − 122
2015          Jan 10,747 17,476 1,453 − 284 9,886 6,421 1,547 − 8,277 −
         Feb 11,007 8,697 − 601 − 708 11,970 − 1,964 4,979 − 2,669 − 1,250         Mar − 5,487 − 3,480 2,318 298 − 3,224 − 2,871 1,958 − 3,965 −
         Apr 1,355 1,980 1,392 − 1,843 981 1,450 2,540 − 3,164 −
         May − 4,331 − 14,849 − 1,269 − 76 − 7,711 − 5,793 612 9,905 −         June − 28,026 − 14,649 − 1,654 − 4,181 − 1,319 − 7,494 − 2,804 − 10,573 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2015
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2014          Dec 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015          Jan 3,122,055 1,248,922 122,781 85,150 579,295 461,695 233,890 1,639,243 7,797
         Feb 3,133,061 1,257,618 122,180 84,442 591,265 459,731 238,838 1,636,605 6,547
         Mar 3,127,575 1,254,139 124,498 84,741 588,041 456,859 240,796 1,632,640 6,547
         Apr 3,128,930 1,256,119 125,890 82,898 589,022 458,310 243,336 1,629,476 6,547
         May 3,124,599 1,241,270 124,620 82,822 581,311 452,517 243,948 1,639,381 6,547
         June 3,096,573 1,226,621 122,966 78,641 579,992 445,023 241,144 1,628,808 6,547
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2015 
1,118,365 545,170 40,646 36,439 251,379 216,707 50,125 523,069 2,969    less than 2
641,650 276,211 35,046 20,422 141,074 79,670 38,216 327,221 278 2 to less than 4
442,756 174,756 23,728 10,503 92,398 48,128 41,056 226,947 179 4 to less than 6
309,773 86,665 12,630 4,310 40,711 29,014 23,893 199,214 523 6 to less than 8
221,900 60,310 7,879 4,877 24,510 23,045 11,926 149,665 1,092 8 to less than 10
103,576 30,638 2,785 1,872 13,587 12,393 10,224 62,714 530 10 to less than 15
58,508 11,120 40 107 5,253 5,721 7,492 39,895 10 15 to less than 20
200,047 41,750 213 110 11,081 30,346 58,213 100,083 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2014          Dec 177,097 546 178 1 625 − − 11 13 − 260 1,478,063
2015          Jan 177,103 6 73 11 13 − 0 − 30 − 61 1,595,237
         Feb 177,200 97 87 1 64 − 0 − 20 − 35 1,690,516
         Mar 177,159 − 41 43 − 78 − − 47 − 16 − 99 1,773,480
         Apr 177,577 418 461 10 − − − 36 29 − 47 1,715,289
         May 177,532 − 45 106 − 4 − − 44 − 73 − 38 1,709,211
         June 178,051 519 330 251 202 − − 37 − 154 − 73 1,645,417
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015          Feb 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.7 2.2 140.18 116.47 543.06 11,401.66
         Mar 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.6 2.1 140.52 118.05 567.47 11,966.17
         Apr 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.7 2.0 139.85 116.16 543.36 11,454.38
         May 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 1.1 2.2 139.56 114.65 534.29 11,413.82         June 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.7 1.5 2.4 138.37 111.96 512.30 10,944.97
         July 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 1.4 2.4 139.21 113.45 530.65 11,308.99
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,609 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,667 115,031 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,093 23,229 − 3,4222013 123,276 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,939 117,189 771 100 116,418 31,838 6,086
2014 127,129 88,804 4,177 − 471 1,431 944 84,627 38,324 132,773 969 − 1,753 131,804 40,077 − 5,6422014          Dec 8,926
p)9,846 p) 100 p)−2 0 p)−3 3 p) 316 p)9,746 − 920 9,862 − 1,329 − 1,696 11,191 776 − 936
2015          Jan 23,837 21,924 3,817 − 69 3,058 433 18,106 1,913 22,381 2,405 1,434 19,976 479 1,456
         Feb 25,786 19,185 4,085 − 20 3,661 386 15,100 6,601 23,346 1,001 355 22,345 6,246 2,440         Mar 23,298 14,363 1,673 − 43 669 433 12,690 8,934 22,494 1,968 1,450 20,526 7,484 803
         Apr 12,804 10,144 136 − 11 − 799 221 10,008 2,660 16,252 1,496 897 14,756 1,763 − 3,448
         May 11,011 6,520 1,285 129 805 − 50 5,236 4,490 11,155 1,899 619 9,256 3,871 − 145         June 11,444 10,457 1,132 141 107 769 9,325 986 11,483 360 − 531 11,123 1,517 − 39
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 1.51 0.61 −10.67 15.19 − 13.00 − 7.22 14.39 − 4.85 − 7.70
Debt securities − 2.65 0.18 − 1.63 − 0.58 1.52 0.29 0.10 − 3.53 − 1.47
short-term debt securities − 2.61 1.56 1.62 − 0.38 1.79 − 0.13 − 0.44 0.40 − 1.06
long-term debt securities − 0.03 − 1.39 − 3.24 − 0.20 − 0.27 0.42 0.54 − 3.93 − 0.42
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.87 − 1.27 − 1.88 − 1.10 − 0.26 1.05 0.06 − 2.74 − 0.07
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53
Financial corporations . − 2.14 − 1.26 − 0.25 − 0.37 0.05 − 0.43 − 0.52 0.75
General government . 0.07 − 0.57 − 0.31 0.08 0.66 0.80 − 2.12 − 0.28
Debt securities of the rest of the world 2.22 1.44 0.26 0.53 1.78 − 0.76 0.04 − 0.80 − 1.40
Loans 20.32 39.05 37.97 − 7.61 8.38 2.43 15.88 11.27 15.90
short-term loans 9.78 55.02 33.50 7.44 7.12 5.98 16.25 4.14 19.42
long-term loans 10.54 −15.96 4.47 − 15.05 1.27 − 3.55 − 0.37 7.13 − 3.52
Memo item
to domestic sectors 19.11 31.97 34.43 0.23 5.91 5.94 7.63 14.96 9.44
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 20.25 0.31 − 0.16 1.75 5.10 13.56 − 3.08
Financial corporations 9.73 1.92 14.36 − 0.13 6.12 4.23 2.57 1.45 12.52
General government 0.50 0.21 − 0.18 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 0.00
to the rest of the world 1.21 7.09 3.54 − 7.83 2.47 − 3.51 8.26 − 3.69 6.46
Equity and investment fund shares 36.64 20.02 3.79 6.29 8.57 − 2.78 9.06 − 11.05 8.53
Equity 36.84 12.37 14.17 3.94 7.40 − 0.61 7.93 − 0.56 0.38
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 8.70 − 1.62 1.05 − 0.93 − 0.69 2.77 − 2.76 − 16.68
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10
Financial corporations . − 0.95 3.78 − 0.06 0.02 0.10 0.47 3.19 − 2.59
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 1.41 6.96 0.16 1.91 6.20 − 1.22 0.08 9.33
Other equity 1 38.27 2.27 8.83 2.73 6.42 − 6.11 6.39 2.13 7.73
Investment fund shares − 0.20 7.65 −10.38 2.35 1.17 − 2.18 1.13 − 10.50 8.15
Money market fund shares 0.03 − 0.15 0.23 − 0.27 0.48 − 0.16 − 0.01 − 0.08 − 0.25
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 0.22 7.80 −10.61 2.62 0.68 − 2.02 1.14 − 10.41 8.40
Insurance technical reserves 1.34 2.82 2.95 0.76 0.72 0.72 0.77 0.75 0.76
Financial derivatives 0.72 6.49 6.01 0.62 − 2.80 − 0.38 − 0.25 9.44 3.56
Other accounts receivable 87.03 161.91 −78.52 23.53 2.75 − 24.65 − 20.29 − 36.32 − 36.73
Total 141.89 231.08 −40.09 38.22 6.14 − 31.60 19.67 − 34.29 − 17.15
External financing
Debt securities 18.72 12.78 1.26 0.94 1.18 − 6.30 2.05 4.32 3.58
short-term securities − 1.58 − 1.12 −11.63 − 4.13 − 2.75 − 6.35 − 1.65 − 0.88 1.26
long-term securities 20.30 13.90 12.89 5.07 3.93 0.05 3.70 5.20 2.32
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 5.28 5.26 0.20 2.47 1.78 − 0.14 1.15 1.07
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53
Financial corporations . 3.03 5.11 0.74 2.34 1.12 0.25 1.41 1.38
General government . − 0.05 0.00 0.00 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Households . 1.50 0.20 0.01 0.11 0.32 − 0.07 − 0.16 0.22
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 7.50 − 4.00 0.74 − 1.29 − 8.08 2.19 3.17 2.51
Loans 5.64 49.03 29.86 4.76 17.02 27.45 − 17.96 3.35 22.35
short-term loans 7.80 42.81 − 5.16 − 4.13 13.34 13.89 − 12.47 − 19.92 17.86
long-term loans − 2.16 6.22 35.02 8.89 3.68 13.56 − 5.49 23.27 4.49
Memo item
from domestic sectors −16.12 17.24 49.47 − 9.66 20.54 20.69 − 7.79 16.03 11.26
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 20.25 0.31 − 0.16 1.75 5.10 13.56 − 3.08
Financial corporations − 8.62 9.02 18.70 − 9.69 20.29 8.77 − 4.11 − 6.26 23.59
General government −16.37 −21.62 10.53 − 0.27 0.41 10.17 − 8.78 8.72 − 9.26
from the rest of the world 21.77 31.74 −19.61 14.42 − 3.52 6.76 − 10.17 − 12.68 11.10
Equity 12.74 15.94 23.88 7.73 2.31 2.57 5.05 13.95 − 0.70
Listed shares of domestic sectors . − 4.57 − 1.62 − 7.00 3.33 − 0.32 0.72 − 5.35 − 13.75
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10
Financial corporations . − 5.02 0.93 − 3.98 4.41 − 0.01 − 2.49 − 0.98 5.78
General government . − 0.98 0.05 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00
Households . − 8.21 2.80 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.47 0.90 1.57 − 5.43
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 7.90 10.36 8.38 − 2.71 2.18 3.58 7.31 14.01
Other equity 1 9.44 12.60 15.13 6.35 1.69 0.70 0.75 11.99 − 0.97
Insurance technical reserves 7.69 6.00 6.00 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 8.09 3.72 16.75 − 4.03 2.28 2.46 2.47 9.55 9.92
Other accounts payable 18.75 31.21 3.90 − 0.35 − 2.16 − 1.28 17.35 − 10.00 30.91
Total 71.63 118.67 81.65 10.55 22.13 26.40 10.46 22.66 67.56
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 413.7 411.8 406.4 411.8 372.5 359.0 389.9 406.4 385.0
Debt securities 51.9 48.6 47.5 48.6 50.4 50.9 51.1 47.5 46.5
short-term debt securities 3.6 5.1 6.8 5.1 6.9 6.8 6.4 6.8 5.7
long-term debt securities 48.3 43.5 40.8 43.5 43.4 44.1 44.7 40.8 40.8
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 24.6 22.9 24.6 24.4 25.5 25.6 22.9 23.0
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1
Financial corporations . 13.8 12.7 13.8 13.5 13.6 13.2 12.7 13.5
General government . 6.1 5.7 6.1 6.2 6.9 7.7 5.7 5.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 24.0 24.6 24.0 26.0 25.4 25.5 24.6 23.5
Loans 411.5 456.6 498.9 456.6 463.4 470.0 487.9 498.9 515.6
short-term loans 291.4 351.7 386.0 351.7 357.4 364.7 382.1 386.0 404.5
long-term loans 120.1 104.9 112.9 104.9 106.0 105.3 105.8 112.9 111.1
Memo item
to domestic sectors 284.8 316.7 351.2 316.7 322.7 328.6 336.2 351.2 358.3
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.6 227.4 227.2 229.0 234.1 247.6 244.6
Financial corporations 80.9 82.9 97.2 82.9 89.0 93.2 95.8 97.2 107.4
General government 6.3 6.5 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.3 6.3
to the rest of the world 126.7 139.8 147.8 139.8 140.8 141.4 151.7 147.8 157.3
Equity and investment fund shares 1,627.3 1,785.9 1,878.6 1,785.9 1,787.6 1,810.9 1,848.2 1,878.6 2,103.1
Equity 1,498.3 1,647.8 1,743.1 1,647.8 1,646.7 1,669.0 1,703.0 1,743.1 1,952.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 275.4 262.2 275.4 266.3 266.0 254.6 262.2 290.6
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1
Financial corporations . 5.7 10.0 5.7 5.7 5.5 5.7 10.0 7.4
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 52.2 59.9 52.2 54.8 61.1 59.9 59.9 70.9
Other equity 1 1,229.3 1,320.2 1,421.0 1,320.2 1,325.7 1,341.8 1,388.5 1,421.0 1,590.6
Investment fund shares 129.0 138.1 135.5 138.1 140.9 141.9 145.2 135.5 151.0
Money market fund shares − 1.1 1.2 1.1 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.2 0.9
Non-MMF investment fund shares 129.0 137.0 134.4 137.0 139.3 140.4 143.9 134.4 150.1
Insurance technical reserves 43.3 46.1 49.2 46.1 46.9 47.6 48.4 49.2 50.0
Financial derivatives 18.0 16.8 22.8 16.8 14.0 13.6 13.3 22.8 26.3Other accounts receivable 824.2 893.2 873.3 893.2 874.1 859.7 866.3 873.3 912.3
Total 3,389.8 3,659.1 3,776.7 3,659.1 3,608.9 3,611.7 3,705.2 3,776.7 4,038.9
Liabilities
Debt securities 130.9 138.9 150.9 138.9 142.5 138.0 143.1 150.9 159.5
short-term securities 14.6 13.4 1.8 13.4 10.7 4.4 2.7 1.8 2.3
long-term securities 116.3 125.4 149.1 125.4 131.8 133.6 140.4 149.1 157.1
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 51.6 60.6 51.6 55.3 57.9 59.1 60.6 54.8
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1
Financial corporations . 31.3 40.3 31.3 34.9 36.7 38.4 40.3 34.2
General government . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . 15.6 15.8 15.6 15.7 16.2 16.0 15.8 16.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 87.3 90.2 87.3 87.2 80.0 83.9 90.2 104.7
Loans 1,341.5 1,429.1 1,438.0 1,429.1 1,438.3 1,467.2 1,450.9 1,438.0 1,464.9
short-term loans 429.0 486.8 480.9 486.8 499.5 512.1 501.9 480.9 502.2
long-term loans 912.5 942.3 957.1 942.3 938.8 955.1 949.0 957.1 962.7
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,064.9 1,114.8 1,140.1 1,114.8 1,132.1 1,149.7 1,140.8 1,140.1 1,150.0
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.6 227.4 227.2 229.0 234.1 247.6 244.6
Financial corporations 816.6 820.8 821.5 820.8 838.7 848.1 842.8 821.5 845.0
General government 50.8 66.7 71.0 66.7 66.1 72.6 63.9 71.0 60.4
from the rest of the world 276.7 314.3 297.9 314.3 306.2 317.5 310.1 297.9 314.9
Equity 2,127.9 2,433.5 2,535.1 2,433.5 2,443.3 2,464.9 2,425.1 2,535.1 2,852.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 567.9 554.2 567.9 565.0 569.4 538.5 554.2 647.0
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1
Financial corporations . 120.3 121.2 120.3 124.4 125.6 116.7 121.2 152.0
General government . 31.2 32.2 31.2 30.5 32.0 30.5 32.2 38.5
Households . 146.6 148.7 146.6 149.6 151.2 142.4 148.7 173.4
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 674.8 735.7 674.8 684.2 696.5 678.5 735.7 874.2
Other equity 1 1,132.8 1,190.9 1,245.2 1,190.9 1,194.2 1,198.9 1,208.1 1,245.2 1,331.2
Insurance technical reserves 237.5 243.5 249.5 243.5 245.0 246.5 248.0 249.5 251.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 40.2 37.3 54.0 37.3 39.5 42.0 44.4 54.0 63.9
Other accounts payable 956.9 980.2 1,013.9 980.2 959.4 957.3 991.6 1,013.9 1,061.8
Total 4,834.9 5,262.5 5,441.4 5,262.5 5,268.1 5,315.8 5,303.1 5,441.4 5,853.3
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 74.42 66.59 83.78 29.08 13.04 19.19 17.01 34.54 16.83
Currency − 0.05 10.80 13.58 0.07 5.27 3.52 3.99 0.80 6.44
Deposits 74.47 55.79 70.19 29.01 7.77 15.67 13.01 33.75 10.39
Transferable deposits 90.08 89.41 73.84 28.95 8.42 19.91 11.88 33.62 19.30
Time deposits − 5.21 − 9.78 8.76 1.47 2.37 1.31 0.94 4.14 − 2.32
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) −10.39 −23.85 −12.41 − 1.40 − 3.03 − 5.56 0.19 − 4.01 − 6.59
Debt securities −17.39 −17.81 −18.00 − 2.47 − 2.12 − 2.52 − 7.47 − 5.89 − 7.38
short-term debt securities − 0.26 − 0.36 − 0.67 − 0.20 0.11 − 0.08 − 0.39 − 0.32 0.29
long-term debt securities −17.13 −17.45 −17.33 − 2.28 − 2.24 − 2.44 − 7.09 − 5.57 − 7.66
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . −14.86 −15.08 − 2.53 − 2.27 − 2.64 − 5.92 − 4.25 − 4.76
Non-financial corporations . 1.24 0.02 − 0.07 0.09 0.27 − 0.11 − 0.23 0.21
Financial corporations . −12.46 −12.52 − 1.79 − 1.77 − 2.25 − 4.92 − 3.58 − 4.05
General government . − 3.64 − 2.58 − 0.67 − 0.60 − 0.65 − 0.89 − 0.44 − 0.91
Debt securities of the rest of the world . − 2.94 − 2.93 0.06 0.15 0.12 − 1.56 − 1.64 − 2.62
Equity and investment fund shares − 3.51 9.63 36.87 − 3.89 8.19 10.69 7.55 10.43 4.53
Equity − 0.08 − 0.41 12.17 − 4.36 3.44 3.79 1.00 3.94 − 6.26
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . − 5.63 4.61 − 4.89 0.51 2.07 0.25 1.79 − 6.53
Non-financial corporations . − 5.29 2.69 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.44 0.85 1.55 − 5.50
Financial corporations . − 0.35 1.93 − 0.76 0.66 1.63 − 0.60 0.23 − 1.03
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 2.99 3.70 0.50 1.91 0.65 0.08 1.06 0.66
Other equity 1 2.58 2.24 3.86 0.03 1.02 1.06 0.68 1.10 − 0.39
Investment fund shares − 3.42 10.04 24.70 0.47 4.75 6.91 6.55 6.49 10.79
Money market fund shares 0.46 − 0.30 − 0.34 0.14 − 0.20 − 0.16 − 0.10 0.12 − 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 3.88 10.34 25.04 0.33 4.95 7.07 6.65 6.37 10.94
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.62 26.02 14.79 6.42 3.69 3.70 3.66 3.74 3.75
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 26.68 29.45 30.74 7.50 15.73 6.57 4.32 4.12 13.74
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.37 19.07 30.20 3.39 7.04 6.67 5.34 11.15 9.13
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 17.22 13.30 −21.09 − 7.30 0.27 − 7.79 3.95 − 17.52 12.15
Total 147.42 146.25 157.28 32.72 45.83 36.52 34.35 40.58 52.76
  External financing
Loans 15.65 11.25 19.89 0.50 0.36 5.93 9.39 4.21 3.62
short-term loans − 1.16 − 3.31 − 1.98 − 1.44 0.83 0.50 − 1.26 − 2.04 1.00
long-term loans 16.81 14.56 21.87 1.93 − 0.46 5.43 10.65 6.25 2.63
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.59 18.18 24.17 3.64 0.75 5.75 9.30 8.36 2.34
Consumer loans − 0.99 − 0.30 1.21 − 1.19 1.46 0.13 1.33 − 1.71 1.57
Entrepreneurial loans − 1.95 − 6.64 − 5.49 − 1.95 − 1.84 0.04 − 1.25 − 2.44 − 0.29
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 15.17 12.60 18.87 2.07 − 0.99 6.10 9.60 4.17 3.27
Loans from other financial institutions 0.48 − 1.31 1.02 − 1.57 1.35 − 0.17 − 0.21 0.05 0.35
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 − 0.05 0.00 − 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.36 − 0.01 0.38 − 0.26 0.19 − 0.02 0.30 − 0.09 0.36
Total 17.01 11.24 20.27 0.24 0.55 5.91 9.68 4.12 3.98
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,847.6 1,914.0 1,997.6 1,914.0 1,926.8 1,945.9 1,963.0 1,997.6 2,016.0
Currency 104.4 115.2 128.8 115.2 120.5 124.0 128.0 128.8 135.3
Deposits 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,868.7 1,798.8 1,806.3 1,821.9 1,835.0 1,868.7 1,880.8
Transferable deposits 818.3 907.8 981.4 907.8 916.0 935.9 947.8 981.4 1,000.6
Time deposits 255.9 245.9 254.7 245.9 248.2 249.5 250.5 254.7 254.0
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 669.0 645.1 632.7 645.1 642.1 636.5 636.7 632.7 626.1
Debt securities 200.1 179.0 162.2 179.0 177.7 176.4 168.9 162.2 156.8
short-term debt securities 3.1 2.7 2.1 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.4
long-term debt securities 197.0 176.3 160.1 176.3 174.9 173.6 166.5 160.1 154.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 116.9 102.4 116.9 115.1 112.9 107.1 102.4 98.6
Non-financial corporations . 14.2 14.1 14.2 14.2 14.7 14.5 14.1 14.8
Financial corporations . 90.7 78.7 90.7 89.4 87.4 82.6 78.7 75.1
General government . 12.0 9.6 12.0 11.5 10.9 10.0 9.6 8.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 62.0 59.8 62.0 62.7 63.4 61.8 59.8 58.2
Equity and investment fund shares 820.2 885.9 951.4 885.9 901.6 923.4 928.9 951.4 1,051.1
Equity 446.8 487.6 508.9 487.6 496.3 502.8 497.2 508.9 563.4
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . 167.4 169.7 167.4 170.5 171.5 163.0 169.7 197.9
Non-financial corporations . 140.4 142.1 140.4 143.3 144.9 136.2 142.1 165.4
Financial corporations . 26.9 27.6 26.9 27.1 26.6 26.9 27.6 32.5
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 55.8 64.0 55.8 57.9 60.6 63.2 64.0 74.6
Other equity 1 255.7 264.4 275.3 264.4 267.9 270.7 271.0 275.3 290.9
Investment fund shares 373.4 398.3 442.5 398.3 405.3 420.6 431.7 442.5 487.7
Money market fund shares 23.7 4.4 4.0 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.0 4.0 3.8Non-MMF investment fund shares 349.7 393.8 438.5 393.8 401.0 416.5 427.7 438.5 483.8
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 273.3 291.3 306.1 291.3 295.0 298.7 302.4 306.1 309.9
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 809.1 847.3 879.8 847.3 863.9 871.1 875.7 879.8 894.6
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 677.0 707.8 738.0 707.8 714.8 721.5 726.8 738.0 747.1
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 37.1 36.7 36.3 36.7 36.7 36.7 36.5 36.3 36.3
Total 4,664.5 4,862.0 5,071.3 4,862.0 4,916.5 4,973.7 5,002.1 5,071.3 5,211.7
  Liabilities
Loans 1,538.5 1,548.9 1,569.1 1,548.9 1,549.3 1,555.2 1,564.6 1,569.1 1,571.5
short-term loans 71.5 66.4 64.6 66.4 67.2 67.7 66.5 64.6 65.6
long-term loans 1,467.0 1,482.5 1,504.5 1,482.5 1,482.0 1,487.4 1,498.1 1,504.5 1,505.9
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,072.7 1,092.2 1,116.6 1,092.2 1,093.0 1,098.8 1,108.7 1,116.6 1,119.0
Consumer loans 194.3 188.7 188.9 188.7 190.1 189.9 190.6 188.9 189.2
Entrepreneurial loans 271.4 268.0 263.6 268.0 266.2 266.5 265.2 263.6 263.3
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,458.4 1,457.4 1,463.5 1,473.1 1,477.6 1,479.6
Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 90.5 91.5 90.5 91.9 91.7 91.5 91.5 91.9
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 14.9 15.2 15.2 15.2 16.2 16.1 16.9 15.2 16.5
Total 1,553.4 1,564.1 1,584.3 1,564.1 1,565.5 1,571.2 1,581.4 1,584.3 1,588.0
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2009 − 74.5 − 38.0 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 14.4 − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2 − 104.8 − 82.2 − 20.4 − 6.2 + 3.9 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 23.3 − 27.1 − 13.0 + 1.4 + 15.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.6 − 14.7 − 5.7 + 4.7 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 p + 4.2 − 4.5 − 2.8 + 5.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
2014 pe + 18.6 + 10.5 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2013          H1  p + 7.8 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 6.2 + 3.9 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  p − 3.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          H1  pe + 13.2 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 5.3 + 6.7 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 5.4 + 9.1 + 1.7 − 2.7 − 2.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2009 1,788.8 1,084.3 585.3 133.7 1.3 72.8 44.1 23.8 5.4 0.1
2010 2,078.4 1,323.6 632.1 139.2 1.3 80.7 51.4 24.5 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,106.5 1,332.5 646.9 143.4 1.3 78.0 49.4 24.0 5.3 0.0
2012 p 2,184.9 1,377.9 675.9 147.5 1.2 79.5 50.1 24.6 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,171.4 1,382.0 656.7 150.0 1.3 77.3 49.2 23.4 5.3 0.0
2014 pe 2,175.7 1,389.3 653.0 151.1 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2013          Q1 p 2,174.0 1,378.2 668.1 149.3 1.2 79.0 50.1 24.3 5.4 0.0
         Q2 p 2,174.5 1,386.1 657.4 149.0 1.1 78.5 50.0 23.7 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,155.9 1,371.6 650.1 149.6 1.1 77.3 49.2 23.3 5.4 0.0
         Q4 p 2,171.4 1,382.0 656.7 150.0 1.3 77.3 49.2 23.4 5.3 0.0
2014          Q1 pe 2,159.9 1,379.3 648.2 149.8 1.2 76.0 48.6 22.8 5.3 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,167.5 1,388.1 646.6 150.5 1.1 75.8 48.5 22.6 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,168.3 1,384.4 649.0 150.8 1.1 75.3 48.1 22.5 5.2 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,175.7 1,389.3 653.0 151.1 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015          Q1 pe 2,175.9 1,389.3 651.9 156.0 1.4 74.4 47.5 22.3 5.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Including ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
  
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts
*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2009 1,090.8 554.5 415.6 120.6 1,165.3 625.2 197.8 64.8 56.2 221.2 − 74.5 974.1
2010 1,110.4 556.2 426.2 128.1 2 1,215.3 634.7 203.5 63.3 58.9 2 254.8 2 − 104.8 986.5
2011 p 1,179.5 598.9 442.2 138.3 1,202.7 634.6 208.2 67.1 61.2 231.7 − 23.3 1,045.8
2012 p 1,217.8 624.1 454.3 139.5 1,215.2 645.6 212.7 63.2 62.1 231.7 + 2.6 1,082.9
2013 p 1,249.4 642.5 465.4 141.6 1,245.3 666.8 217.6 56.3 62.8 241.8 + 4.2 1,112.2
2014 pe 1,295.0 664.6 482.2 148.1 1,276.4 691.2 224.1 50.9 62.2 248.0 + 18.6 1,151.4
as a percentage of GDP
2009 44.4 22.6 16.9 4.9 47.4 25.4 8.1 2.6 2.3 9.0 − 3.0 39.7
2010 43.1 21.6 16.5 5.0 2 47.2 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 2 9.9 2 − 4.1 38.3
2011 p 43.7 22.2 16.4 5.1 44.6 23.5 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.6 − 0.9 38.7
2012 p 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.2 23.5 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.4 + 0.1 39.4
2013 p 44.5 22.9 16.6 5.0 44.3 23.7 7.7 2.0 2.2 8.6 + 0.1 39.6
2014 pe 44.6 22.9 16.6 5.1 44.0 23.8 7.7 1.8 2.1 8.5 + 0.6 39.7
Percentage growth rates
2009 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.4 + 9.3 + 5.0 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.2 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.8 + 15.1 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 8.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 9.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.1 − 5.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.6 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.3 − 10.8 + 1.0 + 4.3 . + 2.7
2014 pe + 3.6 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 9.6 − 0.9 + 2.6 . + 3.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and ceived from the 2010 frequency auction, which are deducted from other expenditure
social contributions plus customs duties. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds re- in the national accounts. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.7
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 789.8 643.6 11.3 786.3 235.7 293.9 56.9 46.1 17.6 + 3.6 554.5 551.0 + 3.5 1,243.2 1,236.2 + 7.1
2013          Q1 p 178.0 148.6 2.6 187.8 53.7 74.9 22.5 6.0 2.9 − 9.8 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.3 294.9 − 13.6
         Q2 p 193.8 155.3 4.8 185.0 54.7 68.7 14.2 8.5 8.0 + 8.8 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 302.0 292.7 + 9.4
         Q3 p 183.8 151.8 2.4 192.3 55.2 70.9 20.1 11.6 3.2 − 8.5 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.4 299.9 − 9.5
         Q4 p 204.7 164.2 4.6 207.5 60.8 71.0 10.0 15.4 8.3 − 2.8 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.9 316.2 + 5.7
2014          Q1 p 188.1 153.6 2.0 193.8 56.7 77.8 20.1 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 295.9 304.9 − 8.9
         Q2 p 193.2 157.4 2.2 188.3 56.9 71.9 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 4.9 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.6 299.1 + 5.5
         Q3 p 186.3 157.5 3.4 188.0 57.0 70.8 12.2 11.3 4.0 − 1.7 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 297.2 300.0 − 2.7
         Q4 p 222.8 175.0 3.5 217.0 65.2 74.8 14.8 16.8 3.1 + 5.8 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 345.5 332.8 + 12.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.4
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.2 − 0.3 338.1 335.9 + 2.2 218.8 219.0 − 0.2
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.5 − 0.6
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.2 94.1 − 1.9 63.2 61.2 + 2.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 ... 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 ... ... 6,633
2014          June . 59,266 32,536 24,508 2,222 . . 2,268
2015          June . 60,268 32,823 25,517 1,929 . . 2,211
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059
         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783
         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907
2014          June 63,460 35,348 14,879 10,558 5,534 4,376 16,490 12,659 3,831 6 9,855 1,418 342 4,194
2015          June 64,776 37,076 16,033 11,043 6,639 3,361 16,659 12,758 3,901 4 9,046 1,620 372 4,508
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2014: 53.5:44.5:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2014: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 3,683 4,278 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 . 2,561 1,617 660 ... ... ...
2014          June 3,716 1,239 2,009 579 1,130 700 168 316 . 711 495 212 . . .2015          June 3,273 1,116 2,175 654 788 401 149 490 . 895 504 221 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance forsures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043
         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192
         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21
         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144
         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37
         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,900
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,851 4,440 400,200 21 382,690 945,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,605 4,440 356,800 102 408,863 982,400
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,241 4,440 426,700 70 284,331 1,075,700
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 266,051 1,106,400
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 p 1,826,587 4,440 430,300 16 263,431 1,128,400
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 1,802,340 4,440 430,600 20 258,880 1,108,400
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 1,806,613 4,440 425,500 23 284,950 1,091,700
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 1,794,764 4,440 424,100 28 273,896 1,092,300
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 266,051 1,106,400
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 1,809,545 4,440 437,900 21 240,884 1,126,300
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 1,821,827 4,440 439,700 16 253,971 1,123,700
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 1,818,189 4,440 429,900 16 272,033 1,111,800
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 1,826,587 4,440 430,300 16 263,431 1,128,400
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 pe 1,820,910 4,440 431,600 16 284,854 1,100,000
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,605 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,307 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,241 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,802,340 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,587 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 1,806,613 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,700 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 1,794,764 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 280,055 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 p 1,809,545 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,641 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,821,827 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,727 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,818,189 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,628 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,826,587 27,951 429,632 259,186 2,375 703,811 1,187 287,443 16 110,546 4,440 2
2015          Q1 pe 1,820,910 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,904 1,155 290,676 16 110,441 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
State government
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,571 1,975 283,601 .... 154,545 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 p 540,545 261 309,346 .... 132,432 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 p 542,959 1,098 314,024 .... 128,920 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 p 546,951 856 322,362 .... 125,452 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 p 555,182 0 326,186 .... 130,293 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 p 547,263 1,821 323,055 .... 123,719 5 98,662 . 1
Local government11
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 138,370 . − . . 423 . 134,898 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 137,102 . − . . 523 . 133,530 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 137,625 . − . . 523 . 134,053 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 p 140,046 . − . . 1,046 . 135,659 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 p 140,414 . − . . 1,046 . 136,027 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 p 140,817 . − . . 1,046 . 136,430 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 p 141,278 . − . . 1,296 . 136,641 11 3,330 . .
2015          Q1 pe 146,605 . − . . 1,596 . 141,668 11 3,330 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2013   2014   2015
  2012   2013   2014   2012   2013   2014   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.3 107.5 108.9 1.4 0.2 1.3 1.1 2.5 3.3 − 0.1 1.0 1.1 1.1Construction 104.1 103.8 106.7 0.1 − 0.3 2.8 1.8 2.7 11.9 2.1 0.4 − 0.3 − 3.1Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 101.6 101.6 103.0 − 2.3 0.0 1.4 1.3 0.8 2.5 0.9 1.1 1.3 2.3Information and communication 116.8 118.2 120.8 5.3 1.2 2.2 1.1 1.2 2.3 2.3 2.7 1.6 0.9Financial and insuranceactivities 102.8 101.3 102.2 2.0 − 1.5 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 1.6 1.1 0.9 0.4Real estate activities 101.3 101.9 103.1 − 2.0 0.5 1.2 0.4 0.7 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.1 0.4Business services 
1 102.8 103.8 106.3 0.6 0.9 2.5 1.5 1.8 2.9 1.9 2.6 2.4 1.8
Public services, education and
health 102.2 102.1 103.3 1.0 − 0.1 1.2 − 0.0 0.3 1.6 0.9 1.1 1.2 0.9Other services 100.7 99.1 99.4 0.1 − 1.6 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 0.8 − 0.3 0.2 0.3 − 0.4
Gross value added 104.0 104.1 105.7 0.5 0.1 1.5 0.7 1.2 2.6 0.9 1.3 1.3 1.0Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.8 0.4 0.1 1.6 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.0 103.8 105.0 0.7 0.8 1.1 2.0 0.7 1.1 0.8 0.8 1.8 2.4
Government consumption 101.9 102.7 103.8 1.2 0.7 1.1 1.0 0.4 0.4 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.4
Machinery and equipment 102.9 100.5 104.8 − 3.0 − 2.4 4.3 0.1 0.1 7.9 3.6 4.1 2.4 1.5Premises 109.1 109.0 112.7 0.6 − 0.1 3.4 2.6 2.2 13.2 1.5 − 0.1 1.0 − 1.9Other investment 
4 106.9 108.2 109.5 0.1 1.3 1.2 0.7 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 1.4 0.2 − 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.6
Domestic demand 102.1 102.7 104.1 − 0.9 0.7 1.3 2.3 1.0 2.7 1.2 0.2 1.4 1.1Net exports 
6 . . . 1.3 − 0.5 0.4 − 1.4 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 1.0 0.3 0.0
Exports 111.1 112.8 117.1 2.8 1.6 3.8 1.6 4.3 4.0 2.4 4.5 4.2 4.3Imports 107.1 110.5 114.3 − 0.0 3.1 3.5 5.2 4.9 4.5 3.0 2.4 4.0 5.0
Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.8 0.4 0.1 1.6 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,539.5 1,571.5 1,604.3 2.2 2.1 2.1 3.3 1.8 2.2 1.9 1.8 2.5 2.7
Government consumption 521.3 541.2 562.3 3.1 3.8 3.9 4.6 3.2 3.6 4.2 4.0 3.9 3.8Machinery and equipment 181.7 177.9 185.6 − 2.2 − 2.1 4.3 0.2 0.3 7.9 3.6 4.1 2.4 1.5Premises 273.9 279.2 293.6 3.4 1.9 5.2 4.6 4.2 15.4 3.3 1.7 2.7 − 0.1Other investment 
4 95.6 98.8 102.1 2.1 3.3 3.3 2.7 3.3 3.0 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.6
Changes in inventories 5 − 23.9 − 22.3 − 30.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,588.2 2,646.2 2,717.3 0.8 2.2 2.7 3.7 2.3 4.2 2.6 1.5 2.5 1.9Net exports 161.7 163.3 186.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,262.9 1,280.1 1,325.0 4.4 1.4 3.5 1.0 3.8 3.5 1.8 4.4 4.3 4.9Imports 1,101.1 1,116.9 1,138.5 2.1 1.4 1.9 3.1 2.6 2.5 1.1 1.3 2.9 2.6
Gross domestic product 
2 2,749.9 2,809.5 2,903.8 1.9 2.2 3.4 2.7 2.9 4.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.0
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 103.4 104.7 105.7 1.5 1.2 0.9 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.0 0.7 0.3Gross domestic product 102.7 104.8 106.6 1.5 2.1 1.7 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.9Terms of trade 97.1 98.5 99.7 − 0.5 1.5 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.4 1.2 1.0 1.2 2.9
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,389.7 1,428.3 1,482.0 3.8 2.8 3.8 2.8 2.8 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.8 3.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 665.7 671.6 699.5 − 3.3 0.9 4.1 1.3 4.5 9.9 1.5 4.4 0.0 4.4
National income 2,055.3 2,099.9 2,181.4 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.3 3.3 5.9 3.0 3.9 2.7 3.7
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,822.2 2,881.9 2,981.8 1.9 2.1 3.5 2.3 2.8 5.0 2.8 3.4 2.8 3.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2015. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2011 106.7 107.0 95.6 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
2014 107.9 108.5 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
 
2014          Q2 107.1 110.5 85.8 109.4 107.4 115.5 98.1 100.1 112.4 106.7 112.1 121.9
         Q3 107.9 116.4 86.6 109.4 107.2 114.8 97.0 102.8 111.1 110.6 115.1 114.6
         Q4 111.6 118.9 99.6 112.1 103.6 122.8 104.7 106.1 110.7 111.2 125.3 119.0
2015          Q1 105.4 85.0 103.7 108.5 106.2 114.3 104.0 99.3 110.4 107.5 105.5 126.4
         Q2 x 108.6 108.9 91.7 110.7 107.5 117.8 101.0 100.9 113.3 107.5 113.2 124.3
 
2014          June 109.6 115.3 83.2 112.2 108.8 120.2 101.6 100.8 115.0 111.5 119.3 123.0
         July 2 111.0 119.3 84.9 113.1 110.4 120.4 97.0 102.7 114.7 111.3 114.6 129.8
         Aug 2 99.7 111.8 85.0 99.9 101.9 99.1 83.5 100.5 103.9 105.3 106.3 83.8
         Sep 113.1 118.2 89.9 115.3 109.3 124.9 110.5 105.2 114.8 115.2 124.3 130.2
         Oct 113.7 120.0 98.4 114.8 111.0 120.6 108.2 109.8 116.8 114.5 116.3 125.9
         Nov 115.7 120.7 98.4 117.3 109.5 128.1 111.9 108.5 119.0 116.3 123.4 134.4
         Dec 105.3 116.0 101.9 104.3 90.3 119.7 93.9 100.0 96.3 102.7 136.1 96.6
2015          Jan 98.3 71.6 105.5 101.2 102.0 102.2 95.7 97.5 105.1 100.6 94.1 111.5
         Feb 102.6 79.4 100.3 106.2 103.2 113.2 103.2 94.7 107.6 105.9 102.2 128.9
         Mar 3 115.3 3 104.1 105.3 118.2 113.3 127.5 113.2 105.6 118.5 116.0 120.1 138.7
         Apr x 3 107.9 3 107.1 96.3 109.5 106.7 116.4 101.9 98.9 112.8 104.5 109.5 125.6
         May x 3 107.5 3 108.8 89.7 109.6 106.8 116.1 100.2 100.9 112.7 106.1 110.8 123.8
         June x,p 3 110.3 3 110.8 89.1 112.9 109.1 120.9 101.0 102.9 114.4 111.9 119.2 123.4
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.7 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
 
2014          Q2 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 4.7 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.7 − 1.4 + 5.2
         Q3 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 4.2 + 2.6 + 0.5
         Q4 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.8
2015          Q1 + 0.2 − 3.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 2.3 + 3.1
         Q2 x + 1.4 − 1.4 + 6.9 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 1.9
 
2014          June + 0.1 + 0.8 − 5.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 3.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 3.4
         July 2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 19.0
         Aug 2 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 4.8 − 1.8 + 0.7 − 4.9 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 20.0
         Sep + 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.8 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.0 + 1.6
         Oct + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.3 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2
         Dec + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 0.5
2015          Jan + 0.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 2.3 + 3.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 7.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.6
         Mar 3 + 0.1 3 − 1.0 + 6.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.9 + 1.5
         Apr x 3 + 1.1 3 − 1.4 + 8.8 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 2.5
         May x 3 + 2.4 3 + 1.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 2.9
         June x,p 3 + 0.6 3 − 3.9 + 7.1 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Statistical Office (on average + 4%). xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Sur-
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by vey or the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
a change in holiday dates. 3Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations to

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2014          June 113.1 − 2.4 105.7 + 1.2 118.9 − 5.6 108.5 + 6.1 104.9 − 3.1 109.7 + 9.5
         July 116.6 + 7.1 106.4 + 2.1 124.0 + 11.0 114.7 + 2.8 97.9 − 1.2 120.5 + 4.0
         Aug 100.3 + 0.5 94.5 − 1.3 102.9 + 0.7 110.6 + 6.6 94.2 + 2.8 116.3 + 7.8
         Sep 111.9 − 0.4 101.8 − 0.2 118.9 − 0.6 112.4 + 0.4 109.0 − 2.2 113.6 + 1.2
         Oct 115.0 + 3.4 107.1 − 0.5 120.5 + 6.1 114.6 + 2.3 108.4 − 1.5 116.7 + 3.5
         Nov 114.7 + 0.1 104.2 − 1.7 122.4 + 1.2 113.4 + 0.5 104.9 − 2.4 116.3 + 1.4
         Dec 112.7 + 4.5 92.6 + 2.7 128.9 + 5.7 97.7 + 3.1 92.9 + 5.1 99.4 + 2.4
2015          Jan 112.8 + 0.5 107.3 − 1.4 116.8 + 2.4 111.6 − 2.9 104.8 + 3.6 114.0 − 4.8
         Feb 111.9 − 0.4 101.7 − 2.4 118.0 + 0.7 119.8 + 2.0 101.4 + 4.8 126.2 + 1.3
         Mar 125.0 + 3.7 113.0 − 0.1 134.3 + 5.9 118.6 + 5.3 113.0 + 0.3 120.5 + 6.9
         Apr 116.2 + 3.4 104.4 − 1.1 125.1 + 5.9 111.2 + 3.9 104.2 − 3.6 113.6 + 6.6
         May 114.1 + 6.4 105.0 + 2.7 120.8 + 8.8 111.8 + 5.8 102.3 + 4.3 115.1 + 6.1
         June p 123.3 + 9.0 106.6 + 0.9 136.2 + 14.6 114.1 + 5.2 108.4 + 3.3 116.2 + 5.9
From the domestic market
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.4 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2014          June
105.2 − 1.2 101.9 − 0.6 109.3 − 2.6 99.9 + 3.1 106.6 + 3.5 97.6 + 3.1
         July 108.5 + 1.8 104.0 + 0.0 113.1 + 3.3 108.3 + 3.4 101.6 + 2.6 110.7 + 3.7
         Aug 
97.9 − 2.3 94.0 − 2.6 100.9 − 2.7 103.0 + 1.6 95.8 + 3.2 105.5 + 1.1
         Sep 102.2 − 3.6 96.8 − 4.1 107.1 − 3.7 105.3 + 0.2 112.3 − 1.1 102.8 + 0.7
         Oct 109.0 + 3.4 102.0 − 1.5 116.3 + 8.6 106.7 + 1.1 110.7 − 5.6 105.3 + 3.8
         Nov 105.9 − 3.4 100.2 − 4.9 112.1 − 2.3 102.6 − 1.8 106.3 − 2.1 101.3 − 1.7
         Dec 97.2 + 3.4 87.8 − 0.1 108.0 + 6.2 88.4 + 4.6 84.8 + 4.2 89.7 + 4.8
2015          Jan 105.6 − 1.1 103.0 − 3.6 108.5 + 1.0 104.2 + 0.9 103.2 + 0.8 104.5 + 0.9
         Feb 104.9 − 1.2 96.7 − 5.8 112.2 + 2.7 110.5 + 1.7 100.6 + 0.4 114.0 + 2.1
         Mar 121.2 + 3.8 108.2 + 0.0 136.1 + 7.3 110.5 + 2.4 108.5 − 4.0 111.2 + 4.8
         Apr 
108.5 + 0.7 100.9 − 3.1 117.5 + 4.2 99.8 + 0.8 102.8 − 4.5 98.8 + 2.9
         May 106.2 + 2.2 101.6 + 0.3 111.7 + 3.5 101.0 + 5.9 94.4 + 1.5 103.3 + 7.3
         June p 106.6 + 1.3 100.5 − 1.4 113.5 + 3.8 101.3 + 1.4 102.0 − 4.3 101.1 + 3.6
From abroad
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.6 + 25.3 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.7 − 0.5 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.6 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2014          June 119.5 − 3.3 110.1 + 3.2 124.9 − 7.1 115.8 + 8.3 103.5 − 8.3 120.0 + 14.5
         July 123.1 + 11.2 109.3 + 4.6 130.8 + 15.8 120.1 + 2.2 94.7 − 4.5 128.9 + 4.1
         Aug 102.2 + 2.7 95.1 + 0.3 104.1 + 2.9 117.1 + 10.7 92.8 + 2.4 125.4 + 13.1
         Sep 119.7 + 1.9 107.7 + 4.2 126.1 + 1.0 118.5 + 0.6 106.2 − 3.1 122.7 + 1.7
         Oct 119.8 + 3.4 113.1 + 0.6 123.1 + 4.7 121.3 + 3.1 106.4 + 2.7 126.4 + 3.3
         Nov 121.9 + 2.8 108.9 + 2.0 128.7 + 3.2 122.6 + 2.3 103.6 − 2.7 129.1 + 3.7
         Dec 125.3 + 5.3 98.3 + 5.7 141.8 + 5.4 105.7 + 1.9 100.0 + 5.8 107.6 + 0.7
2015          Jan 118.7 + 1.9 112.3 + 1.1 122.0 + 3.1 118.0 − 5.5 106.2 + 6.1 122.0 − 8.5
         Feb 117.6 + 0.3 107.6 + 1.6 121.5 − 0.6 127.8 + 2.3 102.1 + 8.7 136.6 + 0.7
         Mar 128.0 + 3.6 118.7 − 0.2 133.2 + 5.0 125.5 + 7.5 117.0 + 4.1 128.4 + 8.5
         Apr 122.4 + 5.2 108.5 + 1.1 129.8 + 7.0 120.9 + 6.2 105.5 − 2.9 126.1 + 9.1
         May 120.5 + 9.6 109.0 + 5.6 126.4 + 12.0 121.1 + 5.7 109.2 + 6.5 125.2 + 5.4
         June p 136.8 + 14.5 113.8 + 3.4 150.2 + 20.3 125.1 + 8.0 113.9 + 10.0 129.0 + 7.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 99.7 + 1.4 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.8 + 2.9 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.0 102.2 + 2.5 112.9 + 13.2 96.1 − 3.7
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.5 − 0.3 107.7 + 5.4 118.5 + 5.0 103.3 + 7.5
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.5 + 4.2 140.7 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.4 111.7 + 3.7 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.5 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.2 126.8 − 1.0 90.5 − 3.4 109.9 − 1.6 121.8 + 0.0 104.0 − 3.3
 
2014          May 127.7 + 1.8 130.9 − 3.3 157.1 + 10.5 122.9 − 12.5 103.0 − 3.5 124.5 + 7.6 120.3 − 5.4 123.5 + 5.6
         June 132.1 − 9.5 140.0 − 11.2 163.1 − 10.4 133.1 − 15.9 114.8 + 6.3 124.3 − 7.4 131.7 − 13.0 120.1 − 4.6
         July 136.5 − 4.1 139.8 − 1.5 143.9 − 9.0 147.3 + 3.5 109.4 + 0.6 133.2 − 6.9 139.6 + 4.9 130.4 − 10.5
         Aug 121.5 − 1.9 122.5 − 1.3 127.0 − 12.3 130.7 + 7.9 89.5 − 3.1 120.5 − 2.4 124.9 + 4.7 115.8 − 3.4         Sep 121.8 − 3.3 130.0 − 4.3 149.0 − 2.6 128.9 − 2.9 96.2 − 13.3 113.5 − 2.2 123.3 − 5.5 109.3 − 1.1
         Oct 113.6 − 3.3 129.3 + 0.5 152.0 + 7.5 129.4 − 3.9 84.6 − 1.2 98.0 − 7.9 119.1 − 4.9 92.6 − 7.3
         Nov 99.4 − 6.8 113.0 − 5.5 130.2 + 5.9 116.7 − 11.9 68.2 − 9.1 85.8 − 8.4 109.0 − 11.5 77.2 − 7.3         Dec 101.7 − 4.3 122.1 + 1.8 154.4 + 12.8 115.2 − 5.0 78.9 − 4.8 81.4 − 12.0 109.5 − 3.6 72.6 − 16.1
2015          Jan 95.4 + 2.5 102.0 − 4.2 122.7 + 8.7 100.6 − 11.2 65.7 − 10.9 88.8 + 11.4 104.3 − 5.8 75.4 + 12.4
         Feb 104.9 + 2.6 113.5 + 0.6 136.7 + 2.0 105.7 − 7.5 90.9 + 35.9 96.3 + 5.0 103.6 − 2.6 93.4 + 9.5
         Mar 142.6 + 2.7 149.9 + 2.4 189.6 + 14.8 133.4 − 9.8 120.6 + 14.6 135.3 + 3.1 136.7 − 3.1 129.7 + 3.0
         Apr 126.9 − 5.3 133.1 − 0.2 171.4 + 0.8 118.5 − 2.5 101.0 + 5.3 120.8 − 10.3 118.1 − 5.8 118.2 − 7.9
         May 132.9 + 4.1 138.3 + 5.7 168.0 + 6.9 131.1 + 6.7 101.0 − 1.9 127.5 + 2.4 130.8 + 8.7 120.9 − 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.0 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.1 105.2 + 2.6 102.2 + 0.6 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.4 109.0 + 3.6 103.1 + 0.9 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 3 108.6 + 2.3 103.1 + 1.8 111.7 + 2.5 105.0 + 1.8 95.0 − 0.4 102.7 + 0.4 110.8 + 7.5 107.1 + 2.5
 
2014          June 3 107.3 + 2.9 101.7 + 2.7 113.7 + 3.3 102.7 + 2.1 82.5 − 2.4 100.5 − 0.7 109.1 + 10.3 111.3 + 1.3
         July 107.7 + 1.4 102.5 + 1.1 112.1 + 0.4 103.4 + 0.9 90.6 + 6.1 100.1 − 2.9 114.4 + 7.7 108.9 + 2.6
         Aug 106.0 + 2.6 100.9 + 2.1 108.5 + 0.5 107.0 + 10.1 84.0 − 4.0 100.0 + 2.0 106.3 + 7.4 100.0 + 2.5         Sep 104.9 + 0.3 99.3 − 0.2 106.2 + 2.6 107.4 − 6.3 91.9 − 1.9 99.5 − 2.3 108.1 + 6.5 106.2 + 1.0
         Oct 112.0 + 2.5 106.3 + 2.4 113.6 + 2.5 113.7 − 3.1 98.9 + 2.6 109.4 + 0.6 114.9 + 8.3 115.5 − 0.2
         Nov 113.2 + 1.1 107.8 + 1.2 113.1 + 0.9 107.6 − 2.4 109.8 + 3.6 111.4 + 1.1 115.9 + 9.1 112.0 − 0.3         Dec 127.5 + 4.1 122.2 + 4.4 129.3 + 4.1 123.5 + 3.3 146.8 + 4.0 108.2 + 4.6 128.0 + 10.1 101.2 + 3.5
2015          Jan 102.2 + 2.4 98.7 + 3.5 105.0 + 3.3 89.8 − 1.3 102.5 + 2.2 92.3 + 4.1 112.0 + 6.6 95.2 + 3.7
         Feb 98.4 + 2.3 94.2 + 3.0 102.2 + 1.5 82.1 − 0.5 86.4 + 5.6 92.1 + 1.7 108.9 + 6.0 101.3 + 5.5
         Mar 113.2 + 1.4 107.2 + 1.7 115.8 − 0.1 106.2 − 3.6 90.4 + 4.6 114.2 + 1.1 118.8 + 8.3 128.1 + 7.6
         Apr 112.5 + 3.4 105.9 + 3.2 116.9 + 2.7 110.2 + 5.5 82.7 + 1.1 110.9 + 2.7 117.3 + 7.4 123.2 + 8.7
         May 112.2 + 4.0 105.6 + 3.5 117.4 + 5.1 108.9 + 1.8 82.2 − 2.8 109.7 + 6.0 113.8 + 6.7 120.9 + 9.9         June 108.0 + 0.7 102.2 + 0.5 114.0 + 0.3 105.1 + 2.3 82.5 +
 0.0 103.1 + 2.6 112.1 + 2.7 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2014 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2010 41,020 + 0.3 28,008 + 1.0 8,421 18,693 675 5,025 503 429 3,239 1,076 7.7 359
2011 r 41,577 r + 1.4 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 r 42,060 r + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 r 42,328 r + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 r 42,703 r + 0.9 30,197 + 1.6 8,859 20,328 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2012          Q2 r 41,989 r + 1.2 29,223 + 2.5 8,706 19,510 771 4,983 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499
         Q3 r 42,262 r + 1.1 29,416 + 2.1 8,776 19,604 798 5,006 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493
         Q4 r 42,418 r + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 r 41,880 r + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 r 42,249 r + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459
         Q3 r 42,515 r + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471
         Q4 r 42,666 r + 0.6 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 r 42,226 r + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 r 42,667 r + 1.0 30,080 + 1.7 8,828 20,251 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487
         Q3 r 42,903 r + 0.9 30,284 + 1.7 8,895 20,341 799 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 r 43,016 r + 0.8 30,614 + 1.6 8,955 20,622 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 r 42,469 r + 0.6 8 30,329 8 + 1.7 8 8,830 8 20,520 8 755 8 4,864 ... 8 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 9 42,842 9 + 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,772 822 10 6.3 560
2012          Mar r 41,653 r + 1.3 29,082 + 2.7 8,663 19,437 756 4,935 167 78 3,028 956 7.2 491
         Apr r 41,828 r + 1.2 29,199 + 2.6 8,698 19,505 763 4,964 83 71 2,964 893 7.0 499
         May r 42,018 r + 1.2 29,289 + 2.4 8,724 19,548 778 5,002 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499
         June r 42,120 r + 1.1 29,280 + 2.2 8,733 19,519 790 5,032 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July r 42,149 r + 1.3 29,255 + 2.3 8,737 19,478 804 5,038 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500
         Aug r 42,246 r + 1.1 29,477 + 2.0 8,793 19,645 801 4,986 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493
         Sep r 42,391 r + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485
         Oct r 42,494 r + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468
         Nov r 42,494 r + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451
         Dec r 42,265 r + 0.9 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan r 41,862 r + 0.8 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb r 41,853 r + 0.8 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448
         Mar r 41,926 r + 0.7 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463
         Apr r 42,083 r + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460
         May r 42,288 r + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457
         June r 42,376 r + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459
         July r 42,419 r + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469
         Aug r 42,484 r + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471
         Sep r 42,641 r + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473
         Oct r 42,746 r + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466
         Nov r 42,730 r + 0.6 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458
         Dec r 42,523 r + 0.6 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan r 42,170 r + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb r 42,195 r + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456
         Mar r 42,312 r + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476
         Apr r 42,522 r + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485
         May r 42,684 r + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,835 20,289 750 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481
         June r 42,795 r + 1.0 30,175 + 1.9 8,853 20,292 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July r 42,833 r + 1.0 30,121 + 1.8 8,859 20,217 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502
         Aug r 42,857 r + 0.9 30,312 + 1.6 8,903 20,358 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep r 43,020 r + 0.9 30,663 + 1.7 8,991 20,603 812 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct r 43,118 r + 0.9 30,676 + 1.6 8,979 20,641 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517
         Nov r 43,067 r + 0.8 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,642 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515
         Dec r 42,862 r + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,863 20,563 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan r 42,449 r + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,813 20,493 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb r 42,432 r + 0.6 8 30,276 8 + 1.7 8 8,814 8 20,486 8 753 8 4,828 ... 8 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
         Mar r 42,525 r + 0.5 8 30,476 8 + 1.8 8 8,864 8 20,600 8 776 8 4,822 ... 8 51 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr r 42,707 r + 0.4 8 30,595 8 + 1.8 8 8,893 8 20,673 8 783 8 4,835 ... 8 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
         May r 42,866 r + 0.4 8 30,648 8 + 1.7 8 8,895 8 20,711 8 791 8 4,863 ... 8 43 2,762 815 10 6.3 557
         June 9 42,952 9 + 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,773 830 6.3 589
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2013
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- and 2014, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 1.4 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal 6.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 21.3 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9Initial preliminary estimate
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding by the Federal Statistical Office. 10From May 2015 calculated on the basis of new la-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located bour force figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 111.8 104.0 103.6 120.8 96.8
 
2013          Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 120.8 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 121.3 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 122.3 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 122.4 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 119.5 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 119.4 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 120.4 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 121.1 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 118.8 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 117.7 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 113.9 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 111.5 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3
         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 108.6 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 104.4 104.2 103.5 111.9 95.5
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 104.3 104.2 102.7 103.1 97.5
         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 103.4 103.9 101.0 84.3 96.0
2015          Jan 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.3 106.1 104.2 8 103.1 104.4 100.2 71.4 97.7
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 105.5 104.7 101.6 86.2 97.2
         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.8 105.3 102.6 86.9 98.9
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 104.5 106.7 105.6 103.2 94.0 98.3
         May 107.1 113.2 105.1 110.9 106.2 106.5 111.1 104.5 105.5 105.4 103.0 96.9 96.4
         June 107.0 112.6 104.9 110.4 106.3 106.6 104.4 106.0 105.3 102.5 93.3 94.9
         July 107.2 111.8 104.4 109.8 107.8 106.7 ... ... ... ... 85.5 94.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 7.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 9.2 − 4.2
 
2013          Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 10.1 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 13.9 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 14.7 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.9 + 1.2
         Dec + 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 15.5 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 35.9 − 0.6
2015          Jan − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 8 − 13.7 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 44.8 + 1.8
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 11.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 33.3 + 0.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.1 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 31.0 + 2.1
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.5 − 11.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 25.5 − 1.0
         May + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.2 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 25.0 − 2.5
         June + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 1.4 − 9.9 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 29.8 − 2.6
         July + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 6.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... − 33.0 − 0.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From January 2015 onwards,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2007
969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,540.7 1.8 157.1 3.6 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.4 0.6 1,029.2 2.4 1,579.0 2.5 165.1 5.1 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.5 7.0 1,056.1 2.6 1,564.2 − 0.9 155.7 − 5.7 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 388.0 1.2 1,090.1 3.2 1,605.0 2.6 159.3 2.3 9.9
2011 1,087.7 4.7 728.5 3.7 383.2 − 1.2 1,111.6 2.0 1,666.0 3.8 159.2 − 0.1 9.6
2012 1,131.7 4.0 756.4 3.8 389.4 1.6 1,145.7 3.1 1,699.0 2.0 159.5 0.2 9.4
2013 1,165.5 3.0 777.2 2.8 398.3 2.3 1,175.6 2.6 1,728.5 1.7 157.0 − 1.6 9.1
2014 1,210.8 3.9 805.3 3.6 408.2 2.5 1,213.5 3.2 1,770.5 2.4 166.2 5.9 9.4
2013          Q4 321.9 3.0 214.0 2.6 98.0 1.8 311.9 2.3 434.4 1.7 32.2 0.5 7.4
2014          Q1 281.7 4.0 187.8 3.6 103.7 2.1 291.4 3.1 438.0 2.4 55.1 3.4 12.6
         Q2 295.6 3.9 192.7 3.8 100.1 1.1 292.7 2.9 439.1 2.2 39.3 5.4 8.9
         Q3 299.1 3.8 203.4 3.5 102.2 2.3 305.6 3.1 444.7 1.9 35.4 3.2 8.0
         Q4 334.3 3.8 221.5 3.5 102.3 4.4 323.8 3.8 448.8 3.3 36.5 13.2 8.1
2015          Q1 291.5 3.5 193.2 2.9 106.5 2.8 299.7 2.8 451.4 3.1 58.0 5.4 12.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2015. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2007 93.9 1.3 93.7 1.5 93.4 1.5 92.9 1.5 95.3 1.4
2008 96.5 2.7 96.4 2.8 96.2 3.0 95.9 3.2 97.6 2.42009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.3 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.3 3.32012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.1 2.72013 107.1 2.4 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.4 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.4 2.8 110.4 2.9 111.3 2.7
2014          Q1 102.2 3.1 102.1 3.0 101.9 2.5 109.1 2.5 104.9 3.0
         Q2 103.5 3.2 103.4 3.1 103.6 3.1 110.2 3.3 108.9 2.7         Q3 112.3 2.8 112.2 2.8 112.5 2.8 110.9 2.8 109.7 2.7         Q4 123.2 2.9 123.0 2.9 123.4 2.8 111.2 2.9 121.6 2.6
2015          Q1 104.4 2.2 104.3 2.1 104.2 2.3 111.6 2.3 107.4 2.5
         Q2 105.8 2.2 105.6 2.2 106.0 2.3 112.8 2.3 . .
2014          Dec 106.0 3.0 105.9 2.9 106.1 2.8 111.2 2.9 . .
2015          Jan 104.0 0.9 103.9 0.9 104.0 2.3 111.4 2.3 . .
         Feb 104.1 2.5 103.9 2.5 104.0 2.3 111.4 2.3 . .
         Mar 105.2 3.1 105.1 3.0 104.6 2.3 112.1 2.3 . .
         Apr 106.0 2.5 105.8 2.5 106.2 2.6 112.6 2.6 . .
         May 106.0 2.0 105.9 1.9 106.2 2.1 112.7 2.1 . .
         June 105.4 2.2 105.2 2.1 105.5 2.1 113.0 2.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2015. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2010 1,748.4 1,077.5 334.5 459.6 213.2 670.9 169.5 170.2 132.6 514.7 1,233.7 657.9 354.8 575.8 147.2 151.4
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.2 176.8 161.1
2012 1,904.5 1,178.2 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.4 189.8 179.1 125.9 561.4 1,343.1 719.6 380.8 623.6 179.5 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.1 635.9 191.5 166.8
2014 p 2,103.0 1,303.3 430.4 530.2 262.0 799.7 202.8 188.0 133.5 584.2 1,518.8 829.8 429.9 689.1 215.6 178.1
2014          Q1 1,972.1 1,203.0 388.2 501.9 252.6 769.1 196.9 193.4 142.7 578.2 1,393.9 739.9 383.3 654.0 194.4 164.2
         Q2 1,982.5 1,224.8 394.0 505.9 261.9 757.6 200.9 189.9 123.3 568.7 1,413.8 763.3 395.0 650.5 199.7 162.6         Q3 2,043.4 1,263.4 403.1 522.2 267.8 780.0 206.8 190.0 136.0 586.1 1,457.3 793.2 407.0 664.0 200.7 172.0         Q4
p 2,103.0 1,303.3 430.4 530.2 262.0 799.7 202.8 188.0 133.5 584.2 1,518.8 829.8 429.9 689.1 215.6 178.1
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 61.6 19.1 26.3 12.2 38.4 9.7 9.7 7.6 29.4 70.6 37.6 20.3 32.9 8.4 8.7
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.7 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014 p 100.0 62.0 20.5 25.2 12.5 38.0 9.6 8.9 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.4 32.8 10.3 8.5
2014          Q1 100.0 61.0 19.7 25.5 12.8 39.0 10.0 9.8 7.2 29.3 70.7 37.5 19.4 33.2 9.9 8.3
         Q2 100.0 61.8 19.9 25.5 13.2 38.2 10.1 9.6 6.2 28.7 71.3 38.5 19.9 32.8 10.1 8.2
         Q3 100.0 61.8 19.7 25.6 13.1 38.2 10.1 9.3 6.7 28.7 71.3 38.8 19.9 32.5 9.8 8.4
         Q4 p 100.0 62.0 20.5 25.2 12.5 38.0 9.6 8.9 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.4 32.8 10.3 8.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2010 1,383.0 814.2 213.9 355.8 189.5 568.8 152.2 135.1 105.4 400.6 982.4 515.3 258.3 467.1 125.4 108.1
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.7 921.3 258.9 388.0 222.1 619.4 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.7 1,097.0 581.8 286.6 515.2 161.0 116.5
2013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.7 118.6
2014 p 1,686.6 1,012.4 277.1 423.5 248.1 674.2 185.9 141.9 101.7 453.9 1,232.7 664.7 323.6 568.1 194.2 125.9
2014          Q1 1,594.6 940.9 259.8 400.5 236.3 653.8 180.9 152.3 110.3 457.3 1,137.3 596.1 289.3 541.2 173.9 121.5         Q2 1,604.2 956.5 260.9 403.7 245.0 647.7 184.7 147.7 97.0 451.5 1,152.7 617.5 301.8 535.2 177.9 118.2         Q3 1,647.8 986.3 265.4 418.1 249.8 661.5 190.7 146.2 102.1 461.3 1,186.5 640.3 310.4 546.2 176.5 125.4         Q4
p 1,686.6 1,012.4 277.1 423.5 248.1 674.2 185.9 141.9 101.7 453.9 1,232.7 664.7 323.6 568.1 194.2 125.9
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 58.9 15.5 25.7 13.7 41.1 11.0 9.8 7.6 29.0 71.0 37.3 18.7 33.8 9.1 7.8
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014 p 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.7 40.0 11.0 8.4 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2014          Q1 100.0 59.0 16.3 25.1 14.8 41.0 11.3 9.6 6.9 28.7 71.3 37.4 18.1 33.9 10.9 7.6
         Q2 100.0 59.6 16.3 25.2 15.3 40.4 11.5 9.2 6.1 28.1 71.9 38.5 18.8 33.4 11.1 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.9 16.1 25.4 15.2 40.1 11.6 8.9 6.2 28.0 72.0 38.9 18.8 33.2 10.7 7.6
         Q4 p 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.7 40.0 11.0 8.4 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2010 365.4 263.3 120.6 103.8 23.7 102.1 17.4 35.1 27.2 114.0 251.4 142.6 96.5 108.8 21.8 43.3
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.4
2012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.2
2013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.8 48.2
2014 p 416.4 290.8 153.3 106.6 13.9 125.6 16.9 46.1 31.8 130.3 286.1 165.1 106.3 121.0 21.4 52.2
2014          Q1 377.4 262.1 128.4 101.4 16.4 115.3 16.0 41.1 32.4 120.9 256.5 143.7 94.0 112.8 20.5 42.7
         Q2 378.3 268.4 133.1 102.2 16.9 109.9 16.2 42.1 26.2 117.2 261.1 145.8 93.2 115.3 21.8 44.4
         Q3 395.6 277.1 137.7 104.2 18.1 118.5 16.1 43.8 33.9 124.8 270.8 152.9 96.6 117.9 24.2 46.5
         Q4 p 416.4 290.8 153.3 106.6 13.9 125.6 16.9 46.1 31.8 130.3 286.1 165.1 106.3 121.0 21.4 52.2
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 72.1 33.0 28.4 6.5 27.9 4.8 9.6 7.4 31.2 68.8 39.0 26.4 29.8 6.0 11.9
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.2
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 p 100.0 69.8 36.8 25.6 3.3 30.2 4.1 11.1 7.6 31.3 68.7 39.7 25.5 29.1 5.1 12.5
2014          Q1 100.0 69.5 34.0 26.9 4.3 30.6 4.2 10.9 8.6 32.0 68.0 38.1 24.9 29.9 5.4 11.3
         Q2 100.0 70.9 35.2 27.0 4.5 29.1 4.3 11.1 6.9 31.0 69.0 38.5 24.7 30.5 5.8 11.7
         Q3 100.0 70.0 34.8 26.3 4.6 30.0 4.1 11.1 8.6 31.6 68.4 38.7 24.4 29.8 6.1 11.8
         Q4 p 100.0 69.8 36.8 25.6 3.3 30.2 4.1 11.1 7.6 31.3 68.7 39.7 25.5 29.1 5.1 12.5
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2006 1,209.4 10.6 155.0 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.5 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.0 4.4 173.8 15.0 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.7 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 180.1 − 0.3 12.6 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.5 6.6 192.5 3.3 12.4 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 96.9 − 7.1 6.2 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 189.2 − 2.5 12.2 − 0.2 5.0 10.2 18.4 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2014 p 1,571.3 0.8 199.8 5.0 12.7 0.5 6.3 10.7 18.2 109.0 7.6 6.9 0.4 2.4 6.3 11.9
2012          Q2 382.4 7.2 47.1 9.3 12.3 0.2 4.8 9.9 17.0 27.7 10.6 7.2 0.2 1.2 6.5 11.4
         Q3 384.3 7.1 48.7 4.3 12.7 − 0.3 4.8 10.3 17.2 16.6 − 49.8 4.3 − 3.9 1.7 6.2 11.9         Q4 406.9 3.4 49.1 0.6 12.1 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 23.8 5.8 0.9 0.1 6.4 12.3
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.9 − 1.0 12.5 0.1 5.2 10.4 16.5 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8         Q4 406.7 − 0.4 47.6 − 1.5 11.7 − 0.1 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.2 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 0.0 50.2 9.0 13.2 1.1 3.7 8.7 16.2 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.1 10.2
         Q2 386.7 − 1.8 47.9 0.0 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 2.0 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1         Q3 394.7 2.9 49.8 3.8 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.4 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7         Q4
p 418.0 2.2 52.4 7.2 12.6 0.6 5.1 12.4 19.7 23.6 9.4 5.6 0.4 2.0 7.6 12.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2006 898.7 9.8 114.9 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.7 12.2 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.42007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.8 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.1 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.0 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.3 7.6 144.0 5.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.8 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.7 140.9 − 2.2 11.8 − 0.2 4.3 10.2 15.5 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.82014
p 1,211.0 0.9 149.3 5.7 12.3 0.6 6.0 10.2 15.5 81.6 7.8 6.7 0.4 1.9 6.2 10.3
2012          Q2 294.0 8.2 35.8 9.8 12.2 0.2 5.4 10.2 15.8 22.0 12.5 7.5 0.3 1.6 6.6 10.2         Q3 292.4 8.3 35.0 4.7 12.0 − 0.4 5.3 10.3 15.0 19.2 − 11.0 6.6 − 1.2 1.7 5.7 10.7         Q4 311.7 3.8 34.3 5.2 11.0 0.2 3.4 10.5 15.7 15.9 14.1 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 10.7
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 34.1 − 0.4 11.7 0.2 4.9 10.3 15.1 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.5 34.6 2.0 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.3 4.6 − 0.4 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.1 39.1 6.5 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.7 14.5 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.3 5.3 9.0
         Q2 297.2 − 2.2 36.1 0.5 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 0.1 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3 300.0 3.4 36.3 6.2 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 12.9 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3         Q4
p 319.9 2.3 38.1 9.7 11.9 0.8 5.0 11.0 15.8 15.4 8.5 4.8 0.3 0.5 6.5 10.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 44.2 9.3 13.3 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.7 8.7 13.4 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 48.2 7.6 14.4 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.2 3.0 48.5 − 3.3 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.22014
p 360.3 0.6 50.5 2.6 14.0 0.3 6.7 13.6 25.7 27.4 6.9 7.6 0.4 4.0 7.7 17.8
2012          Q2 88.4 3.8 11.3 7.8 12.8 0.5 4.1 9.7 20.9 5.7 2.6 6.5 − 0.1 0.7 5.2 14.6         Q3 91.9 3.1 13.7 3.3 14.9 0.0 4.4 11.1 20.6 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5         Q4 95.2 1.9 14.8 − 10.1 15.5 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.7 55.8 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.4 11.1 20.2 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 50.2 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.4 11.9 − 1.7 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 9.8 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8         Q4
p 98.1 2.0 14.3 − 0.1 14.6 − 0.3 6.3 18.6 27.1 8.2 11.8 8.3 0.6 4.1 9.9 22.1
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2014 2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May p
Current account + 119,854 + 178,142 + 206,806 + 66,919 + 84,730 + 54,488 + 33,818 + 21,980 + 3,412 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,897,939 1,911,715 1,964,791 492,562 513,310 496,046 184,370 174,806 162,566
Imports 1,763,667 1,704,277 1,716,514 430,422 432,415 428,870 155,407 145,713 139,375
Balance + 134,274 + 207,438 + 248,280 + 62,141 + 80,896 + 67,176 + 28,963 + 29,093 + 23,191
2 Services
Receipts 610,769 644,437 693,214 185,506 181,271 166,931 60,015 57,382 60,300
Expenditure 555,341 577,456 625,651 164,749 166,966 157,084 55,853 53,848 53,261
Balance + 55,432 + 66,979 + 67,564 + 20,757 + 14,306 + 9,847 + 4,162 + 3,533 + 7,038
3 Primary income
Receipts 602,214 610,259 578,299 135,864 140,637 146,861 57,731 47,358 47,098
Expenditure 539,284 565,013 548,141 127,254 119,795 118,907 43,735 46,783 63,607
Balance + 62,929 + 45,245 + 30,154 + 8,609 + 20,841 + 27,953 + 13,996 + 574 − 16,509
4 Secondary income
Receipts 81,270 90,305 94,401 22,997 24,331 23,436 7,551 8,209 11,058
Expenditure 214,047 231,825 233,591 47,585 55,644 73,924 20,854 19,429 21,367
Balance − 132,779 − 141,521 − 139,191 − 24,588 − 31,313 − 50,489 − 13,303 − 11,220 − 10,309
Capital account + 11,927 + 22,924 + 22,194 + 4,225 + 7,502 + 3,910 + 1,721 + 1,116 + 2,268 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 224,137 + 409,893 + 294,650 + 90,486 + 60,979 − 8,842 + 96,216 − 9,333 + 26,155 C
1 Direct investment + 6,517 + 13,739 + 19,748 + 24,407 − 17,364 + 85,029 + 63,590 − 12,420 + 26,321
By resident units abroad + 486,089 + 643,145 + 137,825 + 69,095 + 56,140 + 159,715 + 52,110 + 16,294 + 26,015
By non-resident units in the euro area + 479,573 + 629,404 + 118,074 + 44,688 + 73,503 + 74,686 − 11,480 + 28,713 − 306
2 Portfolio investment − 40,128 − 11,092 + 94,206 + 84,357 + 95,879 − 131,235 − 5,217 + 52,725 + 14,704
By resident units abroad + 208,823 + 270,752 + 426,381 + 104,147 + 93,165 + 129,039 + 45,265 + 33,278 + 73,420
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 64,743 + 173,241 + 125,891 + 25,366 + 12,444 − 13,339 − 8,408 + 19,541 + 17,437
Long-term debt securities + 147,132 + 90,064 + 220,712 + 58,424 + 61,559 + 129,002 + 62,135 + 25,630 + 45,313
Short-term debt securities − 3,052 + 7,445 + 79,776 + 20,356 + 19,161 + 13,376 − 8,462 − 11,893 + 10,670
By non-resident units in the euro area + 248,951 + 281,844 + 332,173 + 19,789 − 2,716 + 260,273 + 50,482 − 19,447 + 58,716
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 142,996 + 175,297 + 265,653 + 58,004 + 33,945 + 143,587 + 45,116 + 3,821 + 12,927
Long-term debt securities + 125,068 + 93,902 + 89,732 − 50,288 + 16,210 + 94,207 − 1,484 − 37,735 + 57,143
Short-term debt securities − 19,113 + 12,646 − 23,212 + 12,073 − 52,869 + 22,480 + 6,850 + 14,467 − 11,354
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 33,775 + 32,721 + 45,361 + 20,285 + 10,179 + 27,333 + 10,536 + 4,587 + 4,513
4 Other investment + 208,232 + 369,795 + 130,814 − 37,220 − 30,653 + 4,020 + 27,024 − 50,327 − 17,753
Eurosystem − 9,061 + 57,138 + 55,813 + 14,913 − 77 − 1,524 + 22,734 + 5,325 + 3,599
General government + 3,682 − 13,077 + 10,607 + 331 + 17,955 + 17,876 + 15,975 − 75 − 5,858
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 96,511 + 256,526 + 114,937 − 30,311 − 3,612 + 7,093 − 12,901 − 61,327 − 10,512
Enterprises and households + 117,105 + 69,210 − 50,544 − 22,154 − 44,920 − 19,425 + 1,216 + 5,750 − 4,982
5 Reserve assets + 15,742 + 4,730 + 4,518 − 1,343 + 2,936 + 6,011 + 284 − 3,897 − 1,630
Net errors and omissions + 92,357 + 208,829 + 65,650 + 19,342 − 31,253 − 67,239 + 60,677 − 32,429 + 20,475 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
Goods trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total (fob/fob) 
1 items 2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2000 − 36,962 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,370 − 12,722 − 29,931 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,660
2001 − 7,912 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,156 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1172002 + 41,701 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,367 − 4,010 + 8,029 − 2,065 − 29,6612003 + 31,215 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,694 − 18,933 − 31,179 + 5,920 + 47,555 − 445 + 10,4202004 + 100,835 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 16,895 − 30,479 − 119 + 112,832 − 1,470 + 12,116
2005 + 106,140 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 20,965 − 31,175 − 2,334 + 96,432 − 2,182 − 7,374
2006 + 135,939 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 41,571 − 32,320 − 1,328 + 157,134 − 2,934 + 22,5232007 + 169,595 + 201,989 − 922 − 35,032 + 36,483 − 33,845 − 1,597 + 183,158 + 953 + 15,1602008 + 143,317 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,608 + 24,865 − 34,462 − 893 + 121,326 + 2,008 − 21,0972009 + 141,117 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,909 + 55,018 − 35,159 − 1,858 + 117,837 − 3,200 − 21,423
2010 + 145,101 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,477 + 51,101 − 39,669 + 1,219 + 92,759 + 1,613 − 53,560
2011 + 164,552 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,471 + 69,102 − 35,505 + 1,642 + 120,849 + 2,836 − 45,3452012 + 187,345 + 196,579 − 10,694 − 35,905 + 66,811 − 40,139 + 1,427 + 157,461 + 1,297 − 31,3122013 + 179,743 + 207,597 − 5,236 − 44,755 + 59,941 − 43,041 + 1,142 + 207,920 + 838 + 27,0352014 + 215,524 + 229,301 − 6,351 − 39,967 + 66,744 − 40,555 + 2,826 + 243,226 − 2,564 + 24,877
2012          Q3 + 45,856 + 52,191 − 2,392 − 15,516 + 17,714 − 8,533 + 1,342 + 40,448 + 59 − 6,750
         Q4 + 54,761 + 45,332 − 3,422 − 4,435 + 24,962 − 11,099 − 120 + 62,900 − 494 + 8,260
2013          Q1 + 40,674 + 51,585 − 1,335 − 10,480 + 14,761 − 15,192 + 420 + 36,822 + 86 − 4,272
         Q2 + 42,520 + 54,180 + 1,595 − 10,657 + 6,370 − 7,373 + 760 + 58,926 + 72 + 15,646         Q3 + 37,146 + 49,141 − 4,067 − 16,907 + 14,375 − 9,463 + 438 + 48,587 − 785 + 11,003         Q4 + 59,403 + 52,691 − 1,429 − 6,712 + 24,436 − 11,013 − 476 + 63,585 + 1,464 + 4,658
2014          Q1 + 48,561 + 53,324 + 1,177 − 7,378 + 17,521 − 14,906 + 2,182 + 60,008 − 565 + 9,265
         Q2 + 45,461 + 54,760 − 1,105 − 8,201 + 5,735 − 6,833 + 542 + 57,204 − 610 + 11,201         Q3 + 54,954 + 61,098 − 2,693 − 17,089 + 18,747 − 7,802 + 783 + 68,150 + 332 + 12,413         Q4 + 66,547 + 60,119 − 3,729 − 7,299 + 24,740 − 11,013 − 681 + 57,863 − 1,722 − 8,003
2015          Q1 + 57,223 + 60,384 − 1,619 − 6,553 + 18,947 − 15,556 + 249 + 54,452 − 21 − 3,019
         Q2 
p + 57,347 + 69,680 − 1,923 − 8,429 + 3,466 − 7,370 + 1,151 + 73,775 − 465 + 15,278
2013          Jan + 9,538 + 14,421 − 427 − 3,871 + 4,353 − 5,364 + 173 − 10,275 + 493 − 19,986         Feb + 10,925 + 16,197 − 1,411 − 3,425 + 4,899 − 6,746 − 113 + 12,821 − 321 + 2,008         Mar + 20,210 + 20,966 + 502 − 3,183 + 5,509 − 3,082 + 360 + 34,275 − 86 + 13,705
         Apr + 15,408 + 19,987 + 498 − 2,425 + 180 − 2,333 + 188 + 20,636 + 56 + 5,041
         May + 11,852 + 16,471 + 1,917 − 4,221 + 1,817 − 2,215 + 268 + 9,952 − 22 − 2,168         June + 15,260 + 17,722 − 820 − 4,010 + 4,373 − 2,824 + 304 + 28,338 + 38 + 12,773
         July + 11,469 + 16,143 − 1,005 − 6,491 + 5,048 − 3,230 + 126 + 4,633 − 654 − 6,963
         Aug + 7,342 + 12,722 − 1,776 − 6,786 + 5,027 − 3,621 + 184 + 24,787 + 425 + 17,261         Sep + 18,335 + 20,276 − 1,285 − 3,629 + 4,300 − 2,612 + 128 + 19,168 − 556 + 705
         Oct + 15,783 + 18,903 − 362 − 5,875 + 5,544 − 2,789 + 514 + 16,097 − 212 − 200
         Nov + 21,452 + 19,822 + 192 − 2,141 + 5,997 − 2,226 + 176 + 21,190 + 407 − 439         Dec + 22,167 + 13,966 − 1,258 + 1,305 + 12,895 − 5,998 − 1,166 + 26,299 + 1,269 + 5,297
2014          Jan + 13,851 + 15,962 − 748 − 2,882 + 5,238 − 4,466 + 1,500 + 1,295 − 375 − 14,057
         Feb + 13,066 + 17,277 − 9 − 2,817 + 5,842 − 7,236 + 433 + 23,490 − 898 + 9,991         Mar + 21,644 + 20,085 + 1,933 − 1,680 + 6,442 − 3,204 + 249 + 35,224 + 708 + 13,331
         Apr + 16,597 + 18,601 − 329 − 1,857 + 3,231 − 3,378 + 194 + 29,427 + 151 + 12,636
         May + 11,945 + 17,921 − 1,532 − 2,392 − 2,350 − 1,233 − 54 + 12,165 − 631 + 275         June + 16,919 + 18,238 + 756 − 3,951 + 4,854 − 2,222 + 402 + 15,611 − 130 − 1,709
         July + 20,591 + 22,871 − 1,837 − 5,393 + 6,036 − 2,923 − 8 + 18,353 + 431 − 2,230
         Aug + 11,056 + 14,558 − 675 − 6,974 + 5,875 − 2,403 + 439 + 14,135 + 166 + 2,640         Sep + 23,308 + 23,669 − 182 − 4,721 + 6,837 − 2,477 + 352 + 35,662 − 265 + 12,003
         Oct + 22,195 + 23,474 − 1,539 − 5,488 + 6,600 − 2,392 − 109 + 12,134 + 203 − 9,951
         Nov + 18,985 + 18,355 − 480 − 2,418 + 6,603 − 3,555 + 134 + 21,558 + 30 + 2,440         Dec + 25,368 + 18,290 − 1,710 + 607 + 11,537 − 5,066 − 706 + 24,171 − 1,955 − 491
2015          Jan + 14,513 + 15,592 − 1,190 − 2,372 + 5,551 − 4,258 + 27 − 3,722 + 372 − 18,261
         Feb + 15,510 + 19,584 − 872 − 2,372 + 5,873 − 7,575 + 37 + 34,463 + 266 + 18,915         Mar + 27,199 + 25,208 + 444 − 1,809 + 7,523 − 3,722 + 185 + 23,712 − 660 − 3,673
         Apr + 21,237 + 22,611 − 1,197 − 2,098 + 3,671 − 2,947 + 370 + 34,680 − 69 + 13,073
         May + 11,752 + 21,473 − 477 − 2,572 − 5,019 − 2,130 + 565 + 16,319 − 78 + 4,002         June 
p + 24,358 + 25,596 − 249 − 3,759 + 4,815 − 2,293 + 216 + 22,776 − 318 − 1,798
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net acquisition/disposal of
transactions for the account of residents and the deduction of goods returned. non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from
Deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing; the difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3Including freight and current account and the capital account. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2015
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2015
Ländergruppe/Land  2012  2013  2014 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,095,766 1,093,115 1,133,541 89,963 95,620 107,493 100,485 95,830 105,934
Imports 905,925 898,164 916,636 74,032 76,199 84,515 78,647 76,305 81,896Balance + 189,841 + 194,950 + 216,905 + 15,931 + 19,421 + 22,978 + 21,839 + 19,526 + 24,038
I Exports 751,071 748,156 770,936 62,244 65,248 71,889 66,563 65,120 ... European countries
Imports 629,305 633,706 650,011 50,253 52,869 58,172 55,364 53,847 ...
Balance + 121,766 + 114,451 + 120,925 + 11,991 + 12,380 + 13,717 + 11,199 + 11,273 ...
Exports 622,674 623,472 657,164 54,131 56,502 61,599 57,094 56,376 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 504,494 513,463 532,929 41,254 43,996 48,449 45,814 44,851 ...
Balance + 118,180 + 110,009 + 124,235 + 12,877 + 12,506 + 13,149 + 11,280 + 11,526 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 410,039 406,064 417,159 34,402 35,760 38,573 36,350 35,622 ...
countries Imports 340,845 344,143 352,398 27,082 29,063 31,928 30,456 29,531 ...
Balance + 69,194 + 61,921 + 64,761 + 7,320 + 6,698 + 6,645 + 5,894 + 6,091 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,591 56,276 56,160 4,344 4,611 5,136 4,684 4,607 ...
Imports 36,419 36,793 36,368 2,786 2,984 3,344 3,219 2,997 ...
Balance + 20,172 + 19,484 + 19,792 + 1,558 + 1,627 + 1,792 + 1,465 + 1,610 ...
Belgium and Exports 49,424 47,980 47,656 3,746 3,812 4,279 3,969 3,840 ...
Luxembourg Imports 40,528 42,033 42,960 3,187 3,436 3,494 3,453 3,328 ...
Balance + 8,896 + 5,947 + 4,696 + 559 + 376 + 785 + 516 + 512 ...
France Exports 102,911 99,980 101,954 8,597 9,250 9,032 9,010 8,579 ...
Imports 64,035 64,018 67,440 5,160 5,662 6,471 5,424 5,312 ...
Balance + 38,875 + 35,962 + 34,515 + 3,438 + 3,588 + 2,561 + 3,585 + 3,267 ...
Italy Exports 55,529 53,247 54,475 4,482 4,708 5,276 4,814 4,889 ...
Imports 47,957 46,930 48,565 3,568 3,956 4,358 4,170 4,070 ...
Balance + 7,572 + 6,317 + 5,910 + 914 + 752 + 918 + 644 + 819 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,381 70,970 73,120 6,117 6,038 6,856 6,544 6,189 ...
Imports 85,738 88,680 88,184 6,755 6,993 7,688 7,691 7,528 ...
Balance − 15,357 − 17,709 − 15,064 − 638 − 956 − 832 − 1,147 − 1,339 ...
Spain Exports 31,047 31,349 34,950 3,090 3,230 3,333 3,067 3,270 ...
Imports 23,206 23,639 24,835 2,036 2,139 2,359 2,219 2,297 ...
Balance + 7,841 + 7,709 + 10,115 + 1,055 + 1,092 + 974 + 848 + 973 ...
Other EU member Exports 212,635 217,408 240,005 19,729 20,742 23,026 20,744 20,754 ...
states Imports 163,649 169,320 180,531 14,172 14,933 16,521 15,357 15,320 ...
Balance + 48,986 + 48,088 + 59,474 + 5,557 + 5,809 + 6,505 + 5,387 + 5,434 ...
of which
United Exports 73,283 75,488 84,115 6,848 7,462 8,400 7,383 7,025 ...
Kingdom Imports 42,820 42,513 42,235 3,113 3,025 3,761 3,223 3,183 ...
Balance + 30,462 + 32,975 + 41,880 + 3,735 + 4,437 + 4,638 + 4,160 + 3,842 ...
Exports 128,398 124,684 113,772 8,113 8,747 10,290 9,468 8,744 ... 2 Other European
Imports 124,811 120,242 117,082 8,999 8,873 9,723 9,550 8,996 ... countries
Balance + 3,586 + 4,442 − 3,310 − 886 − 127 + 568 − 82 − 253 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 48,933 46,924 46,270 3,861 4,028 4,547 4,173 3,775 ...
Imports 37,775 38,321 39,344 3,211 3,624 3,632 3,450 3,401 ...
Balance + 11,158 + 8,603 + 6,926 + 650 + 404 + 915 + 723 + 374 ...
II Exports 340,980 341,213 359,131 27,540 30,193 35,545 33,699 30,461 ... Non-European
Imports 276,620 264,459 266,625 23,779 23,330 26,396 23,283 22,458 ... countries
Balance + 64,360 + 76,754 + 92,506 + 3,761 + 6,862 + 9,149 + 10,417 + 8,003 ...
Exports 21,920 21,803 22,602 1,771 1,888 2,307 2,189 1,924 ... 1 Africa
Imports 24,145 23,108 20,195 1,635 1,408 1,596 1,572 1,607 ...
Balance − 2,224 − 1,305 + 2,407 + 136 + 480 + 711 + 616 + 317 ...
Exports 128,703 130,427 135,530 10,771 12,088 14,670 13,470 12,359 ... 2 America
Imports 80,549 75,023 73,704 6,129 6,571 7,802 7,521 6,602 ...
Balance + 48,154 + 55,404 + 61,827 + 4,642 + 5,517 + 6,868 + 5,949 + 5,757 ...
of which
Exports 86,971 89,348 96,077 7,747 8,811 10,738 9,824 8,666 ... United States
Imports 51,070 48,582 48,591 4,208 4,773 5,549 5,285 4,449 ...
Balance + 35,901 + 40,766 + 47,486 + 3,539 + 4,038 + 5,189 + 4,540 + 4,217 ...
Exports 179,630 179,038 191,421 14,247 15,460 17,704 17,228 15,378 ... 3 Asia
Imports 167,873 162,960 169,808 15,812 15,110 16,738 13,982 14,009 ...
Balance + 11,757 + 16,077 + 21,613 − 1,565 + 350 + 966 + 3,245 + 1,369 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,503 32,754 35,611 2,506 3,018 3,087 3,701 3,167 ...
Imports 8,134 8,921 7,845 624 608 660 501 660 ...
Balance + 24,369 + 23,833 + 27,767 + 1,882 + 2,410 + 2,427 + 3,200 + 2,506 ...
Japan Exports 17,138 17,076 16,919 1,388 1,392 1,513 1,305 1,168 ...
Imports 21,910 19,492 19,038 1,521 1,595 1,876 1,687 1,662 ...
Balance − 4,772 − 2,416 − 2,119 − 133 − 202 − 362 − 383 − 495 ...
Exports 66,746 66,912 74,504 5,500 5,711 6,681 6,345 5,610 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 78,529 74,544 79,679 7,915 7,374 8,077 6,127 6,530 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 11,783 − 7,633 − 5,175 − 2,416 − 1,663 − 1,396 + 218 − 920 ...
Exports 45,651 45,894 48,563 3,689 3,978 4,726 4,479 4,180 ... New industrial countries
Imports 37,428 36,672 38,720 3,399 3,260 3,764 3,533 3,201 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 8,223 + 9,222 + 9,842 + 289 + 718 + 963 + 946 + 978 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,727 9,946 9,578 751 757 865 812 800 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,054 3,368 2,918 202 241 261 206 240 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,672 + 6,578 + 6,660 + 548 + 516 + 604 + 606 + 561 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment Manufacturing intellectual Compensation
Period Total services 1 Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 income of employees
2010 − 27,477 + 1,070 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 8,762 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 + 47,948
2011 − 32,471 + 567 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,823 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,314 + 64,7072012 − 35,905 + 178 − 10,199 − 35,422 + 8,784 + 3,020 + 1,404 − 9,547 + 3,103 + 3,616 + 62,1932013 − 44,755 + 0 − 12,063 − 37,713 + 8,181 + 3,522 − 858 − 6,358 + 3,076 + 1,069 + 57,6772014 − 39,967 − 26 − 13,079 − 37,649 + 6,333 + 4,284 + 2,472 − 2,859 + 2,930 + 1,036 + 64,859
2013          Q4 − 6,712 + 92 − 3,527 − 7,004 + 2,570 + 1,204 + 1,008 − 1,446 + 717 + 486 + 20,014
2014          Q1 − 7,378 + 111 − 3,566 − 5,883 + 1,294 + 1,114 + 124 − 388 + 753 + 873 + 17,648
         Q2 − 8,201 + 69 − 3,080 − 8,568 + 1,721 + 1,063 + 619 − 351 + 782 + 50 + 6,526         Q3 − 17,089 − 39 − 3,216 − 15,909 + 1,757 + 807 + 171 − 882 + 719 − 275 + 20,018         Q4 − 7,299 − 168 − 3,217 − 7,288 + 1,561 + 1,300 + 1,557 − 1,238 + 677 + 388 + 20,667
2015          Q1 − 6,553 + 51 − 3,052 − 5,798 + 1,742 + 1,158 + 234 − 767 + 867 + 801 + 19,225
         Q2 − 8,429 + 86 − 2,283 − 8,660 + 1,303 + 1,248 + 1,343 − 1,540 + 808 + 12 + 4,683
2014          Aug − 6,974 − 1 − 960 − 6,563 + 496 + 332 + 106 − 445 + 250 − 79 + 6,306
         Sep − 4,721 + 7 − 1,101 − 5,101 + 402 + 229 + 453 + 265 + 231 − 91 + 7,325
         Oct − 5,488 − 46 − 1,275 − 4,505 + 414 + 334 + 143 − 629 + 259 + 160 + 6,853
         Nov − 2,418 − 21 − 1,082 − 1,795 + 503 + 381 + 159 − 502 + 238 + 126 + 6,890         Dec + 607 − 101 − 860 − 988 + 644 + 584 + 1,255 − 106 + 180 + 103 + 6,924
2015          Jan − 2,372 + 10 − 1,151 − 1,404 + 907 + 172 − 75 − 682 + 283 + 274 + 5,653
         Feb − 2,372 + 35 − 816 − 1,825 + 221 + 381 − 88 − 385 + 280 + 283 + 5,873         Mar − 1,809 + 6 − 1,085 − 2,569 + 614 + 605 + 397 + 300 + 304 + 244 + 7,698
         Apr − 2,098 − 11 − 740 − 1,785 + 504 + 342 + 84 − 627 + 303 − 36 + 4,127
         May − 2,572 + 24 − 770 − 2,688 + 429 + 561 + 245 − 677 + 309 + 39 − 4,629         June − 3,759 + 73 − 773 − 4,186 + 370 + 345 + 1,014 − 236 + 195 + 9 + 5,185
1Includes fees for processing goods that are not owned by the processor. 2Since side. 3Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not
2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2010 − 39,669 − 24,953 − 4,720 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,085
2011 − 35,505 − 21,001 − 4,475 + 6,718 − 14,504 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 4942012 − 40,139 − 25,752 − 5,451 + 5,206 − 14,387 − 2,952 − 2,952 + 1,427 + 1,743 − 3162013 − 43,041 − 28,147 − 4,051 + 6,173 − 14,893 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 1,142 + 1,111 + 312014 − 40,555 − 27,438 − 5,139 + 7,953 − 13,116 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,826 + 2,736 + 90
2013          Q4 − 11,013 − 6,503 − 907 + 825 − 4,510 − 815 − 807 − 476 − 430 − 46
2014          Q1 − 14,906 − 11,885 − 1,677 + 1,285 − 3,021 − 870 − 863 + 2,182 + 934 + 1,248
         Q2 − 6,833 − 2,662 − 763 + 4,998 − 4,172 − 869 − 863 + 542 + 811 − 269         Q3 − 7,802 − 4,501 − 1,048 + 930 − 3,301 − 870 − 863 + 783 + 725 + 58         Q4 − 11,013 − 8,390 − 1,651 + 740 − 2,623 − 866 − 863 − 681 + 266 − 947
2015          Q1 − 15,556 − 12,631 − 2,180 + 1,256 − 2,925 − 885 − 881 + 249 − 6 + 255
         Q2 − 7,370 − 2,031 − 1,146 + 6,070 − 5,339 − 884 − 881 + 1,151 + 1,166 − 15
2014          Aug − 2,403 − 1,586 − 326 + 269 − 817 − 291 − 288 + 439 + 272 + 167
         Sep − 2,477 − 977 − 271 + 447 − 1,500 − 290 − 288 + 352 + 220 + 132
         Oct − 2,392 − 1,667 − 370 + 125 − 725 − 289 − 288 − 109 + 130 − 238
         Nov − 3,555 − 2,738 − 491 + 15 − 817 − 289 − 288 + 134 + 388 − 255         Dec − 5,066 − 3,985 − 790 + 600 − 1,081 − 288 − 288 − 706 − 252 − 454
2015          Jan − 4,258 − 3,337 − 1,462 + 752 − 922 − 295 − 294 + 27 − 20 + 47
         Feb − 7,575 − 6,680 − 470 + 234 − 895 − 296 − 294 + 37 + 91 − 54         Mar − 3,722 − 2,614 − 249 + 270 − 1,108 − 295 − 294 + 185 − 77 + 262
         Apr − 2,947 − 2,010 − 511 + 1,045 − 936 − 295 − 294 + 370 + 427 − 57
         May − 2,130 + 975 − 179 + 3,673 − 3,105 − 295 − 294 + 565 + 448 + 116         June − 2,293 − 996 − 456 + 1,351 − 1,297 − 295 − 294 + 216 + 290 − 75
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2014 2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 376,169 + 36,997 + 297,431 + 78,048 + 13,185 + 246,467 − 4,709 + 50,138 − 7,137 − 47,710
1 Direct investment + 77,735 + 53,360 + 88,717 + 19,891 + 16,458 + 39,394 + 21,469 + 6,355 + 4,403 + 10,711
Equity + 61,084 + 34,189 + 70,251 + 11,398 + 17,373 + 24,440 + 13,300 + 3,817 + 7,029 + 2,454
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 21,052 + 14,523 + 22,241 + 6,452 + 1,579 + 10,758 + 2,787 + 1,328 − 430 + 1,889
Debt instruments + 16,651 + 19,172 + 18,465 + 8,492 − 915 + 14,954 + 8,169 + 2,538 − 2,626 + 8,256
2 Portfolio investment + 109,712 + 143,233 + 149,427 + 29,438 + 35,510 + 56,618 + 26,215 + 6,998 + 10,971 + 8,246
Shares 2 + 11,675 + 19,019 + 10,610 − 563 + 3,328 + 260 + 10,650 + 50 + 5,038 + 5,563
Investment fund shares 3 + 21,667 + 31,939 + 38,324 + 12,892 + 6,105 + 17,448 + 8,136 + 2,660 + 4,490 + 986
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 75,913 + 87,772 + 99,068 + 19,462 + 28,763 + 32,761 + 10,351 + 5,464 + 4,177 + 710
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 456 + 4,503 + 1,425 − 2,353 − 2,686 + 6,149 − 2,923 − 1,175 − 2,735 + 987
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 24,386 + 24,286 + 31,783 + 9,521 + 6,996 + 11,702 + 8,164 + 1,832 + 1,112 + 5,220
4. Other investment 7 + 163,040 − 184,720 + 30,068 + 18,867 − 44,057 + 138,775 − 60,093 + 35,021 − 23,545 − 71,569
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 66,080 − 56,647 + 76,332 + 1,780 − 2,366 + 39,134 − 35,503 + 43,424 − 16,930 − 61,997
Long-term − 47,912 − 50,495 + 21,176 + 9,844 + 12,562 + 7,417 + 2,812 + 448 − 2,807 + 5,171
Short-term − 18,169 − 6,152 + 55,156 − 8,064 − 14,928 + 31,718 − 38,315 + 42,976 − 14,123 − 67,168
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 13,394 + 10,049 − 10,409 − 6,408 − 27,394 + 29,064 − 11,484 − 8,712 + 6,361 − 9,133
Long-term + 337 + 910 + 852 + 773 + 1,738 + 1,129 + 2,981 + 1,587 + 1,231 + 162
Short-term − 13,731 + 9,139 − 11,261 − 7,181 − 29,132 + 27,935 − 14,465 − 10,299 + 5,130 − 9,296
General government + 49,836 + 7,397 + 14,024 + 5,392 + 4,777 − 279 − 12,477 − 180 − 6,974 − 5,322
Long-term + 49,846 + 15,078 − 2,372 + 16 − 1,305 − 3,690 − 1,294 − 277 − 70 − 946
Short-term − 10 − 7,681 + 16,396 + 5,376 + 6,082 + 3,411 − 11,183 + 97 − 6,904 − 4,376
Bundesbank + 192,679 − 145,519 − 49,880 + 18,103 − 19,074 + 70,856 − 628 + 490 − 6,002 + 4,884
5. Reserve assets + 1,297 + 838 − 2,564 + 332 − 1,722 − 21 − 465 − 69 − 78 − 318
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 218,708 − 170,922 + 54,205 + 9,897 − 44,678 + 192,015 − 78,484 + 15,458 − 23,456 − 70,486
1 Direct investment + 42,110 + 44,385 + 5,508 − 2,625 − 5,968 + 14,681 + 18,235 − 3,277 + 12,535 + 8,977
Equity + 9,959 + 7,499 + 22,527 + 7,927 + 10,841 + 5,872 + 5,967 + 1,531 + 3,965 + 472
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 2,552 + 585 + 5,427 + 2,166 + 968 + 4,025 + 2,288 + 1,077 + 891 + 320
Debt instruments + 32,150 + 36,886 − 17,020 − 10,551 − 16,809 + 8,809 + 12,268 − 4,808 + 8,570 + 8,506
2 Portfolio investment + 54,951 − 21,263 + 21,680 + 1,328 − 10,735 + 6,466 − 22,725 − 7,989 − 5,320 − 9,415
Shares 2) + 2,281 + 5,024 + 8,328 + 2,743 + 2,946 + 1,615 + 8,504 − 4,458 + 1,952 + 11,010
Investment fund shares 3 − 3,422 + 6,086 − 5,642 − 2,955 − 3,457 + 4,699 − 3,632 − 3,448 − 145 − 39
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 56,198 − 9,467 + 21,410 − 5,550 + 6,441 − 13,842 − 26,194 − 8,130 − 6,690 − 11,373
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 107 − 22,907 − 2,417 + 7,090 − 16,665 + 13,994 − 1,403 + 8,047 − 437 − 9,013
3. Other investment 7 + 121,648 − 194,044 + 27,017 + 11,194 − 27,975 + 170,868 − 73,994 + 26,724 − 30,671 − 70,048
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 51,508 − 158,237 + 32,495 + 29,893 − 33,557 + 105,678 − 45,229 + 38,634 − 21,480 − 62,383
Long-term − 10,250 − 16,733 − 14,555 − 5,748 − 675 − 9,793 − 7,942 − 2,189 − 4,134 − 1,619
Short-term + 61,758 − 141,504 + 47,050 + 35,640 − 32,882 + 115,470 − 37,287 + 40,823 − 17,346 − 60,764
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 8,668 − 8,583 + 4,141 − 631 − 6,789 + 20,844 − 17,204 − 10,382 − 1,226 − 5,596
Long-term − 56 − 13,790 − 5,331 − 1,579 − 936 + 522 + 8,653 + 998 + 4,007 + 3,648
Short-term + 8,724 + 5,207 + 9,473 + 948 − 5,853 + 20,322 − 25,858 − 11,381 − 5,233 − 9,244
General government − 31,011 − 1,577 − 5,594 − 3,123 − 3,916 + 6,146 − 17,520 − 3,444 − 8,457 − 5,619
Long-term + 35,994 + 9,302 − 914 + 203 − 892 − 4,085 − 37 + 60 − 139 + 42
Short-term − 67,005 − 10,878 − 4,680 − 3,326 − 3,023 + 10,231 − 17,483 − 3,504 − 8,318 − 5,661
Bundesbank + 92,482 − 25,647 − 4,025 − 14,945 + 16,287 + 38,200 + 5,959 + 1,916 + 492 + 3,550
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 157,461 + 207,920 + 243,226 + 68,150 + 57,863 + 54,452 + 73,775 + 34,680 + 16,319 + 22,776
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,222 37,7262003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,309 12,085
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,029 − 1,919
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,396 14,8722006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,724 − 30,3352007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,607 2,8852008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,941 − 7,166
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,701 75,585
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,295 251,4002011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,793 380,8692012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,9762013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2012          Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 13,772 8,999 29,606 727,807 715,124 63,240 429,581 558,953
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,976
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 13,251 8,701 28,249 629,935 616,937 63,705 420,968 457,619
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 13,375 8,637 29,079 625,570 612,572 62,715 414,303 457,205         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 13,526 8,877 29,590 601,719 588,722 62,445 399,626 452,985
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 13,336 8,760 29,040 620,862 607,866 62,590 414,310 443,123
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 13,272 8,712 28,893 602,185 589,189 61,455 405,918 426,828         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 13,236 8,690 28,618 588,473 575,477 59,589 393,961 404,927
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 12,960 8,690 27,623 589,421 576,469 59,133 398,251 408,914
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 13,018 8,416 28,330 586,580 573,628 57,590 398,868 409,781         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 12,920 8,375 27,337 583,320 570,368 56,873 398,035 398,611
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 12,941 7,981 27,086 574,449 561,497 56,514 421,360 364,089
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 12,962 7,945 27,473 557,441 544,488 56,278 409,079 352,651         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 13,030 8,080 28,388 512,785 500,357 54,153 402,189 314,679
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 389,297 329,020         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 376,533 311,024
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 397,660 295,296
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 400,885 280,003         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 394,597 283,539
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 372,693 287,828
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 374,337 306,987         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 380,316 316,486
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 392,583 289,207
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 399,026 283,943         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 451,674 299,388
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 442,744 301,808         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 433,272 334,584
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 434,750 327,687
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 435,439 323,061         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 438,820 317,442
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 445,159 318,088
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,892
2013 779,109 280,526 498,583 319,761 178,822 163,734 15,088 920,620 142,676 777,944 616,341 161,603 94,646 66,957
2014 812,778 276,370 536,408 351,186 185,222 170,423 14,799 922,628 148,746 773,882 609,827 164,055 97,641 66,413
2015          Jan 848,260 305,497 542,763 358,288 184,475 169,656 14,819 943,403 165,356 778,047 618,144 159,903 91,849 68,054
         Feb 860,326 308,542 551,784 362,998 188,786 173,821 14,965 954,324 161,784 792,540 626,223 166,316 97,748 68,568         Mar 879,813 311,525 568,287 369,286 199,001 184,184 14,817 971,794 164,382 807,412 634,509 172,903 104,731 68,172
         Apr 869,591 299,733 569,858 376,549 193,309 178,392 14,918 956,906 159,624 797,281 631,613 165,668 97,019 68,649
         May 
r 875,930 306,468 569,462 379,450 190,012 175,225 14,787 971,466 160,895 810,571 644,661 165,911 96,643 69,268
         June 869,994 294,300 575,693 380,447 195,247 180,643 14,604 972,483 148,926 823,556 646,164 177,392 104,329 73,064
Industrial countries 1
 
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,181
2013 689,637 277,223 412,414 291,000 121,414 108,082 13,332 833,922 141,307 692,615 579,018 113,597 78,921 34,676
2014 713,600 271,498 442,103 317,132 124,971 111,871 13,100 835,644 147,572 688,072 572,267 115,805 80,626 35,178
2015          Jan 748,114 301,076 447,038 322,864 124,174 110,921 13,253 856,554 164,117 692,436 580,710 111,726 75,556 36,170         Feb 757,657 303,965 453,692 325,408 128,284 114,901 13,383 863,192 157,877 705,314 588,839 116,475 80,474 36,001         Mar 774,105 307,200 466,905 330,454 136,451 123,237 13,215 875,377 155,133 720,244 597,564 122,680 87,143 35,537
         Apr 761,717 295,713 466,004 335,137 130,867 117,560 13,307 861,866 151,156 710,710 594,619 116,091 80,518 35,573
         May 
r 767,959 302,222 465,738 337,515 128,222 115,094 13,128 877,838 153,148 724,691 609,304 115,386 79,464 35,922
         June 763,810 290,269 473,542 339,473 134,069 121,150 12,919 878,509 143,666 734,843 610,957 123,886 86,839 37,047
EU member states 1
 
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,507
2013 582,038 262,788 319,249 232,788 86,461 75,934 10,527 699,765 127,084 572,681 493,383 79,298 52,975 26,323
2014 600,437 256,437 344,001 255,518 88,483 77,872 10,611 700,737 133,331 567,406 486,649 80,757 53,878 26,879
2015          Jan 633,615 285,501 348,115 259,651 88,464 77,756 10,708 722,420 153,817 568,603 490,049 78,554 50,837 27,717         Feb 640,095 287,264 352,831 261,188 91,643 80,840 10,803 729,804 148,731 581,073 498,450 82,623 55,133 27,490         Mar 651,963 290,081 361,882 264,555 97,328 86,591 10,737 735,746 144,980 590,766 504,402 86,365 59,491 26,873
         Apr 639,968 278,614 361,354 267,817 93,537 82,727 10,810 722,493 142,080 580,413 498,770 81,643 54,755 26,888
         May 
r 645,392 285,057 360,335 268,646 91,689 81,051 10,638 728,229 143,509 584,720 503,588 81,132 54,012 27,120
         June 639,258 274,635 364,623 268,619 96,004 85,591 10,413 726,363 134,645 591,718 505,396 86,322 59,100 27,222
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,196
2013 422,440 196,101 226,339 170,696 55,643 49,469 6,175 593,680 100,922 492,758 439,537 53,221 36,389 16,832
2014 444,124 201,453 242,671 186,318 56,353 50,132 6,220 591,186 105,388 485,798 433,325 52,472 35,555 16,918
2015          Jan 472,002 224,409 247,593 190,290 57,303 51,017 6,286 611,918 123,093 488,825 436,734 52,091 34,508 17,582         Feb 475,004 224,638 250,366 191,822 58,544 52,165 6,380 606,794 111,603 495,192 440,932 54,260 37,061 17,199         Mar 480,981 225,938 255,043 193,641 61,403 55,056 6,347 614,830 110,641 504,189 448,279 55,910 39,162 16,748
         Apr 467,235 211,821 255,414 195,923 59,491 53,091 6,399 606,337 108,240 498,097 444,765 53,331 36,538 16,793
         May 
r 479,567 225,078 254,488 195,997 58,491 52,122 6,369 605,974 106,987 498,987 446,062 52,924 36,027 16,898
         June 471,500 213,883 257,617 196,698 60,919 54,568 6,351 603,463 100,537 502,925 447,037 55,889 39,127 16,762
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,683
2013 89,466 3,303 86,163 28,759 57,403 55,647 1,756 86,694 1,368 85,325 37,323 48,002 15,723 32,280
2014 99,174 4,872 94,302 34,051 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,982 1,174 85,808 37,560 48,248 17,014 31,234
2015          Jan 100,146 4,421 95,725 35,424 60,301 58,735 1,566 86,849 1,239 85,610 37,433 48,177 16,293 31,884         Feb 101,946 3,999 97,946 37,590 60,356 58,774 1,582 88,223 1,198 87,025 37,184 49,841 17,274 32,567         Mar 104,894 3,659 101,235 38,833 62,403 60,801 1,602 88,195 1,227 86,968 36,745 50,223 17,588 32,635
         Apr 107,035 3,349 103,686 41,412 62,274 60,663 1,611 87,531 1,160 86,371 36,794 49,577 16,501 33,076
         May 
r 107,117 3,575 103,543 41,934 61,608 59,949 1,659 86,994 1,314 85,681 35,156 50,525 17,179 33,346
         June 105,332 3,367 101,965 40,973 60,992 59,307 1,685 89,811 1,298 88,513 35,007 53,506 17,489 36,017
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2014          July 1.4420 1.4524 8.3940 7.4564 137.72 8.3880 9.2327 1.2150 0.79310 1.3539
         Aug 1.4306 1.4548 8.1965 7.4551 137.11 8.2522 9.1878 1.2118 0.79730 1.3316         Sep 1.4246 1.4196 7.9207 7.4449 138.39 8.1798 9.1929 1.2076 0.79113 1.2901
         Oct 1.4436 1.4214 7.7635 7.4448 136.85 8.3136 9.1797 1.2078 0.78861 1.2673
         Nov 1.4432 1.4136 7.6411 7.4415 145.03 8.4912 9.2384 1.2027 0.79054 1.2472         Dec 1.4928 1.4216 7.6330 7.4402 147.06 8.9802 9.4043 1.2026 0.78830 1.2331
2015          Jan 1.4390 1.4039 7.2269 7.4406 137.47 8.9320 9.4167
3 1.0940 0.76680 1.1621
         Feb 1.4568 1.4199 7.0960 7.4501 134.69 8.6188 9.4901 1.0618 0.74051 1.1350
         Mar 1.4008 1.3661 6.7623 7.4593 130.41 8.6434 9.2449 1.0608 0.72358 1.0838
         Apr 1.3939 1.3313 6.6863 7.4655 128.94 8.5057 9.3254 1.0379 0.72116 1.0779
         May 1.4123 1.3568 6.9165 7.4612 134.75 8.4103 9.3037 1.0391 0.72124 1.1150         June 1.4530 1.3854 6.9587 7.4603 138.74 8.7550 9.2722 1.0455 0.72078 1.1213
         July 1.4844 1.4124 6.8269 7.4616 135.68 8.9357 9.3860 1.0492 0.70685 1.0996
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange indicative rates. 2Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 3Discontinuation
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference of the minimum exchange rate of EUR 1 = CHF 1.20 on 15 January 2015. 
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2015
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.0 95.9 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.5 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.8 84.9 87.9 85.7 91.6 97.3 85.0 90.7 92.9 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.4 85.9 90.5 86.9 91.4 96.2 85.8 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.3 89.2 95.0 90.5 92.0 95.3 88.2 90.6 93.6 92.0 91.8
2003 100.7 101.3 100.3 100.6 106.9 101.4 95.5 94.4 97.4 94.8 97.1 96.6 96.8
2004 104.5 105.0 103.1 104.1 111.5 105.1 95.7 93.1 99.7 95.0 98.5 98.0 98.4
2005 102.9 103.6 100.9 102.2 109.5 102.6 94.5 91.8 98.8 92.9 98.5 97.0 96.7
2006 102.8 103.5 100.2 101.2 109.4 101.9 93.3 90.1 98.3 91.1 98.7 96.5 96.0
2007 106.3 106.3 102.1 103.5 112.9 103.9 94.2 89.3 102.2 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.2
2008 109.4 108.4 103.4 106.6 117.1 105.9 94.4 87.9 105.3 90.5 102.3 97.9 97.3
2009 110.8 109.1 104.3 111.5 120.0 106.9 94.5 88.6 104.4 91.0 101.9 98.1 97.6
2010 103.6 101.3 95.9 103.6 111.5 97.9 91.9 88.2 97.8 87.1 98.8 93.7 92.1
2011 103.3 100.3 93.7 102.1 112.2 97.3 91.5 88.0 97.1 86.3 98.2 92.8 91.4
2012 97.6 95.0 88.3 95.8 107.0 92.5 89.7 88.0 92.1 83.7 96.0 89.8 88.4
2013 101.2 98.2 91.4 99.1 111.9 95.6 92.1 88.4 97.9 85.5 98.4 91.7 90.4
2014 101.8 97.9 p 91.6 p 100.7 114.7 96.1 92.8 89.2 98.4 86.2 98.6 91.9 91.1
2012          May 97.9 95.2 88.6 96.7 107.3 92.7 89.7 88.0 92.3 83.8 95.9 89.9 88.5
         June 97.0 94.4 106.6 92.1 95.6 89.5 88.2
         July 95.2 92.7 104.3 90.3 94.8 88.6 87.1
         Aug 95.0 92.6 86.5 93.6 104.4 90.2 88.9 88.0 90.2 82.8 94.9 88.5 87.0
         Sep 97.0 94.5 106.6 92.2 95.7 89.5 88.1
         Oct 97.6 95.1 107.3 92.6 95.8 89.6 88.2
         Nov 97.0 94.4 88.3 94.8 106.7 91.9 90.0 88.1 92.9 83.8 95.9 89.4 88.0
         Dec 98.4 95.8 108.2 93.2 96.5 90.0 88.6
2013          Jan 100.1 97.4 109.8 94.4 97.5 91.1 89.6
         Feb 101.3 98.3 90.7 98.6 111.0 95.2 91.3 88.1 96.4 85.0 98.1 91.6 90.0
         Mar 99.8 97.1 109.2 93.8 97.5 90.8 89.1
         Apr 100.0 97.1 109.5 93.8 98.0 91.1 89.4
         May 100.1 97.3 91.0 98.2 109.7 94.0 91.9 88.4 97.5 85.3 98.2 91.2 89.5
         June 101.1 98.2 111.8 95.6 98.4 91.7 90.5
         July 101.0 98.1 111.8 95.6 98.6 91.7 90.5
         Aug 101.7 98.7 91.4 99.4 113.3 96.7 92.2 88.4 98.2 85.5 98.6 91.9 91.0
         Sep 101.6 98.4 113.2 96.5 98.6 91.8 91.0
         Oct 102.5 99.0 114.1 96.9 98.9 92.2 91.2
         Nov 102.2 98.8 92.4 100.1 114.1 96.8 92.9 88.7 99.6 86.3 98.9 92.1 91.2
         Dec 103.4 100.0 115.7 98.1 99.4 92.8 92.0
2014          Jan 103.0 99.5 115.8 98.1 99.2 92.6 92.0
         Feb 103.2 99.6 93.3 102.6 116.3 98.3 93.2 88.9 100.1 86.8 99.1 92.6 92.1
         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.1 99.3 93.1 92.5
         Apr 104.2 100.4 117.0 98.5 99.2 93.1 92.3
         May 103.6 99.5 93.1 102.0 116.1 97.4 93.2 89.2 99.5 87.0 98.9 92.7 91.7
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.5 98.7 92.3 91.3
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 96.0 98.6 92.2 91.1
         Aug 101.5 97.5 90.8 p 100.3 114.0 95.4 92.4 89.2 97.5 85.8 98.4 91.8 90.7
         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.1 91.1 90.0
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.3 97.7 90.5 89.6
         Nov 99.0 94.9 p 89.1 p 98.1 111.9 93.3 92.3 89.6 96.5 85.2 97.8 90.4 89.6
         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.7 90.3 89.9
2015          Jan 95.2 91.1 108.9 p 90.2 95.7 88.2 p 87.6
         Feb 93.3 89.5 p 84.2 p 92.6 107.0 p 88.7 p 90.3 p 90.2 90.4 p 82.9 95.3 87.5 p 86.9
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 p 86.0 94.3 86.1 p 85.3
         Apr 89.7 p 86.1 102.4 p 84.8 94.0 p 85.7 p 84.6
         May 91.6 p 87.9 ... ... 104.7 p 86.6 ... ... ... ... 94.6 p 86.7 p 85.7
         June 92.3 p 88.5 106.0 p 87.6 p 94.7 p 86.9 p 86.2
         July 91.3 p 87.5 105.1 p 86.7 p 94.3 p 86.4 p 85.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,2001, pp  50-53 and May 2007, pp  31-35). For more detailed information on recal- New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkeyculated weights see the ECB’s website and the article in Monthly Report, August and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
2015. For more detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus andPaper No  134 (www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in compe- Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014titiveness. 1ECB calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,
the bilateral exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 6Euro-area
Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, countries and countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2014 see the index attached 
to the January 2015 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2014
– Ownership structure in the German equity 
market: general trends and changes in the 
financial crisis
– The reform of financial relations in the Ger -
man federal system
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2013October 2014
– Methodological changes in the financial 
 accounts – background, approach and se -
lected results
– The German economy in the international division of labour: a look at value added 
flows
– Launch of the banking union: the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism in Europe
November 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2013
January 2015
– The role of trade in goods in the develop -
ment of global imbalances
– The Common Credit Assessment System for assessing the eligibility of enterprises
February 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
83•

March 2015
– Approaches to strengthening the regulatory 
framework of European monetary union
– The importance of macroprudential policy 
for monetary policy
– German balance of payments in 2014
– Securities holdings statistics for analysing 
holdings of securities in   Germany and Eur -
ope: methodology and results
April 2015
– The evolution of labour market-  r elated gov -
ernment expenditure in Germany
– Structural developments in the German 
banking sector
– Euro coins held for transaction purposes in 
Germany
May 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016 
and an outlook for 2017
– Marketable financial instruments of banks 
and their role as collateral in the Eurosystem
– Inflation expectations: newer instruments, 
current developments and key determinants
July 2015
– Slowdown in growth in the emerging  market 
economies
– Adjustment patterns of enterprises in the 
German labour market during the Great Re -
cession – selected results of a special survey
August 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20152, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 009 to 
2014, May 20152
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2011 bis 
2012, May 20152, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20151, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
17/2015  
International financial market integration, asset 
compositions, and the falling exchange rate 
pass-through
18/2015  
Multinational banks’ deleveraging in the crisis 
driven by pre-crisis characteristics and behavior
19/2015  
Calculating trading book capital: is risk separ -
ation appropriate?
20/2015  
The synchronization of European credit cycles
21/2015  
Cross-border banking and business cycles in 
asymmetric currency unions
22/2015  
Characterizing the financial cycle: evidence 
from a frequency domain analysis
23/2015  
Many a little makes a mickle: macro portfolio 
stress test for small and medium-sized German 
banks
24/2015  
The intraday interest rate – what’s that?25/2015  
Cutting the credit line: evidence from Germany
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2015  
86•

