Monthly Report
November 2015
Vol 67  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 13 November 2015.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Developments in global car sales and implications for the world economy  ........................  12
The slowdown in global economic growth and the decline in commodity prices  ...............  16
Recent developments in the exports of euro-area countries  ................................................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Adjusting loan data for sales and securitisation  .................................................................  31
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  41
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  49
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  58Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
5

Overview
Positive domestic demand 
supporting upswing
The global economy probably continued to ex -
perience subdued growth in the third quarter of 
2015. There are no signs of a perceptible slow -
down, let alone a downturn, in global eco -
nomic activity, contrary to fears expressed in the 
public debate in light of events in some emer -
ging market economies (EMEs). On the whole, 
the EMEs’ situation does not appear to have 
deteriorated further. There had been mounting 
concerns regarding, in particular, China’s econ -
omy in connection with financial market tur -
moil. Nevertheless, official figures have put real 
gross domestic product (GDP) growth in China 
more or less unchanged from its second- quarter 
level. In the advanced economies, the upsurge 
has proven to be robust. Growth in economic 
output in the United States was admittedly 
weaker in the third quarter than in the second, 
yet the dampening impact caused by inventory 
changes masked a renewed substantial increase 
in domestic final demand. In the euro area and 
the United Kingdom, real GDP growth in the 
third quarter was not quite as buoyant as it had 
been in the preceding quarter.
With regard to annual average global growth 
for 2015, IMF staff now expect a slight deceler -
ation compared with 2014. This slowdown is 
attributable, in unadjusted terms, to commodity-  
extracting regions, the economies of which are 
reeling from the impact of plummeting com -
modity prices. By contrast, there is no indica -
tion of an overall slowdown in aggregate de -
mand in commodity-  consuming regions. All 
things considered, the regional growth divide 
clearly shows that the slowdown in global eco -
nomic activity this year is, if anything, a re -
sponse to the decline in the prices of important 
commodities and not the cause. With the 
 severe recessions in Russia and Brazil subsiding, 
as things stand today, global growth is ex -
pected to return to stable levels next year.Concerns over growth in some major EMEs 
also influenced the international financial mar -
kets in the third quarter of 2015. In addition, 
monetary policy decisions by central banks and 
changing expectations of future monetary pol -
icy in the industrial countries played a key role. 
Overall, long- term government bond yields in 
the major currency areas have tended to de -
cline – amid fluctuations – since the end of 
June, albeit to varying degrees. In the inter -
national equity markets, fears over the global 
economic outlook and expectations that mon -
etary policy would remain accommodative in 
many countries ultimately balanced each other 
out. Intermittent sharp depreciations were, for 
the most part, quickly recuperated. In the for -
eign exchange markets, the aforementioned 
concerns over the global economy initially 
caused a spike in demand for the euro. Subse -
quently, the single currency came under pres -
sure from market participants’ expectations re -
garding the possibility of diverging monetary 
policy measures on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Overall, the euro has depreciated slightly in 
 effective terms since mid- year.
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept the key interest rates un -
changed in the reporting period. Moreover, it 
found that the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme (EAPP), adopted in January 2015 and 
launched in March 2015, was continuing to 
proceed smoothly and that the purchases were 
having a favourable impact on the cost and 
availability of credit for firms and households. 
After a review following the first six months of 
purchases, which was announced when the 
programme was launched, the Governing 
Council decided in September to increase the 
issue share limit for purchases of individual 
public sector assets from the initial limit of 25% 
to 33%. However, for each individual issue, it 
must be verified that a situation in which the 
Eurosystem has a blocking minority is avoided.Global economyFinancial 
 markets
Monetary policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
6

In light of the somewhat weaker- than- expected 
economic recovery and the renewed down -
ward revision of ECB staff inflation forecasts, 
the Governing Council stressed at the begin -
ning of September that, if required, the EAPP 
provided sufficient flexibility in terms of adjust -
ing the size, composition and duration of the 
programme. It also noted that the purchase 
programme, with a monthly purchase target of 
€60 billion, was intended to run until the end 
of September 2016, or beyond if necessary, 
and, in any case, until it sees a sustained ad -
justment in the path of inflation towards its 
medium- term aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2%. Following the monet -
ary policy meeting in October, the Governing 
Council announced that it would re- examine 
the degree of monetary policy accommodation 
at its December monetary policy meeting on 
the basis of Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections.
Growth of the broad monetary aggregate M3 
stabilised during the third quarter at an annual 
rate of around 5%. In this context, monetary 
developments were dominated by the effects 
of the EAPP , with growth in securitised lending 
by the MFI sector to general government again 
accelerating significantly thanks to Eurosystem 
purchases. In the quarter under review, loans 
to the private sector did not have a bolstering 
effect despite a further decline in lending rates; 
however, inflows of loans to the non- financial 
private sector remained sustained.
The German economy remained on its growth 
path in the third quarter. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office flash estimate, real GDP in 
the third quarter of 2015 was up by 0.3% from 
the previous quarter after seasonal and calen -
dar adjustment. The pace of growth was some -
what more moderate than the 0.4% figure re -
corded in the second quarter and was broadly 
in line with potential. Buoyant consumption 
activity was the main driver of third- quarter 
economic growth, although it was not enough 
to fully compensate for the failure of external 
demand to provide any stimulus. Aggregate capacity utilisation remained in the upper part 
of the corridor of normal capacity utilisation.
As in the fourth quarter of 2014 and the first 
quarter of 2015, purchasing power gains owing 
to the decline in crude oil prices were one of 
the factors behind the stronger growth in pri -
vate consumption in the third quarter. House -
holds’ real income also benefited from the con -
siderable acceleration in employment growth. 
Consumer demand was additionally boosted 
by the mounting influx of refugees, which led 
to a rise in transfer payments as well as in ex -
penditure for staff, accommodation and non-  
cash benefits at the central, state and local 
government levels. Housing construction in -
vestment probably continued its upward ten -
dency, whereas enterprises remained cautious 
with regard to investment in new machinery 
and equipment and in new buildings. This may 
have been one of the reasons why external de -
mand failed to provide any new impetus.
Export business did not grow any further in the 
third quarter of 2015 following the strong up -
swing in the second quarter. Exports of goods 
were down slightly on the quarter after adjust -
ment for seasonal and price variations. Goods 
exports to other euro-  area and non- euro- area 
countries probably did not surpass the highly 
elevated second- quarter level. By contrast, im -
ports in the third quarter again managed to 
keep pace with the strong growth recorded in 
the last three months of 2014 and the first 
quarter of this year, with foreign manufacturers 
also benefiting from the buoyant consumption 
activity.
The labour market remains in very good shape. 
During the reporting period, employment 
growth gained momentum, the number of re -
ported vacancies went up, and unemployment 
held steady at a low level. The very strong up -
turn in employment subject to social security 
contributions continued. Whereas job growth 
in the manufacturing and construction sectors 
was below average, in a number of services 
sectors it once again took off. The increase in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
7

the demand for labour is still being met to a 
considerable extent by immigrants, especially 
from other European Union countries. By con -
trast, the large number of refugees who have 
come to Germany this year are unlikely to have 
taken up gainful employment to date. Accord -
ing to the leading labour market indicators, 
employment growth could expand even further 
in the coming months. Job vacancies for more 
lower- level service activities appear to be par -
ticularly plentiful at present.
Negotiated rates of pay, including all ancillary 
agreements, rose slightly more sharply in the 
third quarter of 2015 than in the previous 
period; however, the annual increase, at just 
under 2½%, remained moderate. Nevertheless, 
annual actual earnings growth is again likely to 
have distinctly exceeded negotiated wage 
growth in the third quarter, owing mainly to 
the introduction of the general statutory min -
imum wage at the beginning of the year. In ac -
cordance with the transitional statutory provi -
sions, the hourly minimum wage of €8.50 will 
only be undercut in the lowest pay groups of 
individual sectors.
The price climate continues to be characterised 
by the swings in crude oil prices, which were 
on their way back down in the third quarter, 
causing prices across all stages of the economy 
to fall further. This movement was amplified 
somewhat by the falling prices for other com -
modities – import prices dropped sharply in the 
third quarter across the board but even fell 
markedly excluding energy. Seasonally adjusted 
consumer prices fell slightly on the quarter in 
the summer months following strong second-  
quarter growth. This was due mainly to signifi -
cantly lower energy prices. Excluding energy, 
however, the upward pressure on prices was 
almost as strong as in the second quarter. In 
October, consumer prices remained unchanged 
on the whole after adjustment for seasonal 
variations. As consumer prices had fallen quite 
distinctly in October of last year, annual CPI 
and HICP inflation were up in the reporting 
period.The slight deceleration of German economic 
growth in the third quarter of 2015 could also 
continue into the final quarter. The favourable 
outlook for the labour market and compensa -
tion, together with sizeable immigration, have 
created the necessary conditions for the buoy -
ant consumption activity to continue and for 
GDP growth to outpace potential over the 
 medium term. These factors, along with the 
persistently low mortgage rates, are also boost -
ing housing construction. Virtually no stimuli 
should be expected from industrial activity be -
fore the end of the year, however. The sharp 
decrease in orders in the third quarter, espe -
cially from non-  euro-  area countries, indicates 
that the industrial sector will remain in its slump 
up until the end of the year and that export 
activity will not gain any traction either. This 
means that firms will probably be more cau -
tious in their investment planning. Neverthe -
less, firms’ short- term export and production 
expectations remain rather optimistic, indicat -
ing that their assessment of industrial activity is 
robust on the whole.
German public finances continued to develop 
favourably throughout the current year. The 
surplus is likely to have improved markedly on 
2014 (0.3% of GDP), in particular due to bene -
ficial one-off factors. In structural terms, it will 
– as in the previous year – probably be in the 
order of ½% of GDP . The reasons for expend -
iture growth, particularly in the second half of 
the year, include not only the strong rise in the 
number of refugees coming to Germany but 
also the pension benefits package which came 
into force in mid-2014. The reduction in the 
debt ratio will continue.
The surplus is expected to contract in the year 
ahead. As a result, the government budget 
could be more or less balanced, with the debt 
ratio continuing to fall. While positive eco -
nomic  developments and a further decline in 
interest expenditure could relieve budgets, no 
auction revenues will be collected, as they have 
been in 2015, and various fiscal policy meas -
ures (tax cuts and additional expenditure, ie on Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
8

infrastructure, education and research) will 
weigh on public  finances. The marked increase 
in expenditure related to the influx of refugees 
will have a particularly profound impact.
However, it is very hard at present to gauge 
how the migration of refugees and the associ -
ated implications for public finances will pan 
out. Besides immigration and emigration, the 
effects on government budgets will also de -
pend on the specific amount of funds allocated 
to immigrants. Expenditure will fundamentally 
focus on basic dietary needs, accommodation, 
healthcare, administration, child day- care as 
well as education and training. In the long 
term, the better and more quickly immigrants 
are integrated into the labour market and earn -
ing their own income, the lower the burden on 
public finances will be. At present, additional 
government expenditure in the amount of up 
to ¼% of GDP in this year and ½% for the year 
ahead do not seem implausible.
According to the latest plans, the Federal 
budget will not have to be financed via net 
borrowing both this and next year, which 
would imply maintaining a balanced budget in 
2016, too. This seems realistic. To this aim, the 
marked surplus is intended to be set aside this 
year for the creation of a reserve. A total of €5 
billion has been earmarked, but the figure 
could also be markedly higher. These funds will 
then be used, particularly in the coming year, 
to cover the added costs associated with the 
influx of refugees. The central government 
debt brake envisages a limit of 0.35% of GDP 
for the structural deficit, although this figure 
must be adjusted for cyclical factors and finan -
cial transactions (ie granting of loans or privat -
isation proceeds) and include some of the spe -
cial funds. There is a possibility that the latter 
will conclude the next year with a deficit, and it 
would make sense to treat a release of reserves 
just like a financial transaction, meaning a per -
ceptible structural deficit can be expected. 
From today’s perspective, however, this deficit 
would still be below the limit of 0.35% of GDP .The current situation demonstrates the advan -
tage of having a relatively favourable structural 
budgetary situation and safety margins to the 
limits set by European and national budgetary 
rules. Especially unexpected developments and 
additional burdens which are difficult to gauge 
can initially be absorbed in the budgets with -
out immediately having to take fiscal policy 
countermeasures or call into question the cred -
ibility of the rules by bending them. At this 
stage, the burdens in connection with the in -
flux of refugees, which can only be roughly 
 estimated at best, could initially be cushioned 
with appropriated funds, thereby narrowing 
the safety margins. Greater clarity regarding 
the continued migration of refugees, the direct 
budgetary impact and political decisions in Ger -
many and also in the European Union, as well 
as the resulting overall impact on government 
finances, may be expected going forward. 
Structural burdens – ie if it takes a long time to 
integrate the large number of immigrants into 
the labour market – should be financed by 
budget cuts elsewhere. A moderate structural 
budget surplus for Germany is advisable not 
only to  ensure compliance with the upper debt 
limits. It would also be a good idea to continue 
markedly reducing the still high debt ratio 
swiftly, not least because this would effectively 
cap the interest burden in the long term – 
 especially given the possibility of interest rates 
going back up in the future. Sound public 
 finances are not antithetical to tackling immi -
gration, among other challenges, or to improv -
ing infrastructure and government educational 
programmes. Instead, they are precisely a key 
prerequisite for continuing to be able to cope 
with unexpected challenges in the future.
In the context of the Stability and Growth Pact, 
the European Commission has announced that 
it would make concessions when assessing 
whether the rules have been complied with re -
garding the additional financial burden associ -
ated with the influx of refugees. That would be 
justifiable if this development could be classi -
fied as unexpected and meant that fiscal tar -
gets were missed merely on a short- term and Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
9

temporary basis due to no more than specific -
ally documented direct net additional burdens. 
A further option on the table – factoring out, 
on a longer- term basis, any additional refugee- 
related burdens – would not be consistent with 
the Pact’s aim of ensuring sound public fi -
nances. A structural public spending require -ment therefore ought to be covered by corres -
ponding income so as to keep government 
debt at a comfortably sustainable level. This 
does not mean that tasks considered to be im -
portant cannot be carried out, but that these 
should be financed in a sustainable manner.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Global economic growth is likely to have re -
mained subdued in the third quarter. There are 
no signs of a perceptible slowdown in eco -
nomic growth, let alone a downturn in global 
economic activity, contrary to fears expressed 
in the public debate given the events in some 
emerging market economies (EMEs). There had 
been mounting concerns regarding, in particu -
lar, China’s economy in connection with finan -
cial market turmoil. According to official fig -
ures, however, gross domestic product (GDP) in 
China expanded at largely the same rate as in 
the second quarter in real terms (although the 
economy contracted markedly in nominal 
terms). Although GDP growth in the United 
States was considerably weaker than in the 
previous quarter, this comparison is skewed by 
the exceptionally high spring figures. The 
dampening impact of changes in inventories 
has also masked a further fairly substantial in -
crease in domestic final demand. In the euro 
area and the United Kingdom, too, real GDP 
growth in the third quarter was not quite as 
buoyant as it had been in the second quarter. 
No national accounts data were available for 
Japan at the time this report went to press. 
After the setback in spring, a perceptible pick- 
up in economic activity in Japan is unlikely to 
materialise until the present quarter. Altogether, 
the upturn in the advanced economies is prov -
ing resilient. Contrary to concerns voiced in 
some quarters, the situation in the EMEs does 
not appear to have deteriorated further.
Short- term economic indicators confirm that 
global economic activity still shows no signs of 
lasting improvement. According to data from 
the Dutch Centraal Planbureau, the monthly 
average volume of global goods trade rose 
markedly in July-  August compared to its low 
level in spring. However, it remained subdued 
in relation to its level at the end of 2014. The 
rise in average global industrial output over the July- August period must also be placed in the 
context of the weak first half of 2015. The cyc -
lical strains in the EMEs over the last few quar -
ters have had a particularly severe impact on 
the car market (see box on pages 12 to 14). 
However, government purchase incentives 
have recently stimulated new car sales in China. 
The VW group’s problems do not yet seem to 
have adversely affected the global market for 
new cars.
The content of the October World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) published by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) reflects the fact that 
global activity has remained moderate. In com -
parison to the July update, the IMF has lowered 
its (purchasing- power- parity- weighted) global 
economic growth projections for 2015 and 
2016 by 0.2 percentage points each to +3.1% 
and +3.6% respectively. In particular, it has sig -
nificantly pared back its projections for a num -
ber of commodity- extracting countries – specif -
ically Brazil, the Commonwealth of Independ -
ent States (CIS), but also Canada. The IMF has 
left its growth projection for China for both 
years unchanged for the third time in succes -
sion.
Since 2011 the IMF, like other observers, has 
consistently overestimated the global economic 
outlook. The latest downward revisions thus fit 
a pattern of previous revisions.1 As recently as 
April 2015, a modest global upturn was antici -
pated this year. However, the IMF is now ex -
pecting a slight deceleration. According to a 
simple regional breakdown, this slackening is 
almost entirely attributable to Latin America 
and the CIS (see pages  16 and 17), whose 
economies are reeling from the impact of 
plummeting commodity prices. An easing of 
the severe recession in Russia and Brazil alone Global economic 
growth remains  subdued
Still no sustained 
improvement in global economic activity accord-ing to short- term indicatorsFurther down-ward revision of IMF global 
growth 
 projections
Global 
 economy’s change of pace  attributable to commodity- extracting  economies
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The global growth forecast 
revisions in recent years, Monthly Report, November 2014, 
pp 12-15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
11

Developments in global car sales and implications 
for the world economy
Analysts looking to assess the state of the 
world economy in real time currently have 
no more than a handful of global indicators 
to work with. And aside from survey- based variables such as the purchasing managers’ 
indices, the measures they can use, for in-
stance the estimations published by the 
Dutch Centraal Planbureau (CPB) on world 
industrial production and global trade, are 
only published with a relatively long delay.1 
There is no such time lag in the availability 
of car sales data. Information on sales or 
new car registrations in almost all the major economies is released during the course of 
the following month, and in some cases 
just a few  days after the end of the month.2 
Nor is aggregation an issue – car sales are 
normally measured in units sold, so aggre-
gated numbers are simply the sum of na-
tional data.3Thus calculated, these data reveal that 
global sales fi  gures plotted a relatively stable 
upward trend through to the end of 2014, 
interrupted only when the global economic crisis sent sales fi  gures sharply into reverse in 
2008.4 Patterns were more mixed among 
the individual groups of countries. The largely saturated markets in the advanced 
economies took quite some time to regain 
the ground they had lost in the crisis.5 The 
group of emerging economies, by contrast, 
racked up robust gains across the board, outstripping their pre- crisis sales fi  gures as early as the spring of 2009, fuelled in no 
small part by the very vibrant Chinese mar-
ket. The combined effect of these two fac-
tors sent the proportion of global car sales 
attributable to the emerging economies 
soaring from a little over a quarter in 2006 
on average to just shy of half in 2014.
1 The CPB’s projections are published roughly seven 
weeks after the end of the month.
2 The analysis is based on fi  gures for 34 advanced 
economies and 19 emerging economies according to 
the International Monetary Fund’s classifi  cation of 
countries. The International Organization of Motor Ve-
hicle Manufacturers (Organisation Internationale des 
Constructeurs d’Automobiles, or OICA) estimates that 
these countries were responsible for 93% of global car sales in 2014. In the same year, these same economies 
accounted for nine- tenths of global gross domestic 
product (GDP).3 This comes at the expense of interpretational prob-lems, however, if the data are lacking in structural con-stancy (if there is a shift in the share of higher- quality vehicles, say). The existence of conceptual inconsisten-
cies can also hamper the interpretation of global car 
sales, with some countries such as the USA recording 
actual sales fi  gures to the fi  nal customer, others such 
as those in the euro area using new car registrations 
and others again (China) the data on  vehicle deliveries to dealers. Further inconsistencies can be found in the 
vehicle classes included in the data and the fact that 
some countries do not seasonally  adjust their data. The time series in question were seasonally adjusted.4 Sales fi  gures also dipped briefl  y in the spring of 2011, when the Tōhoku earthquake in Japan disrupted auto-
motive manufacturing and deliveries throughout the 
world.
5 It took the group of advanced economies until this 
summer to eclipse their sales fi  gures for the fi  nal quar-ter of 2007.Global car sales *
Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* Units (new car registrations or sales). Aggregate covers 93% of  estimated  global  sales  for  2014.  1 IMF  definition.  2 Sub-
samples used to estimate last value.
Deutsche BundesbankMillions of vehicles; seasonally adjusted quarterly data
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015024681012141618
ChinaOther emerging 
economies 1
Other advanced economies 1
Euro area
USA
2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
12

Car sales in the emerging economies have 
been faltering since the beginning of 2015. 
The general slowdown in the pace of Chi-
nese growth meant that demand for ve-
hicles fell short of the strong showing in the 
fourth quarter of 2014, while sales fi  gures 
slumped in Brazil and Russia, both of which 
are mired in recession. Households post-
poned purchases of consumer durables, which is a common response to a cyclical 
lull. This sent the seasonally adjusted emer-ging economy sales for the third quarter of 
2015 down by 9% in total on what were admittedly particularly strong data for the 
fourth quarter of 2014. Although the recov-
ery process continued in the advanced 
economies, global sales likewise decreased 
noticeably.6
All in all, then, developments in the car mar-
ket are consistent with other indicators in 
that they point to weakness in global indus-trial activity. If the sales fi  gures are standard-ised to account for the higher level of volatil-ity, it becomes evident that automotive sales have been a reliable indicator of noteworthy 
movements in global industrial production 
such as the slump sparked by the 2008 cri-
sis, the subsequent rally and the sluggish momentum observed in recent years. As global car sales fi  gures become available 
sooner, they can therefore play an important role as an indicator for global industrial activ-ity and also for economic output as a whole. However, the car market refl  ects more than 
just the ups and downs of the aggregate 
business cycle – it also mirrors developments 
specifi  c to the automotive sector.7
Since automotive manufacturing – true to 
the principle of the international division of 
labour – shows a much stronger degree of 
regional concentration compared to de-
mand, a pronounced movement in global 
sales can leave a noticeable mark on indi-
vidual countries’ industrial production. Ger-many is a prominent example, but the same 
also goes for Japan and South Korea as well 
as a number of central and eastern Euro-
pean economies where domestic manufac-
turing activity far outstrips national de-mand. Added to this, major automotive manufacturers are headquartered in just a handful of countries, including the three 
mentioned above as well as China, the USA and France.
8 The assertion can probably be 
made that automotive groups based in ad-
6 Global car sales in the third quarter of 2015 were just 
under 3% down, in seasonally adjusted terms, on the fi  gures for the fourth quarter of the previous year, even 
though the sales fi  gures in the advanced economies 
were up by 2¾%.7 One such development was the scrappage schemes 
introduced by a number of advanced economies in 2009, the prime outcome of which was probably a 
shift in the timing of demand. See A Mian and A Sufi   
(2012), The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 Cash for Clunkers Program, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 127 (3), pp 1107-1142.8 OICA data show that manufacturers headquartered in these six countries accounted for more than 95% of global production in 2014.Global car sales* and worldwide 
industrial production
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on national data and 
Centraal Planbureau. * Units (new car registrations or sales). Aggregate  covers  93%  of  estimated  global  sales  for  2014. 
1 Adjusted for mean and standard deviation, calculated over 
the period 2007Q1 to 2015Q2; no unit. 2 Sub-samples used to 
estimate last value for car sales; for industrial production, mean 
of July-August 2015 versus 2015Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201543210123
––––+++Standardised quarter-on-quarter change;1
seasonally adjusted data
Car sales
Industrial production2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
13

would suffice to perceptibly raise the affected 
regions’ contributions to global growth in 
2016. As things currently stand, it therefore 
seems reasonable to expect global economic 
activity to strengthen.
Given that the market supply remains gener -
ous, and in view of widespread concerns about 
the economy, commodity prices as measured in 
US dollars fell sharply in August. The spot price 
for barrel of Brent crude oil slipped back below 
US$50 for the first time since January. As this 
report went to press, the spot price stood at 
US$45, although futures were still trading at 
considerable premiums. According to the 
HWWI index, prices for industrial commodities 
have continued to sink. By contrast, there are 
signs that prices for food, beverages and to -
bacco have stabilised.
Lower oil prices have eased the pressure on 
consumers in the advanced economies. Over -
all, consumer prices recorded a slight year- on- year decrease of 0.2% – their first negative 
growth rate since October 2009. This was 
caused by a drop in seasonally adjusted energy 
prices of more than 6% over a three- month 
period. Excluding energy and food, consumer 
prices rose moderately by 1.3% year on year. 
Compared with June, this “core” inflation rate 
even increased slightly. There is still no evidence 
of a broad-  based contraction in consumer 
prices.
Selected emerging market 
economies
During the reporting period, according to an 
official estimate, China’s economic output 
grew by 7% on the year, as in the summer. At 
+1¾%, quarterly GDP growth also remained 
unchanged in seasonally adjusted terms. This 
seems to suggest that the slowdown in eco -
nomic growth feared by many in the aftermath 
of the massive stock market crash this summer Further falling 
prices, especially for crude oil, …
… reflected in 
consumer price levelsChina’s  economic growth  unchanged,  according to  official 
 estimates, …vanced economies, in particular, will tend 
to keep stages of the value chain performed 
by highly qualifi  ed personnel, such as re-
search and development, in their home 
countries, with the result that the segment’s 
importance for the domestic economy is not properly refl  ected by the production statistics showing the number of vehicles manufactured. A steeper drop in global 
sales would therefore worsen the economic outlook for these countries.
9
However, the most recent monthly data, for August and September, signalled that sales 
in the emerging economies might have al-
ready bottomed out. Tax breaks should also 
stimulate car sales in China over the next few months. But it is primarily the longer- 
term prospects which look rosy for automo-
tive sales in the emerging economies, be-cause these countries probably still have 
some catching up to do. As a case in point, data for 2013 indicate that just under 80 
cars were registered per 1,000 inhabitants 
in the emerging economies, compared to a fi  gure of 450 in the advanced economies.
10 
In the advanced economies, by contrast, 
the already- high motorisation rates and the 
demographic outlook would suggest that 
automotive sales will follow a relatively fl  at 
growth path over a medium to long- term 
horizon.
9 Similarly, specifi  c problems faced by individual manu-
facturers could also drag on macroeconomic develop-ments in these countries. The extent to which the re-cent diffi   culties experienced by the Volkswagen Group 
will impact on economic activity in Germany or else-
where still cannot be gauged at the current juncture, 
however.
10 The fi  gures for the total stock of car registrations 
are based on OICA data, which are available up to 2013. Two- wheeled motor vehicles, which are a very important mode of transport in many emerging 
economies, are not captured. The demographic statis-
tics refl  ect interpolated estimations by the United 
 Nations.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
14

and on the basis of the unfavourable indicators 
has not taken place. In nominal terms, how -
ever, there was, in fact, a marked decrease in 
GDP growth; the year- on- year rate fell from 
7% in the second quarter to 6¼% in the third 
quarter. The implicit GDP deflator has thus de -
clined markedly of late. Nonetheless, it is also 
possible that the official data are overstating 
both the increase in real economic output and 
the fall in the domestic price components.2 The 
fact that consumer price inflation rose to +1.8% 
in the third quarter would support this inter -
pretation.
China’s foreign trade remained sluggish over 
the last few months. In terms of value, goods 
exports were down by just under 2% (on a US 
dollar basis) on the year between January and 
September. Import expenditure sank by as 
much as 15%. Even factoring out the sharp fall 
in commodity prices, which account for a large 
share of China’s imports, it is likely to have re -
corded a decrease. This led the IMF to lower its 
growth projection for real imports this year to 
2½% in its current WEO. Import activity is ex -
pected to be significantly weaker in 2016 as 
well.
In the second quarter, the most recent for 
which national accounts data are available, real 
GDP in India grew by 7% on the year. The pace 
of aggregate growth was therefore only slightly 
slower than at the beginning of the year. Based 
on the expenditure- side data from the Central 
Statistical Office, private consumption was the 
main driver of growth. It was probably bol -
stered by an improvement in households’ real 
purchasing power as a result of falling inflation. 
In the third quarter, the year- on- year change in 
the consumer price index (CPI) continued its 
downward movement; at 3.9%, it recorded its 
smallest increase since the beginning of the 
time series in 2011. The subdued price develop -
ments were largely due to the easing of the 
situation in the domestic food markets. Given 
these favourable conditions for private con -
sumption, India’s economy is likely to have continued to expand fairly briskly in the third 
quarter.
According to official estimates, real GDP in Bra -
zil contracted by 1¾% in seasonally adjusted 
terms in the second quarter compared to the 
previous quarter, in which it had already shrunk 
by ¾%. In comparison to its peak in the first 
quarter of 2014, economic output is down by 
3½% so far. This pronounced contraction was 
chiefly due to the decline in commodity prices. 
The recession is also likely to have persisted in 
the quarter just ended given the further drop in 
the price of important export commodities dur -
ing the third quarter. The restrictive monetary 
policy pursued by the central bank in an at -
tempt to combat strong inflation is an add -
itional factor weighing on economic activity, 
especially gross fixed capital formation, which 
has fallen sharply since 2013. Consumer price 
inflation rose to 9.5% on average during the 
third quarter. Excluding the effects of adminis -… but imports 
weak
Growth in 
 India’s economy driven by private consumptionGDP contraction likely to continue in BrazilEconomic growth in China
567891011Year-on-year percentage change
2013 2014 2015
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China and Haver Ana-
lytics.
Deutsche Bundesbank0Nominal GDPReal GDP
2 This is because China’s National Bureau of Statistics uses 
a simplified method to deflate nominal value added for 
most sectors owing to a lack of proper price indices. 
See X Xu (2009), The establishment, reform, and develop -
ment of China’s System of National Accounts, Review of 
Income and Wealth, Vol 55, Issue Supplement s1, pp 442-
465. As part of this process, it uses a producer price index 
for industry, which currently also reflects the impact of fall -
ing prices for imported inputs. This means that real eco -
nomic growth at the current end tends to be overesti -
mated, while the domestic price trend is underestimated.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
15

The slowdown in global economic growth and the decline 
in commodity prices
According to the most recent projections published in its October World Economic Outlook (WEO), the staff of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF) is expecting 
global economic growth (based on pur-chasing power parity weights) to decline 
from 3.4% last year to 3.1% in the current 
year, before rising to 3.6% in 2016. As the 
IMF publishes both the national rates of change as well as the respective shares in 
nominal global economic output, it is pos-
sible to calculate individual countries’ or re-
gions’ contributions to global growth. Fur-
thermore, the rates can be consolidated to form new cross- border aggregates.
Since commodity prices have been, and in some cases are still, falling markedly, there are currently particular merits in breaking them down by producer and consumer countries. A calculation of this kind shows that the slowdown in global economic growth in  the current year is attributable 
solely to the commodity- extracting regions.1 Real gross domestic product (GDP) in this 
group of countries will probably rise by just 
0.7% this year, compared with +2.2% in 
2014. The considerable deterioration in the 
economic situation in the Commonwealth 
of Independent States and in Latin America 
alone will push down global growth by 0.3 percentage point compared with the previous year. This is due, in particular, to 
the severe recessions in Russia and Brazil. An 
easing of the economic downturn in these 
two countries would already be suffi   cient to bring about a marked increase in the contri-bution of the commodity- producing regions 
to global growth in 2016. As things cur-
rently stand, it therefore seems quite plaus-
ible to expect the global economic expan-
sion to strengthen in the coming year.
For the rest of the world, however, ie the advanced economies and the Asian and 
European EMEs, the WEO expects growth in 2015 to be just as strong as in the previous year (+3.8%).
2 The IMF is expecting growth 
to pick up slightly in the coming years. The 
comparatively robust economic growth in the primarily commodity- consuming re-gions, which, purchasing- power- parity- weighted, make up three- quarters of the world economy, runs counter to the as-sumption that the decline in commodity 
prices since mid-2014 is due mainly to weak 
demand. Current fi  gures show no discern-ible signs of a global economic downturn, 
which could result in strong demand- related 
price reductions, as was the case in 2008-
09. In the past, quite strong co- movements 
were also regularly observed between the 
rates of expansion in commodity- producing 
regions and in the rest of the world. The 
current divergence in regional growth rates 
1 In the following, the term “commodity- extracting re-gions” is defi  ned as a group of regions comprising the Commonwealth of Independent States, Latin America 
and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa 
(including Pakistan and Afghanistan) as well as Sub- 
Saharan Africa, as defi  ned by the IMF. Accordingly, the 
term “Other regions” refers to the advanced econ-
omies as well as to the Asian and European EMEs.
2 The slight deceleration of GDP growth in China is 
being offset by a modest pick- up in economic growth in the industrial countries.Economic growth by groups of countries
*
Sources: IMF’s October 2015 World Economic Outlook (WEO) 
and Bundesbank calculations. * Based on the respective prior-
year purchasing power parity weights. From 2015, IMF projec-tions. 1 Commonwealth of Independent States, Latin America 
and  the  Caribbean,  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (including Pakistan and Afghanistan) as well as Sub-Saharan Africa. 2 Ad-
vanced economies, Asian and European EMEs.
Deutsche Bundesbank1996 00 05 10 15 20101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year percentage change in real GDP
Commodity-extracting regions1
Other 
regions 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
16

tered prices and food, this rate fell to 6.9%, a 
figure which is nonetheless far higher than the 
central bank’s monetary policy target rate of 
4.5%.
There are signs that the severe recession in Rus -
sia may be coming to an end. After real GDP 
had fallen by 4½% year- on- year in the second 
quarter of 2015, this decline narrowed to 4% in 
the third quarter according to an official flash 
estimate. Viewed over the period, the contrac -
tion may even have stopped. This is consistent 
with the fact that imports of goods, which had 
slumped at the beginning of the year, have re -
cently stabilised. However, export revenue (cal -
culated in US dollars) has continued its decline 
as a result of the falling prices for oil and gas. 
Although there has been no further rise in con -
sumer price inflation (CPI), it averaged a high 
15.7% during the third quarter.United States
According to an initial estimate by the statis -
tical office, third- quarter seasonally and price-  
adjusted GDP in the United States was up 
slightly on the second quarter (just under 
+½%), in which it had recorded strong growth 
(+1%). The main cause of the deceleration in 
GDP growth was a significant slowdown in the 
buildup of inventories, which had been rela -
tively brisk in the preceding periods, meaning 
that a correction was due. In this regard, the 
GDP result for the third quarter should not be 
viewed in isolation from the good spring figure. 
Private final domestic demand, which heavily 
influences the underlying cyclical trend, lost 
only a little momentum; it even grew slightly 
faster than its average during the current up -
swing, which began in the summer of 2009. 
Private consumption, in particular, went up 
again fairly sharply. By contrast, the upturn in 
corporate capital formation was restrained by a 
further reduction in investment expenditure in Signs of an end 
to the recession in RussiaPrivate domestic final demand 
maintains 
 momentumis therefore much more consistent with the 
hypothesis that the continuing decline in commodity prices, especially for crude oil, 
that has been observed for quite some time is due mainly to an oversupply.
Although there are no signs of the discern-
ible pick- up in global economic activity 
which had been expected owing, above all, 
to lower oil prices, there were some early 
warnings about overestimating this stimu-
lating effect.3 There is much to suggest that 
a decline in the price of oil may not stimu-
late economic growth to the same extent 
that a rise in oil prices weighs on it.4 The oil 
price collapse of 1986, which was also pri-
marily due to supply- side factors yet still failed to stimulate US economic growth, might be seen as a precedent.
5 Further-
more, with respect to China, a rebalancing 
of the economy appears to be dampening 
growth at present.
All things considered, the unusual regional 
growth divide clearly shows that the slow-
down in global economic growth this year is, if anything, a response to the decline in 
the prices of important commodities and 
not the cause. In the affected countries, the high prices in previous years led to a wave of extensive capacity expansion measures in 
the commodities sector, which are now proving to have been bad investments.
6 
The  resulting adjustment process in the commodity- extracting economies that has 
become necessary is certainly a painful one. This structural change cannot, however, be 
substituted by additional, temporary eco-
nomic stimulus measures in other countries.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Potential impacts of the fall in oil prices on the real economy, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 12-14.4 A sharp decline in crude oil prices could present an additional source of uncertainty surrounding, not least, 
corporate investment decisions. See also Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The price of crude oil and its impact on 
economic activity in the industrial countries, Monthly 
Report, June 2012, pp 27-49.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Causes of the fall in oil 
prices, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 16-17.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Slowdown in growth in 
the emerging market economies, Monthly Report, July 2015, pp 15-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
17

the oil industry.3 All in all, the US economy con -
tinued to expand at a moderate underlying 
pace. Employment growth over the last few 
months pushed the unemployment rate down 
to a new cyclical low of 5.0% in October  . On 
the whole, consumer prices in September did 
not exceed their level in the previous year 
owing to a marked decline in fuel prices. By 
contrast, excluding energy and food, (core) in -
flation stood at 1.9%. The US Federal Reserve 
continued to leave its extremely expansionary 
monetary policy stance unchanged.
Japan
Although an initial official estimate of aggre -
gate output in Japan for the third quarter was 
not yet available at the time this Monthly Re -
port went to press, the standard indicators do 
not suggest any noticeable improvement in 
economic activity in the third quarter following 
the second- quarter setback. Industrial output, in particular, which had tracked real GDP 
growth fairly closely in the preceding periods, 
contracted again significantly in the third quar -
ter. Although there was a certain pick- up in pri -
vate consumption on the demand side, real 
goods imports surged considerably, and, hence, 
GDP might not have increased. There were also 
doubts as to whether inventory changes stimu -
lated growth, as they had in the preceding 
quarters. Nonetheless, the Japanese economy 
is likely to remain on its underlying recovery 
path, which is, however, rather flat by inter -
national standards. Enterprises were expecting 
a steep upturn in industrial output at the begin -
ning of autumn, according to the latest survey. 
The unemployment rate also held steady in the 
third quarter, close to its cyclical low. The infla -
tion rate for the basket of consumer goods ex -
cluding energy and food rose from 0.6% in 
June to 0.9% in September.
United Kingdom
The UK economy is continuing along a solid ex -
pansionary path. After elimination of the usual 
seasonal effects, real GDP in the third quarter 
went up by ½% compared to the second quar -
ter, in which it had risen by ¾%. The slower 
pace of growth was mainly due to the produc -
tion of oil and gas, which had expanded rapidly 
in the spring months in connection with the 
introduction of tax relief measures. Although 
construction output dropped off sharply in the 
third quarter according to provisional figures, 
and manufacturing output was once again 
somewhat constrained, real gross value added 
in the services sector, the backbone of the UK 
economy, expanded slightly more strongly than 
in the previous quarter. This is consistent with a 
Economic 
 activity unlikely to have picked up noticeably in the third quarterStrong growth continues in the services sectorContributions to US quarterly real GDP growth
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Private  consumption 
and  private  gross  fixed  capital  formation.  2 Government  de-
mand, inventory changes and net exports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20153210123456
–––++++++Percentage points, seasonally adjusted, annualised rate
GDP (%)
Other demand 2Private domestic final demand 1
3 According to a Bundesbank calculation, the decrease in 
gross fixed capital formation in the oil industry dampened 
US real GDP growth over the last three quarters by just 
under ½ percentage point cumulatively. This is equivalent 
to the braking effect of this component over the first nine 
months of 2009, a period which also followed a sharp 
drop in oil prices. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
effect  of one- off factors on real GDP growth in the USA in 
the first quarter of 2015, Monthly Report, May 2015, 
pp 15-18.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
18

drop in the unemployment rate to a quarterly 
average of 5.3%, representing a new cyclical 
low. At the same time, annual Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation ex -
cluding energy and unprocessed food also re -
mained muted in September (+0.7%). Against 
this background, the Bank of England has not 
raised its policy rates to date.
New EU member states
Economic activity remained lively during the 
third quarter in the new EU member states 
 (EU-6)4 as a whole. In the five countries which 
have so far published initial seasonally adjusted 
national accounts data, real GDP grew, in some 
cases strongly, on the period. Figures for Croa -
tia’s economy, which has recently recovered 
slightly from a lengthy recession, are not yet 
available. On the demand side, private con -
sumption is likely to have been an important 
driving force behind aggregate expansion in 
the region. One factor here is the improving la -
bour market situation. The unemployment rate 
for this group of countries fell in the third quar -
ter by one percentage point on the year to 
7.3%, and salaries showed a robust increase. 
Another is the easing of prices. Consumer 
prices for this group of countries (EU-6) fell 
0.6% on the year as a result of energy prices, in 
particular (although the figures ranged from 
-1.5% in Romania to +0.3% in the Czech Re -
public). Excluding energy and food, consumer 
price inflation was +0.4%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The economic recovery in the euro area con -
tinued at a slightly slower pace during the third 
quarter. According to initial data from Eurostat, 
real GDP rose by ¼% in seasonally adjusted Sustained 
 upswing in the 
third quarter
Recovery in 
the euro area  remains  moderateAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15949698100102104Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, 
log scale
9698100102104
9698100102104106
9496981001021049698100102104
Italy
SpainFranceof which
Euro area excluding GermanyEuro area
4 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
19

Recent developments in the exports of euro-area countries
Foreign trade has thus far constituted an 
important pillar of the euro area’s economic 
recovery. Export growth has been strength-
ening almost continually since the second quarter of 2013. In the fi  rst half of 2015, real exports of goods and services as de-fi  ned in the national accounts even ex-ceeded the previous year’s fi  gure by 5%, while world trade saw distinctly weaker 
growth. It would seem obvious to ascribe at least some of this export success to the de-preciation of the euro. After all, the effect-ive euro exchange rate had decreased by a 
little more than one- tenth within a year. 
However, it must be borne in mind that the 
national accounts data for the euro area 
not only include trade with third countries 
(extra- euro- area trade), but also trade 
among euro- area countries (intra- euro- area trade). It is therefore worth taking a look at the more detailed data contained in the for-eign trade statistics.
According to the foreign trade statistics, total revenue from goods exports rose in 
the euro- area countries by 5% year- on- year in the fi  rst half of 2015. At 6½%, growth in trade with third countries was roughly twice 
as high as that of tr ade among euro- area countries (3%). The upswing accelerated against the second half of 2014 for both extra- euro- area and intra- euro- area trade; this pick- up was even slightly stronger for extra- trade than intra- trade. However, this 
picture is somewhat altered when nominal 
variables are translated into real variables 
using export price indices1 as price trends in 
foreign trade have diverged more strongly 
since the depreciation of the euro began in 
the second quarter of 2014. Whereas ex-port prices in extra- euro- area trade saw a 
year- on- year increase of slightly more than 
1% in the fi  rst half of 2015, they decreased 
by 2¼% in intra- euro- area trade. In real terms, then, the growth in intra- euro- area trade of 5¼% was practically as robust as 
that of extra- euro- area trade (+5½%).
The astonishingly clear expansion in trade 
within the euro area partly refl  ects strength-
ened exports to third countries owing to the European production network. Above 
all, however, the improved underlying eco-nomic trend within the euro area is likely to 
have been a key factor, as can be seen in the substantially higher (+6¼% year- on- year) intra- euro- area trade revenue from goods for private consumption (consumer 
goods and motor vehicles).
In trade with third countries, there were notable increases in revenue from goods 
exports to the United States (up by one- fi  fth 
year- on- year), to India, South Africa and Turkey (up by more than one- tenth each), 
to central and east European EU countries 
(outside the euro area) and to the United Kingdom (up by just under one- tenth). Marked increases were also seen in trade with Switzerland and the Scandinavian countries. Growth in export revenue from 
trade with China was weak by comparison, 
and earnings from exports to Brazil even dropped signifi  cantly, while earnings from 
1 Export prices are approximated here using producer 
prices for non- domestic sales.Foreign trade price indices andeuro-US dollar exchange rate
Sources: ECB, Eurostat and Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1 For im-
ports of goods from EU countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015859095100105110January 2012 = 100, log scale
Extra-euro-area export price index (euro basis)
Exchange rate of euro to US dollar
US import price index (US dollar basis) 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
20

deliveries to Russia fell very sharply (by one- 
third).
These differences largely refl  ect cyclical dis-
parities at the international level. While 
many advanced economies are constantly expanding, growth in a host of emerging market economies has tailed off consider-ably. This primarily relates to commodity- exporting countries, some of which have even slid into recession (see the box on 
pages 16 and 17).
In addition, marked changes in exchange rate patterns are likely to have played an important role in these diverging develop-ments. The euro depreciated very steeply against the US dollar, by almost one- fi  fth. 
This is consistent with the especially strong 
increase in export revenue (in euro terms) 
from the United States. The depreciation of 
the euro was comparatively steep against 
the pound sterling and Swiss franc, as well. However, growth in exports was dispropor-tionately low here.
The picture among the major emerging market economies was very mixed. While 
the euro made heavy losses against the cur-
rencies of China, India and South Africa, 
only the latter two countries saw high ex-
port growth rates. The euro appreciated 
against the Brazilian and, in particular, the 
Russian currencies, and export revenue 
 declined more or less proportionally to this 
appreciation. It is also striking that export 
revenue grew signifi  cantly from some coun-
tries in which, in the fi  rst half of 2015, the 
currency barely appreciated against the 
euro or even lost value in some cases. This applies to the central and east European EU countries outside the euro area as well as to the neighbouring Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. These two groups of countries accounted for one- fi  fth 
of extra- euro- area trade in the fi  rst half of 
2015. The major increase in exports to Tur-
key was also accompanied by compara-
tively weak euro depreciation.One question that remains to be answered 
is how strong the export increases in indi-
vidual countries were in real terms. The ex-port price indices actually needed to deter-
mine this are only available for the third 
countries as an aggregate. For the individ-
ual countries, there are only unit values which, however, suffer from methodo-
logical weaknesses.2 Import prices by coun-
try of origin collected in the United States suggest that the price reaction to the de-
preciation of the euro has so far been small. 
In the fi  rst half of 2015, import prices for 
goods from the EU slipped only slightly (by around 2¾%) on a US dollar basis, despite 
the substantial depreciation of the euro.3 
These prices should therefore have risen 
considerably when translated into euro. In 
fact, the unit values of exports from the 
euro area to the United States increased by 
no less than 11% in this period. This sug-gests that the real rise in exports to the United States was probably signifi  cantly smaller than the increase in current prices 
2 See M Silver, The rights and wrongs of unit value 
indices, Review of Income and Wealth, 56, pp 206-
223, June 2010.
3 To date, the United States has not had an import 
price index for goods from the euro area. However, 
the price index for imports of goods from the EU 
largely moves in lockstep with the index for Germany, though the price drops in Germany and France in the fi  rst half of 2015 were even somewhat weaker than in the EU as an aggregate.Growth in export revenues bycountry and exchange rate changes
Source: Eurostat. 1 BG, CZ, HR, HU, PL, RO. 2 DK, NO, SE. 3 A 
decline in the exchange rate implies a depreciation of the euro 
against the foreign currency.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 20 – 10 0 + 10 + 20 + 30 + 40403020100102030
––––+++%, 2015 H1 vs 2014 H1
NE3 2
RUEU6 1TR
GBZA
US
IN
CHCNJP BR
Change in exchange rate 3Growth in export revenues (euro basis)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
21

terms between the second and third quarter of 
2015 and was thus up by 1½% on the year. 
Weaker export activity is likely to have played a 
large part in the slight slowdown in economic 
growth. While exports in the first half of 2015 
benefited from lively demand in some industrial 
countries and possibly from depreciation ef -
fects (see box on pages 20 to 22), the cyclical 
weakness in key EMEs has now probably be -
come more noticeable.
Private consumption continued to be an im -
portant mainstay of the euro- area upswing. 
Real disposable income is likely to have con -
tinued to rise considerably, bolstered by rising 
employment figures, a slightly stronger rise in 
wages and a consumer- friendly price trend. 
The fairly steep rise in retail turnover (which 
was up by a seasonally adjusted ½% on the 
quarter in real terms) and the strong increase in 
new passenger car registrations of 2½% (a fig -
ure which, however, also includes registrations for commercial vehicles) show that the relevant 
leeway is being used.
Enterprises’ investment activity is likely to have 
boosted economic growth very little, if at all. 
Although capital goods production rose mark -
edly during the third quarter, a large proportion 
of the additional output was destined for ex -
port. Construction investment would appear to 
have remained weak.
Imports are likely to have continued to rise con -
siderably in the third quarter after spiking in the 
first quarter and moving sideways at a high 
level in the second. In any case, imports of 
goods in July and August were up by 1½% on 
the second quarter in seasonally and price-  
adjusted terms. To date, the demand effects 
emanating from the euro area’s good domestic 
activity are therefore likely to have prevailed 
over the potential trade diversion effects 
caused by the depreciation of the euro.Private con-
sumption mak-ing substantial  contribution to growthRestrained  investment  activity
Lively import 
 activityand that exporters’ margins (in euro terms) 
could thus have widened. This also prompts certain doubts regarding the weak price in-crease shown by the export price index for the euro area. However, the example of the United States is likely to be an isolated case, 
as transactions are predominantly settled there in US dollars.
4 In trade with other 
countries, the euro probably plays a greater 
role as an invoicing currency. For the cen-tral, east and north European countries 
with relatively stable exchange rates against the euro, real exports (given only a low in-crease in unit values) are also likely to have seen distinct growth.
Overall, it can be seen that the substantial 
rise in real exports in the euro area can 
probably only be partly explained by the de-
preciation of the euro. This depreciation is 
certainly likely to have aided euro- area en-
terprises in the fi  rst half of 2015 to offset declining demand, especially from a num-ber of emerging market economies, and  fi  nancial leeway was probably also gained 
through a widening of margins. Above all, 
however, exporters in the euro area profi  ted 
from the favourable economic setting in key sales countries, and a signifi  cant por-tion of the growth in exports was ac-
counted for by trade within the euro area.
4 Gopinath (2015) shows that the United States 
 invoices the bulk of its trade (93% of imports) in US 
dollars and that international prices, in their invoicing 
currency, do not react particularly sensitively to ex-
change rate changes over a period of up to two years. 
See G Gopinath, The International Price System, NBER Working Paper 21646, October 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
22

On the output side, activity in the industrial 
sector has remained weak. Seasonally adjusted 
industrial output rose only slightly from the 
second to the third quarter. There was a 
marked decline in the production of intermedi -
ate goods. By contrast, output of capital and 
consumer goods was stepped up perceptibly. 
The significant rise in energy production is likely 
to be the result of a temporary weather effect. 
Enterprises reported a slight increase in cap -
acity utilisation between July and October. 
There are still no signs of improvement for the 
construction sector; average output in July and 
August was down by ¼% on the second quar -
ter in seasonally adjusted terms and down by 
3% on the year.
Economic activity in the large euro- area coun -
tries followed a clear upward trajectory in the 
third quarter. The lively expansion in Spain con -
tinued. The economic recovery also gained 
ground in France and Italy, albeit on a distinctly 
smaller scale. The German economy expanded 
along the path of potential growth. The picture 
for the smaller euro- area countries is more het -
erogeneous. Austria, Belgium and the Nether -
lands recorded comparatively low growth. Eco -
nomic output stagnated in Portugal, chiefly 
owing to a cutback in investment, while aggre -
gate output in Estonia, Finland and Greece ac -
tually contracted in comparison to the second 
quarter. In the case of the two northern Euro -
pean countries, exceptionally weak exports are 
the likely cause.
At ½% in seasonally adjusted terms, the 
quarter- on- quarter contraction in Greek GDP 
was far smaller than widely expected. Extremely 
lively activity in the tourism sector appears to 
have more or less recouped the losses resulting 
from the closure of the banks and the impos -
ition of capital controls. It remains to be seen 
whether this comparatively favourable develop -
ment continues into the final quarter of 2015 
and the first quarter of 2016, in which tourism 
is less relevant.According to the available leading indicators, 
neither a fundamental cyclical improvement 
nor a marked deterioration is expected in the 
euro area in the fourth quarter. Industrial activ -
ity and exports could lose further momentum 
in the light of the problems in key EMEs. In sea -
sonally adjusted terms, industrial orders in the 
July-August period were down by ¾% on the 
second quarter (although there had been 
strong growth during this period). The decline 
affected export orders, in particular. However, 
according to the purchasing managers’ indices, 
the positive trend in the services sector is also 
set to continue in October. The European Com -
mission surveys indicate a high degree of opti -
mism, especially in the retail trade sector.
The labour market situation improved again 
slightly in the third quarter. In comparison to 
the second quarter, the seasonally adjusted un -
employment rate fell by 0.2 percentage point 
to 10.8%, leaving it 1.2 percentage points 
lower than its record high in the second quar -Industrial sector 
activity still weak
Ongoing eco-
nomic recovery in the large euro- area  member states
Economic 
 output down in GreeceGrowth likely to remain  moderate in the 
fourth quarter
Continuation of 
slight improve-ment in labour market2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20159698100102Real retail sales
2010 = 100
2 000 2 0002 200 2 2002 400 2 4002 600 2 6002 800 2 800Scale reduced
New passenger car registrations
(Quarterly totals)Number
(thousands)
951001101202010 = 100
Real goods exports1
Real goods imports1Seasonally and calendar-adjusted, 
quarterly averages, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Nomin-
al export and import data according to foreign trade statistics, 
price adjusted using producer price index (exports) or import 
price index.
Deutsche BundesbankJuly-
AugDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
23

ter of 2013. Among the large euro- area coun -
tries, only France recorded a marked rise of 
0.3 percentage point in the unemployment 
rate in the third quarter. The number of em -
ployees in the euro area rose by 0.3% between 
the first and second quarter and by 0.8% on 
the year. Although the increase in hourly labour 
costs slowed its pace again somewhat in the 
second quarter (to +1.6% year- on- year), on the 
whole it was noticeably greater in the first half 
of 2015 than in the two previous years.
Euro- area consumer price inflation did not in -
crease further in the third quarter following a 
fairly strong seasonally adjusted quarterly in -
crease of 0.5% in the second quarter. This was 
due in large part to the significant fall in oil 
prices over the last few months. Excluding en -
ergy, consumer prices, by contrast, climbed by 
0.3%, as in the previous quarter. The increase 
in the price of services even accelerated slightly, 
a development in which the VAT hike in Greece 
at the end of July is likely to have had a hand. 
Food and industrial goods prices excluding en -
ergy recorded a further modest increase. All in 
all, the underlying price trend is therefore 
clearly pointing upwards. This is borne out by 
the further rise in annual HICP inflation exclud -
ing energy to 1% (a further increase of 0.2 per -
centage point in comparison to the previous 
quarter). Including energy, headline HICP infla -
tion fell slightly to 0.1%.This underlying upward trend in consumer 
prices is also reflected by the HICP data for the 
euro- area countries. HICP excluding energy re -
mained lower than 1% in just nine countries 
and was in negative territory only in Cyprus. 
Non- energy prices in Austria, Luxembourg and 
Malta went up by as much as almost 2% in the 
third quarter. The gap between Germany and 
the average of the rest of the euro area has re -
cently all but closed; one year ago, it still stood 
at ¾ percentage point. This applies to the ser -
vices sector, in particular, for which the average 
inflation rate in the rest of the euro area is now 
higher than in Germany. In terms of industrial 
goods prices, however, the gap has widened 
again somewhat.
A flash estimate by Eurostat showed that euro- 
area consumer prices as a whole compared to 
the previous month hardly budged in season -
ally adjusted terms in October 2015, too. Once 
again, falling energy prices almost fully offset a 
slight increase in the price of food, services and 
industrial goods. That said, annual inflation in -
creased from -0.1% in September to 0.0%, 
since energy prices had fallen even more 
sharply in the previous year. Excluding energy, it 
rose further from 1.0% to 1.1%.Further decline 
in energy prices masking under-lying upward trend in con-sumer pricesFairly sharp rise in services prices in almost all euro- area  countries
Slight further 
rise in HICP ex-cluding  energy  
in OctoberDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, and in line with its forward guidance, 
the ECB Governing Council kept the key inter -
est rates unchanged in the reporting period. 
Therefore, the main refinancing rate remains at 
0.05%, the marginal lending rate at 0.30%, 
and the deposit rate at -0.20%. Moreover, the 
Eurosystem continued as planned to purchase 
bonds under the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme (EAPP) agreed in January 2015 and 
launched in March 2015.
The ECB Governing Council announced that it 
would re- examine the degree of monetary pol -
icy accommodation on the basis of macroeco -
nomic projections compiled by Eurosystem ex -
perts at its next monetary policy meeting in 
December. This decision was made against the 
backdrop of information becoming available in 
the reporting period, which – according to the 
ECB Governing Council – continued to signal 
downward risks regarding the outlook for 
growth and inflation despite robust domestic 
demand. The persistence of the factors slowing 
down the return of inflation to a level of below, 
but close to 2%, likewise justified a detailed 
 analysis. The ECB Governing Council again 
underlined its willingness to respond by using 
all the instruments available within its mandate 
to ensure an appropriate degree of monetary 
policy accommodation. In this context, it was 
highlighted that the EAPP’s volume, compos -
ition and duration offered sufficient scope for 
adjustment.
Following the review after the first six months 
of purchases, which was announced when the 
programme was launched, the Governing 
Council decided in September to increase the 
issue share limit for purchases of individual 
public sector assets from the initial limit of 25% 
to 33%. However, for each individual issue, it must be verified that a situation in which the 
Eurosystem has a blocking minority is avoided. 
Wherever this is not possible, the purchasing 
limit would remain at 25%.
On 6 November, the Eurosystem held assets in 
the amount of €406.6 billion as part of the 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The 
average residual maturity of the PSPP portfolio 
is currently just over eight years. The outstand -
ing amounts purchased to date under the third 
covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3) 
and the asset backed securities purchase pro -
gramme (ABSPP) came to €132.5 billion and 
€14.8 billion respectively. Overall, the volume 
of securities purchased under the EAPP thus 
equates to the average monthly volume of €60 
billion previously announced.Key interest 
rates unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council  announces  
re- examination of degree of monetary policy  accommodation
Limit for 
 purchases  
of individual public sector assets up from 25% to 33%Purchase  volumes remain 
consistent with 
announced 
 target
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-month  EURIBOR 
less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 1 to 12 Novem-
ber 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20150.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
050100Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the two reserve maintenance 
periods from 22 July to 27 October 2015, there was a marked increase in euro-area 
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous factors. In the September-October 2015 re-
serve period, the fi  gure averaged €557.5 billion, which was €44.2 billion above its 
average level in the June-July 2015 reserve 
period. This was largely due to the change 
in the liquidity-providing other factors which, if taken together with net foreign 
assets in order to eliminate valuation effects 
with no impact on liquidity, declined by 
€35.5 billion. Added to this, the €9.7 billion increase in the volume of banknotes in cir-
culation also had a liquidity-absorbing ef-fect. By contrast, government deposits re-mained virtually unchanged on balance in  
the period under review, with a decline dur-ing the July-September 2015 period, which 
includes the summer holidays, being fol-lowed by an upturn in the September-
October 2015 period. Minimum reserve re-quirements rose by €0.3 billion across both reserve periods to stand at €113.2 billion in 
the September-October 2015 period. This 
increase additionally slightly raised the cal-
culated liquidity needs (see the table below).
During the period under review, the out-standing tender volume averaged €533.4 
billion, fl  uctuating less strongly than in pre-vious periods (see chart on page 28). A key 
contributory factor here was the limited 
interest in the fi  fth targeted longer-term re-fi  nancing operation (TLTRO) in which €15.5 billion were allotted. The overall volume of 
TLTROs consequently totalled €400 billion as at 27 October 2015. Three-month ten-
ders fell in volume from €83 billion to €67 
billion, while the volume of main refi  nan-
cing operations shrank only gradually, from 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2015
22 July to
8 Sep9 Sep to27 Oct
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 12.6 +  2.9
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 32.9 – 31.8
3 Net foreign assets
1 – 15.5 –  8.3
4 Other factors 1 –  0.9 – 10.8
Total +  3.9 – 48.0
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations – 10.0 –  2.2
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations + 19.0 –  0.1
(c) Other operations + 79.0 + 92.4
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.3 –  0.5
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 44.9 –  4.8
Total + 43.4 + 84.8
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 47.0 + 36.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.5 +  0.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
26

€75 billion to around €66 billion, despite 
the sharp increase in excess liquidity. The 
 familiar pattern of greater demand for these 
operations prior to month-end was less pronounced than in the preceding report-ing period, probably on account of the 
ample amounts of liquidity provided by the TLTROs and the purchase programmes.
Purchases made as part of the expanded 
asset purchase programme (EAPP) had the 
greatest liquidity-providing effect in the re-
porting period. Balance sheet holdings of 
securities under the three sub-programmes 
increased in the two reserve periods by 
€154.0 billion (PSPP), €28.4 billion (CBPP3) 
and €5.2 billion (ABSPP). As at 6 November 
2015, these holdings amounted to €406.6 
billion (PSPP), €132.5 billion (CBPP3) and €14.8 billion (ABSPP). Holdings under dis-continued Eurosystem purchase pro-grammes dwindled further as a result of 
maturities and taking into account end-of-
quarter revaluations. The balance sheet holdings of these programmes stood at 
€20.8 billion (CBPP1), €10.0 billion (CBPP2) 
and €123.0 billion (SMP) as at 6 November 
2015. On 5 August 2015, the overall bal-ance sheet volume of all outstanding pur-chase programmes exceeded the refi  nan-cing volume arising from tenders for the 
fi  rst time.
In the July-September 2015 reserve period, 
excess liquidity rose by €92 billion com-
pared with the previous period to an aver-
age level of €464 billion. The September-
October 2015 reserve period saw a more 
moderate increase in excess liquidity to the 
tune of €41 billion, resulting in an average 
level of €505 billion thanks to the compen-
sating effect of higher autonomous factors. As in the preceding reporting period, excess 
liquidity fl  uctuated fairly strongly at times over the space of just a few days, which 
was often the result of the higher volatility of the autonomous factors (especially gov-
ernment deposits with the Eurosystem). The 
liquidity needs resulting from the autono-
mous factors fl  uctuated between €489 bil-lion and €602 billion.
The very generous liquidity supply meant 
that overnight rates in the reporting period 
remained in line with the deposit facility 
rate of -0.20%. The overall increase in ex-
cess liquidity caused the spread on the de-posit facility rate to narrow further. This was 
true both of the EONIA as the reference rate for unsecured overnight deposits and of secured overnight money (Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight, ECB basket) (see chart 
above). In the July-September 2015 reserve 
period, the EONIA averaged -0.12%, drop-
ping to a rate of -0.14% over the Septem-
ber-October period. Secured overnight money followed a similar, albeit less pro-
nounced pattern, as it was already close to 
the deposit facility rate. GC Pooling Over-Interest rate spread and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug Sep Oct Nov
2015Daily data
€ billion
0100200300400500600
Excess liquidity 103691215Spread over the deposit facility rate
EONIABasis
points
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
27

night (ECB basket), which was consistently 
below the EONIA in the reporting period, 
stood at an average of -0.19% in the two periods under review (previous period: 
-0.18%), just 1 basis point higher than the 
deposit facility rate. The fact that secured overnight money rates barely increased at 
the end of the month or quarter during the 
reporting period (see chart on page 27) is indicative of the weakened response of overnight money to the liquidity situation. Moreover, average EONIA turnover, which was already low at roughly €20 billion on average in the April-June and June-July 
2015 reserve periods, decreased further to 
stand at around €16 billion in the Septem-
ber-October period. This highlighted the 
fact that the need for a daily redistribution 
of liquidity appears to have diminished 
owing to the longer-term supply of central 
bank money and a greater emphasis on longer money market maturities. Further-more, yield prospects rendered the intraday provision of liquidity less attractive.
The fi  rst two weeks of the October-December 2015 reserve period were char-
acterised by a further rise in excess liquidity 
(€566 billion as at 6 November 2015), low 
overnight rates close to the deposit facility 
rate and a further fall in overnight turnover, 
with Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight secured 
turnover (ECB basket) also declining signifi  -cantly this time.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP),  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), Asset-Backed Securities Purchase Programme (ABSPP) and Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP). 2 Current 
account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility
60040020002004006008001,0001,200
–––++++++
April May June July August September October November
2015Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tendersPurchase programmes1
Targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs)Marginal lending facility
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
28

On 24 September 2015, the fifth of eight tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations 
( TLTROs) was carried out, with 88 banks taking 
up an overall volume of €15.5 billion. The allot -
ted amount, which was below market expect -
ations, is to be seen in the context of the high 
and increasing excess liquidity as well as the 
operation’s relative attractiveness compared 
with market- based funding alternatives. The 
conditions for market- based funding at equiva -
lent maturities hardly changed, or declined, 
compared with when the fourth TLTRO was 
conducted. This was probably one of the rea -
sons why the institutions did not increase their 
demand for TLTRO funds any further. At the 
same time, recourse to the standard main refi -
nancing operations and three- month tenders 
again declined slightly. The Eurosystem’s total 
monetary policy refinancing volume amounted 
to just under €531 billion in October, ie lower 
than at the time of the last report.
Driven by purchases under the EAPP , excess 
 liquidity continued to grow significantly by just 
under €100 billion in the reporting period des -
pite the subdued demand in the fifth TLTRO, 
following the trend of the preceding reporting 
quarter. At around €565 billion, excess liquidity 
is now at as high a level as last seen in January 
2013. Owing to the implementation of the EAPP , further growth is to be expected in the 
months ahead.
However, the increase in excess liquidity only 
sporadically caused short- term money market 
rates to decline further. The secured overnight 
rate (Stoxx GC Pooling) changed only margin -
ally overall and remained close to the deposit 
rate, while the unsecured interbank money 
market rate (Eonia) moved only sideways of 
late, following a slight decline until mid-  
September. The interest rate on the deposit 
 facility limits the downward potential of these 
short- term rates, even while excess liquidity 
continues to grow. However, the negative 
trend of the  unsecured three- month Euribor 
continued and recently reached an all- time low 
of -0.081%, which meant that the spread be -
tween the three- month Euribor and Eonia con -
tracted further.
More significant declines were recorded at the 
longer end of the money market curve of late. 
Eonia swap rates with a maturity of six months, 
for example, fell short of the deposit rate at -21 
basis points, while implicit Eonia forward rates 
with a nine- month maturity fell at times to as 
low as -29 basis points. These downward 
movements occurred against the backdrop of 
growing market expectations of a further eas -
ing of the monetary policy stance in the euro 88 banks 
 borrow €15.5 billion in fifth  
TLTRO
Significant 
growth in excess liquidity persistsDownward  potential of short- term money market rates largely  exhausted
Market expect -
ations regarding 
further deposit rate reductionConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2015 Q3 2015 Q2
Central government deposits 30.1 – 22.5
Monetary aggregate M3 109.8 108.0
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 135.3 173.4
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 31.2 – 34.6
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 5.7 – 30.9
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 
to other non-MFIs – 11.0 – 92.0
of which
Capital and reserves 36.1 –  0.4
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 47.1 – 91.6Assets 2015 Q3 2015 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area 51.8 –  6.6
Loans – 15.1 2.6
Loans, adjusted
1 –  2.0 –  0.5
Debt securities 66.9 –  9.2
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 120.3 51.3
Loans – 12.9 – 15.4
Debt securities 133.3 66.6
Net external assets – 67.3 –  5.4
Other counterparts of M3 24.0 – 45.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
29

area. The declines in the forward rates are con -
sistent, in particular, with expectations regard -
ing a possible further reduction in the deposit 
rate.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 grew again 
considerably in the third quarter. The robust 
growth in the money components was attrib -
utable to the money- holding sector’s sustained 
preference for highly liquid assets, which was 
driven by the interest rate situation. In this con -
text, monetary developments were dominated 
by the effects of the EAPP , with growth in se -
curitised lending by the MFI sector to general 
government again accelerating significantly 
due to Eurosystem purchases. However, part of 
this positive direct effect that the securities pur -
chases had on monetary growth was offset by 
outflows of funds from the euro area as a result 
of foreign investors’ net sales of euro- area sov -
ereign bonds to euro- area residents. Despite a 
further decline in lending rates, no supporting 
effect emanated from loans to the private sec -
tor. Loans to the non- financial private sector, 
on the other hand, recorded sustained inflows.
Growth in M3 in the third quarter was still 
mainly driven by overnight deposits, which 
were accumulated by households and non-  
financial corporations, in particular, in the light 
of the comparatively small and decreasing 
interest rate spreads over other types of invest -
ment. Conversely, households’ demand for 
short- term time deposits fell again significantly 
in the reporting quarter. Unlike in the previous 
quarters, non- monetary financial corporations 
did not continue to increase their overnight de -
posits in the third quarter. On balance, the an -
nual growth rate of M3 remained unchanged 
on the quarter at 4.9%. This means that the 
upward trend in the expansion of the money 
stock observed from the beginning of 2014 has 
given way to a robust sideways movement.Monetary 
 developments increasingly marked by EAPP
Significant M3 
growth still driven by over-night depositsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan sales and secur-
itisation. 5 Non-monetary financial corporations. 6 Non-finan-
cial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201563036912
––++++
–6–30+3+69+12
30369
–+++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
growth contributions 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 4
Financial
corporations 5
Non-financial
corporations 6
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Securitised lending to
general governmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
30

Adjusting loan data for sales and securitisation
Ever since the September 2015 reporting 
date, the national central banks (NCBs) of the Eurosystem and the European Central Bank (ECB) have been using an improved 
reporting framework for loans to the euro- area private sector.
1 One benefi  t of the new 
method is that it allows loan data to be ad-
justed more accurately for the effects of securitisation  and other transfers of loans. This adjustment step is generally needed 
because securitis ed loans that are derecog-
nised from banks’ balance sheets are re-
ported as a reduction in the stock of loans 
originated by banks, even though the ac-
tual amount of bank fi  nancing received by 
the real economy remains unchanged. An-
other improvement brought about by the 
new statistical adjustment method is that it 
enhances the comparability of loan data 
across member states, some of which apply 
different accounting practices when loans 
are derecognised.
The refi  ned adjustment method was made 
possible by a new ECB Regulation and 
Guideline.2 The previous statistical data only 
allowed the actual impact of off- balance- sheet securitisation and comparable loan transfers to be captured by adjusting the 
loan fl  ows for the reduction in the reported loan stock (triggered by one- off derecogni-
tion) in the month in which the transfer 
took place. Statistical data to adjust for sub-
sequent repayments of transferred loans were not available, however. The new re-porting standards now require monetary fi  nancial  institutions (MFIs) which act as ser-
vicers3 to report data on an ongoing basis 
on the stocks and repayments of derecog-
nised securitised loans. Data on derecog-
nised loans which are not serviced by MFIs, 
where available, will also be fed into the 
new adjustment method. This means that it is now possible to adjust statistical data for 
periods subsequent to derecognition as 
well. The new adjusted data series are avail-able from the beginning of 2010, the back-data having been produced in part with the aid of estimations.
The effect of the change in methodology on adjusted growth rates speaks for itself when the growth rate is expressed as the 
quotient of current- period transactions (nu-merator effect) and of the outstanding pre-
vious- period amount (denominator effect). 
1 See European Central Bank, New data on loans to 
the private sector adjusted for sales and securitisation, 
Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/ 2015, pp 25-27.
2 Specifi  cally, these are Regulation ECB/ 2013/ 33 con-
cerning the balance sheet of the monetary fi  nancial 
institutions sector and Guideline ECB/ 2014/ 15 on mon-etary and fi  nancial statistics.3 An MFI acts as a servicer when it manages the loans underlying a securitisation in terms of the collection of principal and interest from the obligors, which is then forwarded to investors in the securitisation scheme.Loans* to the euro-area 
non-financial private sector
Source: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015432101234
––––++++Seasonally adjusted data, year-on-year percentage change
–2–10+1+2+3 German contributionTotalNew adjustment system
Old adjustment system
Non-financial
corporations 1HouseholdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
31

The new method of adjustment broadens 
the capture of data for transactions beyond 
the derecognised volumes of loan transfers 
in the month of derecognition by also in-cluding data on repayments of derecog-
nised loans in subsequent periods, reducing 
the size of the numerator accordingly. In contrast, the denominator increases, be-
cause the refi  ned adjustment method now 
captures not only loan stocks carried in bal-
ance sheets but also the outstanding 
amount of derecognised loans. Taken as a 
whole, the new method of adjustment 
therefore has a negative effect on the ad-
justed growth rates of loans to the euro- 
area private sector.As can be seen in the chart on the previous 
page, growth rates for loans to the euro area’s non- fi  nancial private sector, when calculated according to the new method, are somewhat down on previous rates, as would be expected. The chart also shows 
that loans to households at the euro- area 
level are affected more strongly than those 
to non- fi  nancial corporations. One likely ex-planation for this is that the stocks of derec-ognised loans to households being serviced by an MFI (€335 billion in September 2015) 
far exceed those to non- fi  nancial corpor-ations (€57 billion). But in overall terms, loan growth rates have not been affected 
by the refi  ned adjustment method; in par-
ticular, the robust recovery which the growth rate for loans to the euro area’s non- fi  nancial private sector has shown 
since the beginning of 2014 remains intact.
The negative effect of the new adjustment 
method on growth rates can also be ob-
served in Germany’s contributions to the euro- area aggregates; the pace of the re-covery process has not been signifi  cantly 
affected  by the improvements made to the adjustment method either (see the chart on the previous page). Unlike in the euro area 
as a whole, the difference between the 
growth rates for loans to households calcu-lated according to the old and new adjust-ment methods is very narrow, however. This is because the stock of derecognised loans to households in Germany is quite low (see 
the chart on this page). Consumer loans  account for the bulk of securitisation in 
Germany, with auto fi  nance loans probably accounting for much of this activity. By con-
trast, the securitisation of loans for house purchase, which make up a great deal of the euro area’s total stocks, plays only a 
secondary role in Germany. Loans for house 
purchase are normally retained on the bal-
ance sheets of German credit institutions where they serve as cover assets securing 
Pfandbriefe, which offer attractive yields.Derecognised loans to selected 
sectors in the euro area*
Source: ECB. * Derecognised loans serviced by euro-area MFIs. 
1 Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015020406080100120140160€ billion, end-of-month data
0+10+20+30+40 Scale enlarged
Non-financial corporations 1Households
GermanyItalyFranceIrelandBelgiumNetherlandsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
32

By contrast, the annual growth rate of loans to 
the euro- area private sector (adjusted for sales 
and securitisation)1 continued to recover on the 
whole despite slight net redemptions in the re -
porting quarter, climbing slightly to 0.4% at the 
end of September. Correspondingly, the gap 
between monetary growth and growth in loans 
to the private sector remains exceptionally 
high.
As in the preceding quarter, the development 
of loans to the private sector in the third quar -
ter was dampened by clear outflows in lending 
to the financial corporations sector, whereas 
loans to the non- financial private sector again 
expanded markedly. However, lending to non- 
financial corporations, which had recorded in -
flows in the three previous quarters, contracted 
slightly in the third quarter on balance (see the 
chart on page  34). This was attributable to 
considerable net redemptions of loans with 
short- term maturities, which were offset by an appreciable expansion in medium and longer-  
term lending.
Yet, a breakdown of the data by countries re -
veals that the decline in short- term lending was 
driven by one- off effects in the Netherlands, 
implying that the reported figures probably 
understate the credit dynamics in the reporting 
quarter. This is mirrored by the fact that lending 
to non- financial corporations in the reporting 
quarter showed positive developments in all 
four large euro- area member states, albeit to 
different extents. Some banks in France, Italy 
and Germany, for example, recorded discern -
ible increases in lending, and net redemptions 
decreased somewhat in Spain. Despite the 
above- mentioned one- off effect, the annual 
growth rate for loans to non-  financial corpor -
ations in the euro area as a whole continued to Upturn in lend-
ing growth con-tinues despite net redemptions
Slight reduction 
in loans to non- financial corpor-ations …… due to  
one- off  effects in a single core countryOne factor that does fi  gure quite strongly in 
the fl  atter growth rate for loans to non- 
fi  nancial corporations across the euro area, 
however, is the downward revision of the 
German fi  gures. This would appear coun-terintuitive at fi  rst – after all, the stock of 
derecognised loans to non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations in Germany is likewise relatively low 
compared with other euro- area countries 
(see the chart on the previous page). But it 
is important to note, when calculating 
growth rates, that the bulk of loans securi-
tised in Germany have short maturities (of 
up to one year), while the maturity profi  le in 
the euro area is a lot more mixed. In Ger-
many, then, repayments are a relatively im-portant factor compared to the outstanding 
loan amounts, causing the growth rate to contract more strongly under the new 
method of adjustment.4 However, the infl  u-
ence of German data is likely to wane in future periods, assuming securitisation  activity remains as it is, since the stock of derecognised corporate loans being ser-
viced by German banks has been shrinking since 2010 and is now very small indeed.
As part of the changeover to the new method of adjustment, action was also taken to harmonise the seasonal adjust-ment of loans to the private sector,
5 in a 
move which ensures that NCBs and the ECB now use uniform methods for reporting on the transactions of domestic banks with the 
domestic private sector as well as the re-
spective national contributions to the euro- area aggregates.
4 This is mainly because the numerator (that is, the 
fl  ow effect) accounts for the bulk of the difference 
between  the growth rates calculated according to the 
old and the new methods.5 This related inter alia to the question of which data 
series for loans to households and non- fi  nancial cor-
porations are seasonally adjusted according to the dir-
ect estimating approach and which use the indirect 
approach.
1 For details on the methodological changes to the adjust -
ment of loan series for loan securitisation and their implica -
tions for growth rates, see the box on pp 31-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
33

recover slightly and, at 0.1% at the end of the 
reporting quarter, moved marginally back into 
positive territory for the first time since the be -
ginning of 2012.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) carried out in 
the third quarter also pointed to a continued 
upward movement in lending to the non-  
financial corporations sector. Although the 
euro- area banks surveyed said they had, on 
balance, eased their standards for loans to en -
terprises only marginally,2 they reported a fur -
ther marked increase in non- financial corpor -
ations’ demand for loans.  According to the 
banks, this demand was driven, above all, by 
the low general interest rate level. In addition, 
financial needs for investment and corporate 
restructuring as well as adjustments to enter -
prises’ equity and debt funding had a boosting 
effect on demand. The BLS stated that the 
EAPP , too, had had a positive impact on lend -
ing. For example, the respondent euro- area 
banks reported to have primarily deployed the 
liquidity received under the EAPP for lending 
purposes over the past six months and indi -
cated that they planned to continue on this 
path in the six months to come. Moreover, the 
surveyed institutions stated that they intended, 
in particular, to ease credit conditions on the 
back of the EAPP .Growth in lending to households accelerated 
appreciably again compared to the previous 
quarter. However, at an annual growth rate of 
1.1% in the reporting quarter, the expansion of 
this aggregate was still moderate.3 In an envir -
onment of historically low interest rates, lend -
ing growth was again driven by loans for house 
purchase, although consumer credit also con -
tinued to make a distinctly positive contribu -
tion. As in the preceding quarters, the aggre -
gate increase in loans for house purchase in the 
euro area masked heterogeneous develop -
ments in the different countries. Whereas these 
loans continued to increase significantly in 
France and Germany, in particular, most euro-  
area periphery countries saw them decline – 
not least as a result of the persistent need for 
deleveraging among households in some of 
these countries. For the euro area as a whole, 
the banks surveyed in the BLS reported that de -
mand in this credit segment had risen substan -
tially yet again, while credit standards had 
tightened marginally.Ongoing recov-
ery in demand for loans by non- financial corporationsLoans to house-holds up percep-tibly; driven by loans for house purchaseLoans to non-financial corporations*
€ billion; end-of-quarter three-month changes, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Non-financial corporations. As from the implementation of ESA 2010, from December 
2014, holding companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but 
are now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector in banks’ monthly balance sheet statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 2012 13 14 15 2012 13 14 15 2012 13 14 152520151050510
–––––++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2012 13 14 1560504030201001020
––––––++
2 Banks last reported that they had tightened their lending 
standards in this business line for the final quarter of 2013.
3 The improved methodology for adjusting credit data for 
credit transfers (see the box on pp 31-33) has had a par -
ticularly pronounced effect on loans to households, caus -
ing annual growth rates in that segment to be revised 
downwards discernibly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
34

Compared to loans for house purchase, the rise 
seen in consumer credit over the past few 
quarters was visibly more broad- based – prob -
ably a reflection of the ongoing pick- up in pri -
vate consumption in the euro area. According 
to the BLS, this is consistent with the renewed 
marked rise in funding requirements in the con -
sumer credit segment, which the surveyed 
banks continued to attribute, in part, to con -
sumers’ high propensity to spend, improved 
consumer confidence and the low interest rate 
level. The BLS reported a marginal loosening of 
credit standards in this segment.
The discrepancy between the overall weak 
lending to the private sector and the robust 
growth in the monetary aggregate in the re -
porting quarter can primarily be explained by 
the major expansion in securitised lending to 
general government (see the adjacent chart), 
which, in turn, was supported by Eurosystem 
purchases of securities made under the EAPP . In 
this vein, claims by the entire MFI sector (to 
which the Eurosystem also belongs) vis- à- vis 
general government again increased consider -
ably in the quarter under review, which sug -
gests that a fair share of the paper was ultim -
ately sold by holders outside the domestic 
banking sector. This goes hand in hand with 
the fact that the sovereign debt held by banks 
and money market funds in the euro area fell 
only slightly in the third quarter. However, they 
simultaneously clearly increased their holdings 
of debt securities from the euro-  area private 
sector in the reporting quarter, from which it 
can be assumed that government securities 
were partly substituted with private sector 
 securities.
The development of the MFI sector’s net exter -
nal position, too, is increasingly being influ -
enced by the Eurosystem’s securities purchases. 
However, the inflow of external funds to euro- 
area non- banks continued as a result of the on -
going current account surpluses, which – taken 
in isolation – increase the MFI sector’s net ex -
ternal assets and thereby support monetary ex -
pansion. At the same time, substantial net cap -ital exports in portfolio investment were in -
creasingly observed from April of this year, 
which, per se , lead to outflows of funds to 
non- euro- area countries and diminish the MFI 
sector’s net external position. The outflows 
from securities transactions were attributable, 
first, to a persistently elevated demand by do -
mestic investors for debt securities issued out -
side the euro area. One factor behind this is 
likely to have been the substitution of domestic 
securities sold to the Eurosystem under the 
EAPP with foreign securities. Second, the ex -
pected reduction of euro- area sovereign bond 
holdings by foreign investors under the pur -
chase programme was clearly observable with 
a small lag from June. In addition, non- residents 
scaled back both their activities in the equity 
market and their exposures to bonds of the 
non- financial private sector slightly on balance.
The contraction in monetary capital, which had 
been the largest supporting M3 counterpart for 
a while, slowed down noticeably in the report -
ing quarter. This was mainly due to the fact 
that the persistently considerable net redemp -
tions of long- term bank debt securities were 
offset by a perceptible increase in capital and 
reserves. Furthermore, due to a large- volume 
securitisation transaction by other financial 
intermediaries in July, longer-  term time de -
posits recorded net inflows for the first time in Stable growth in 
consumer credit
Securitised lend-
ing to general government and private sector pushes growth in monetary  aggregate
Net capital 
 exports in  securities trans-actions cause net external position to  contractFurther decline in monetary capital due to shrinking long- term bank debt securitiesSecuritised lending of MFIs to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 201510050050100150200250300
––++++++€ billion, end-of-month 12-month changes, not seasonally adjusted
Eurosystem
Euro-area MFIs excluding
the Eurosystem
Entire MFI sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
35

quite a while (see below). As in the preceding 
quarters, the continued reduction in bank debt 
securities in the hands of the money- holding 
sector is probably attributable to the fact that 
market- based funding is currently compara -
tively unattractive due to banks further expand -
ing their deposits and liquidity being provided 
by the Eurosystem at favourable conditions.
The balance sheet assets of euro- area banks fell 
slightly again in the third quarter of 2015, 
which, besides the continued decline in inter -
bank claims in the euro area, was predomin -
antly due to the reduction in claims vis- à- vis 
non- residents and –  in the context of the 
EAPP – claims on general government in the 
euro area (see the chart above). The latter ap -
plied, in particular, to banks in Italy and Spain, 
which mainly reduced their holdings of domes -
tic government bonds. Conversely, credit insti -
tutions in Ireland, France and Germany, in par -
ticular, experienced a reduction in external 
claims. The persistent decline in interbank 
claims is probably attributable to the financial 
institutions’ comfortable liquidity position, 
which is reflected, amongst other things, in the 
claims on the Eurosystem, which have once 
again risen discernibly.German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
In Germany, too, the investment behaviour of 
non- banks was characterised – as in the previ -
ous quarters – by an expansion in short- term 
deposits, of which predominantly overnight de -
posits increased. Especially households and, to 
a substantially lesser extent, non- financial cor -
porations strengthened their holdings of over -
night deposits, in part also by reducing other 
longer-  term deposits. This reflected the steep 
incline in households’ disposable income and 
the high level of liquidity currently held by non- 
financial corporations. In addition, the consist -
ently elevated demand for overnight deposits 
mirrors investors’ distinct preference for liquid -
ity, which was driven in the reporting quarter 
by greater fluctuations in the capital markets.4 
Moreover, the ever- narrowing interest rate 
spread between savings and short- term time 
deposits on the one hand and overnight de -
posits on the other has further pushed down 
the opportunity costs of holding money (see 
the chart on page 37).Slight fall in 
banks’ balance sheet assetsDeposit business still marked by portfolio shifts towards overnight 
 deposits …Balance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20153,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++End-of-quarter 12-month changes1 in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the world
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, German households’ saving 
and investment behaviour in light of the low- interest- rate 
environment, Monthly Report, October 2015, pp 13-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
36

With the exception of long- term time deposits, 
financial corporations recorded no noteworthy 
changes in deposit holdings in the third quar -
ter. As in the previous quarters, insurance com -
panies and pension funds managed by profes -
sional investors continued to scale back their 
(persistently high level of) holdings of long-  
term time deposits, probably due to shifts in 
favour of higher- yielding assets. By contrast, 
other financial intermediaries’ long- term time 
deposits recorded a substantial increase as a 
 result of a large- volume securitisation transac -
tion.
The increase in banks’ lending operations with 
the domestic non- bank sector persisted in the 
reporting quarter. Whereas loans of commer -
cial banks to general government increased 
only slightly, loans to the private sector re -
corded robust growth in the third quarter. This 
was due, on the one hand, to a clear expansion 
in securitised lending to private non- banks 
stemming from the above- mentioned securi -
tisation transaction. On the other, loans to the 
private sector (adjusted for sales and securitisa -
tion), likewise increased markedly – as in the 
preceding quarters.5 This rise solidified again in 
the third quarter, but remains at a moderate 
level with an annual growth rate of 2.0%.
The lively demand by households for loans for 
house purchase was once again the key driver 
behind the expansion in loans to the domestic 
private sector. Growth in this credit segment 
markedly accelerated in recent quarters, gain -
ing 3.3% on the year at the end of September, 
which represents the highest figure in 13½ 
years. Besides the substantial increase in house -
holds’ financial assets and the stable income 
situation, the still markedly favourable borrow -
ing conditions, too, are likely to have played a 
role in this context. According to MFI interest 
rate statistics, the interest rate on long- term 
housing loans climbed to 2.1% in the third 
quarter. However, the rate remains close to its 
historic low of May 2015, since the introduc -
tion of harmonised MFI interest rate statistics in 
2003 (see the chart on page 39).Indications of further determinants are pro -
vided by the latest BLS results. Besides the low 
general interest rate level, the dynamic demand 
for loans in this segment was, according to the 
surveyed banks, also supported by the positive 
outlook on the housing market, including pro -
spective price movements, and by strong con -
sumer confidence. By contrast, the bank man -… but only 
in the non- financial private  sector
Considerably 
more lending 
business with 
domestic 
  non-banks on  balance
Housing loans to households act as key driver of growthInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015012345% pa, monthly
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2up to 2 years
over 2 years
up to 3 monthsDeposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsDeposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
5 As at the September 2015 reporting date, the Eurosys -
tem introduced its improved reporting framework for loans 
to the euro- area private sector. One benefit of the new 
method is that – with retroactive effect from the beginning 
of 2010 – it allows loan data to be adjusted more accur -
ately for the effects of securitisation and other transfers of 
loans. For details and more information on the impact on 
German figures, see the box on pp 31-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
37

agers reported that, taken in isolation, a not -
ably dampening effect on financing require -
ments was merely the result of households 
drawing on their own funds. Banks’ lending 
policies sent mixed signals to households. Al -
though the banks participating in the BLS mod -
erately lowered their margins for average loans 
on the whole in the face of intense competi -
tion for new customers, a slight tightening of 
credit standards for loans to households for 
house purchase simultaneously took place on 
balance in the third quarter.
According to the bank managers interviewed 
as part of the BLS, the demand for consumer credit increased in the third quarter. Their as -
sumption was that the increase occurred as a 
result of consumers’ elevated propensity to 
spend, strong consumer confidence and the 
low general interest rate level. Yet, unlike with 
loans to households for house purchase, the 
surveyed banks on balance left their credit 
standards for consumer credit unchanged. 
They did, however, likewise narrow their mar -
gins on average loans, attributing this – as in 
the case of private housing loans – to the cur -
rent competitive environment.
Following two consecutive weaker quarters, 
German banks’ lending business with domestic 
non- financial corporations regained some mo -
mentum in the reporting quarter. This was 
once again attributable solely to long-  term 
loans, which enterprises generally use to fund 
larger projects. Conversely, outflows from short 
and medium- term lending, which is less signifi -
cant in terms of volume, continued; outflows in 
short-term lending were a great deal weaker 
compared with a year earlier, however.
The results of the BLS suggest that the gradual 
increase in lending to non- financial corpor -
ations is due to a growing demand driven pri -
marily by the general low interest rate level. For 
example, at the end of September, domestic 
enterprises paid interest amounting to 2.8% 
for small-  volume and 1.6% for large-  volume 
loans in the short- term segment, while interest 
on long- term loans stood at 2.1% across all vol -
umes of late (see the chart on page 39).
Additional positive stimulus to demand for 
loans was exerted, according to the BLS, by the 
financing needs of enterprises for fixed invest -
ment as well as for refinancing, restructuring 
and renegotiating, in particular. By contrast, 
taken in isolation, a dampening effect on de -
mand was caused by the decline in financing 
needs for  inventories and working capital as 
well as the recourse by enterprises to alterna -
tive sources of funding, which in Germany for 
some time now have included enterprises’ vast 
scope for internal financing as well as loans to Demand for 
consumer credit boosted by f avourable framework  conditions
Slight increase 
in loans to  
non- financial corporations …
… due to low 
interest rate 
level and vast 
scope for in-ternal financingLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2015
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 47.7 33.5
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 15.2 – 4.9
of over 2 years – 14.4 12.5
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 2.2 2.2
of over 3 months –  4.2 – 4.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  6.3 – 2.3
Debt securities –  6.4 6.4
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 12.0 13.6
of which to households 3 9.6 11.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4, 5 –  0.9 2.3
Debt securities –  5.8 13.9
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Corpor-ations and quasi- corporations. 5 As from the implementation of 
ESA 2010 in banks’ balance sheet statistics, the holding com-panies of the non- fi  nancial corporations sector (eg management holding companies with predominantly fi  nancial shareholdings) 
have been reclassifi  ed from the non- fi  nancial corporations  sector 
to the fi  nancial corporations sector (as other fi  nancial intermedi-aries). Moreover, those entities and enterprises which are non- market producers (eg municipal utilities) and have been counted 
as non- fi  nancial corporations thus far have now been reallo-
cated to the general government sector (as off- budget entities).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
38

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “eased some-what” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “nar-rowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2015 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 20151.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 151.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
39

group affiliates, trade credits and loans from 
shadow banks.
The answers provided in the latest BLS give no 
indications of any major changes to the lend -ing policies of the surveyed banks. According 
to the German results, the surveyed institutions 
did not alter their lending standards for loans 
to enterprises on balance in the third quarter of 
2015. In this way, the phase of unchanged or 
only marginally adjusted standards, which 
began in the second quarter of 2013, con -
tinued in the latest reporting period. Con -
versely, the banks adjusted their margins for 
average loans markedly on balance and also 
somewhat eased their non- interest rate 
charges, covenants and interest fixation periods 
in favour of their customers.
The third- quarter BLS survey included ad hoc  
questions on banks’ funding conditions and on 
the impact of the EAPP . The German banks re -
ported that, given the situation in the financial 
markets, their funding situation showed very 
little change compared with the preceding 
quarter. When asked about the EAPP , the credit 
institutions adopted a critical stance regarding 
their earnings situation. The German credit in -
stitutions taking part in the survey reported on 
a broad front that the programme was exerting 
pressure on their net lending margins and thus 
placing a considerable strain on their profitabil -
ity, but that it was having no significant impact 
on their credit standards.Upturn in lend-
ing growth  continues  despite net  redemptions
German banks 
barely interested in selling mar-ketable assets under EAPPLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations.  3 Corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  4 As  from 
the implementation of ESA 2010 in December 2014, holding 
companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as 
belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but are 
now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20152.01.51.00.500.51.01.52.0
––––++++ Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2, 4
Non-financial corporations 3, 4Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
40

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the third quarter of 2015, the international 
financial markets were influenced, above all, by 
the slowdown in growth in some large emer -
ging market economies. Monetary policy deci -
sions by central banks and changing expect -
ations with regard to future monetary policy in 
the industrial countries also played a key role. 
Since the end of June, the trend in long-term 
government bond yields in the major currency 
areas has – despite fluctuations – been nega -
tive overall, albeit to varying degrees. Declining 
long-term inflation expectations derived from 
implied forward inflation rates contributed to 
the lower nominal yields. On the international 
equity markets, the effects of the more moder -
ate global economic outlook, on the one hand, 
and the price-boosting expectations of con -
tinued accommodative monetary policy in 
many countries, on the other, ultimately bal -
anced each other out for the most part. In this 
context, the falling returns had a stabilising 
effect  on share prices, as a lower discount rate 
increases the present value of future corporate 
earnings. However, the more subdued global 
growth expectations also imply reduced future 
corporate earnings. Moreover, the gloomier 
business prospects affected financing condi -
tions for enterprises on the capital market. Al -
though these remain favourable, yields on cor -
porate bonds have not declined to the same 
extent as government bond yields, as risk pre -
miums for enterprises have risen. On the for -
eign exchange markets, concerns about the 
economic outlook of some emerging market 
economies initially led to an increased demand 
for euro. Subsequently, market participants’ ex -
pectations regarding a possible further diver -
gence in the monetary policy stance on either 
side of the Atlantic weighed on the single cur -
rency. Overall, the euro has depreciated slightly 
in effective terms since mid-year.Exchange rates
The euro made relatively strong initial gains 
against the US dollar in the second half of 
August , peaking at around US$1.15, which was 
its highest point since January 2015. This was 
largely attributable to heightened uncertainty 
among market participants with regard to de -
velopments in the global economy, which was 
further intensified by the more flexible ex -
change rate regime for the renminbi and falling 
share prices. According to market participants, 
this uncertainty propped up the euro as a result 
of the unwinding of carry trades funded in 
euro, as a low-interest-rate currency, while also 
raising doubts in market circles about an early 
interest rate rise in the United States.
In the ensuing period, the euro fluctuated be -
tween a rate of around US$1.11 and US$1.15. 
The reasons for this were market participants’ 
changing expectations with regard to an early 
interest rate reversal in the United States and 
the Federal Reserve’s decision to leave policy 
rates unchanged for the time being as well as 
speculation about an expansion of the bond 
purchase programme in the euro area. This 
sideways movement was interrupted in mid-
October when voices within the ECB’s Govern -
ing Council repeatedly buoyed market 
participants’ expectations of a further easing of 
monetary policy and the Federal Reserve sent 
out clear signals of a December interest rate 
rise. As a result, the euro depreciated against 
the US dollar. It was most recently trading at 
approximately US$1.07, which is around 4.1% 
lower than at the end of the second quarter.
The euro began the first half of August with 
gains against the yen, too. Despite fears among 
market participants that uncertainty surround -
ing the economic outlook in China could have 
a negative impact on Japan, the euro subse -
quently depreciated against the yen. Disap -
pointing economic data from Japan only lifted Financial 
 markets gripped by economic  uncertainty in emerging mar-ket economiesEuro falls on balance against the US dollar, …
… against 
the yen …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
41

the euro temporarily, particularly as their im -
pact was softened by optimistic reports from 
the Japanese central bank. It was not until the 
second half of October, amid mounting specu -
lation of a further easing of monetary policy in 
the euro area, that the euro lost value again. It 
fell 3.7% against the yen compared with the 
end of June, standing most recently at about 
132 yen.
The single currency started out with slight gains 
against the pound sterling. According to mar -
ket participants, the initial strength of the euro 
was the result of the unwinding of carry trades 
and the expectation of an interest rate reversal in the United Kingdom being pushed back ever 
further into the future. During this appreciation 
phase, surprisingly positive economic data from 
the United Kingdom weighed on the euro at 
times, but was not enough to break the trend. 
It was only recently that the euro fell again 
against the pound. At the time this report went 
to press, it stood at approximately 0.71 pound 
sterling and was thus trading 0.7% below its 
level at the end of June 2015.
The renminbi, which attracted much attention 
when the People’s Bank of China made changes 
to the fixing methodology for its reference rate 
in mid-August, initially lost 3.2% against the US 
dollar before recovering slightly. Overall, the 
renminbi has depreciated 2.5% against the US 
dollar and 0.4% against the euro since the 
mechanism was changed.
Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro sustained a loss in 
value of 1.1% compared with the end of June. 
The single currency was thus latterly trading 
11.7% below its level at the launch of monetary 
union. In real terms – ie taking account of the 
inflation differentials between the euro area 
and its major trading partners – the effective 
euro exchange rate fell by about 2% in the 
period under review.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Given the uncertainty surrounding the eco -
nomic situation in major emerging market 
economies, long-term yields in the global bond 
markets have fallen. The question of when the 
US Federal Reserve is going to raise its official 
interest rate also continues to affect develop -
ments on the US bond market. At the start of 
August, the majority of market participants had 
still been expecting the first rate rise to occur in 
September. However, on account of risks to the 
US economy arising from the economic situ -
ation in the emerging market economies, the 
US central bank decided to keep interest rates … and against 
the pound  sterlingRenminbi down against 
the euro and 
the US   dollar
Effective 
 exchange rate 
of the euro 
weaker
Yields in inter-
national bond markets downExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM J J A S OND
2014 20151.201.301.40
1.001.101.20
120130140150
0.700.750.800.85
859095100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1
... yen
Launch exchange 
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange 
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100 Launch exchange rate: 103.13
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
42

on hold. Following the most recent US Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the 
bulk of the market is now anticipating a change 
in interest rates in December 2015. On balance, 
yields on ten-year US government bonds – des -
pite the recent increase – have declined by 5 
basis points to 2.3% since the end of June. In 
the context of weaker than expected economic 
data, there was speculation among market par -
ticipants in Japan about further monetary pol -
icy measures by the Bank of Japan. Accordingly, 
yields on ten-year Japanese government bonds 
were down significantly, most recently standing 
at 0.3%.
Bond yields in Germany and in the rest of the 
euro area have also dropped since mid-year. In 
July, negotiations over a third support package 
for Greece had an impact on the yield curve of 
Federal bonds (Bunds) in particular, as investors 
temporarily increased their demand for these 
Federal securities, which are deemed to be par -
ticularly secure. The heightened uncertainty 
surrounding the economic outlook in the emer -
ging market economies, and the drop in share 
prices associated with this, also led market par -
ticipants to seek out secure investments in the 
form of Bunds. In addition, the Eurosystem has 
been acquiring a sizeable volume of German 
debt securities  – Bunds, above all – as part of 
the expanded asset purchase programme (PSPP 
cumulative total as at end-October: €92.3 bil -
lion). As a result, yields on ten-year Bunds have 
thus fallen since the end of June by 19 basis 
points; at the time of going to press, they stood 
at 0.57%. Overall, uncertainty with regard to 
developments  in yields – measured using the 
implied volatility of options on Bund futures – 
also decreased, recently once again dropping 
below the five-year average.
The German yield curve derived from yields on 
Federal securities has become flatter since the 
end of June. This resulted, in particular, from 
lower yields in the medium and long-term ma -
turity segments. With figures as low as -0.36%, 
short-term yields remained squarely in negative 
territory and also below the deposit facility rate. Once again, negative yields could tempor -
arily be observed for bonds with maturities of 
up to six years. Market participants thus appear 
to be expecting low interest rates to persist 
over the longer term.
Yields on bonds issued by other euro-area 
countries have followed a similar path to that 
of Bunds. For example, at 1.4%, the yield on 
GDP-weighted ten-year euro-area government 
bonds was significantly below the value ob -
served at the end of June. Furthermore, the 
spread between these yields and those of Ger -
man Bunds has narrowed by 43 basis points to 
84 basis points since the end of the second 
quarter. A considerable part of this contraction 
occurred back in mid-July as a result of the fall 
in Greek yields in the wake of the agreement 
on a third support package for Greece. Unlike 
in the past, however, the debate surrounding 
this support package only had a marginal im -
pact on the yields on bonds issued by other 
periphery countries. Spanish yields were also Decline in Fed-
eral bond yields
Yield curve for 
Bunds flatterNarrower yield 
spreads in the 
euro area Yields* in euro area and selected 
countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 201500.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
++++++++++% pa, weekly averages
JapanGermanyEuro
areaUSAUnited KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
43

affected by country-specific developments. 
Since the return of political uncertainty in con -
nection with the early parliamentary elections 
held in Catalonia and the nationwide parlia -
mentary elections planned for December, the 
yields on Spanish bonds have been higher than 
those of their Italian counterparts.Most recently, yields on European corporate 
bonds have hovered at approximately the same 
level as at the end of June. BBB-rated bonds 
with a residual maturity of seven to ten years, 
for example, yielded 2.5%. Their yield spread 
over Bunds thus expanded by 15 basis points, 
with the gap widening somewhat more for 
non-financial corporations than for financial 
corporations. The higher risk premiums also re -
flect the fact that the uncertainty surrounding 
the economic outlook in major emerging mar -
ket economies also has an impact on European 
enterprises. The financing conditions for these 
enterprises, however, remained significantly 
more favourable than the five-year average.
In the euro area, the five-year forward inflation 
rate in five years derived from inflation swaps 
has fallen to 1.8% (-6 basis points) since the 
end of June. This market-based indicator of in -
flation expectations has also declined in other 
major currency areas. The forward inflation rate 
was down 23 basis points to 2.2% in the 
United States and fell by 52 basis points to 
0.8% in Japan. This would suggest that global 
rather than country-specific factors are the 
main drivers behind the sinking market-based 
inflation measures. The inflation risk premiums 
derived from market data have dropped further 
since June and have in some cases – depending 
on the model specifications – been in negative 
territory for some time now.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €358½ billion in the third quarter of 
2015 and was therefore up on its previous-
quarter level ( €307½ billion). After deducting 
redemptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance amounted to €32½ billion. In addition, 
foreign borrowers placed debt securities worth 
€21½  billion in the German market. Thus, 
funds totalling €54 billion net were raised in 
the German bond market in the reporting 
period.
German enterprises took advantage of the fa -
vourable financing conditions and issued debt Financing condi-
tions for enter-prises remain  favourable
Declining 
 forward inflation rates in major currency areas
Net issuance in 
the bond marketYield spreads between euro-area government bonds with ten-year residual maturities and comparable German Bunds
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
2015050100150200250Basis points, daily data
6008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,800
Greece
ItalySpainPortugal
IrelandEnlarged scale:Yield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101.0
0.40.200.20.40.60.8+
––++++
Residual maturity in years30 June 2015
12 November 201530 December 2014%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
44

securities to the value of €23  billion in net 
terms in the third quarter. On balance, the vast 
majority of these were bonds with maturities of 
more than one year. The remarkably high issue 
volume was primarily attributable to a larger 
securitisation transaction booked in the corpor -
ate sector in September.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€5½ billion, compared with net redemptions 
amounting to €18 billion in the second quarter. 
They mainly issued mortgage Pfandbriefe 
(€5  billion) and debt securities of specialised 
credit institutions ( €4½ billion). This contrasted 
with net redemptions of public Pfandbriefe 
(€2½  billion) and other bank debt securities 
that can be structured flexibly ( €1 billion).
Between July and September, the public sector 
raised €3½ billion on the bond market, com -
pared with net redemptions of €4½ billion in 
the previous three-month period. These figures 
include issues by resolution agencies set up for 
German banks, which are ascribed to the pub -
lic sector for statistical purposes. Central gov -
ernment itself issued five-year Federal notes 
(Bobls) for the most part ( €13½ billion), and to 
a lesser extent 30-year Bunds ( €2½ billion). At 
the same time, it made net redemptions of ten-
year Bunds ( €10½ billion) and also redeemed 
two-year Federal Treasury notes (Schätze) and 
Treasury discount paper (Bubills) for €3 billion 
net in each case. In the quarter under review, 
state governments issued their own bonds to 
the value of €8 billion in net terms.
In the third quarter, German investor groups 
were the sole buyers on the domestic bond 
market, adding paper worth €72½ billion to 
their portfolios. The Bundesbank acquired Ger -
man bonds to the value of €36½ billion net, 
primarily under the asset purchase pro -
grammes. Domestic non-banks expanded their 
bond portfolios by €24½ billion, concentrating 
mainly on foreign instruments. German credit 
institutions likewise invested in interest-bearing 
paper, making purchases worth €12½ billion. Issuance 
of  corporate 
bonds mainly in the longer-term maturity segment
Rise in credit 
 institutions’ 
 capital market 
debt
Public sector 
borrowing  moderate
Bundesbank and 
domestic non-banks main buyers of debt securitiesForward inflation rates* in the euro area
and the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising from inflation 
swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban Con-
sumers for the USA) realised over the next five or ten years. 
1 Barrel of Brent Blend (for delivery in one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20151.52.02.53.03.5Weekly averages
% pa
406080100120Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swaps
USA
Euro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1US$
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 19.8 16.7 72.5
Credit institutions 4.9 – 39.4 12.4
of which
Foreign debt securities 3.4 –  5.5 3.8
Deutsche Bundesbank – 3.7 36.2 35.8
Other sectors 18.7 19.9 24.3
of which
Domestic debt securities 1.9 5.0 5.7
Non-residents 1.5 – 30.4 – 18.4
SharesResidents 0.2 10.2 7.0
Credit institutions 2.3 –  2.8 – 14.5
of which
Domestic shares 0.7 –  6.8 –  7.0
Non-banks – 2.0 13.1 21.4
of which
Domestic shares – 0.3 1.2 13.7
Non-residents 5.9 8.8 –  5.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 20.7 24.6 14.7
Investment in retail funds 0.4 2.6 7.3
of which
Equity funds – 3.2 –  2.6 2.9
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
45

Their focus was on instruments issued by do -
mestic enterprises. By contrast, non-resident in -
vestors parted with German debt securities to 
the tune of €18½ billion. On balance, these 
were exclusively bonds issued by the public 
sector. Ultimately, it appears that foreign hold -
ers, above all, are disposing of Bunds, and 
these are then primarily being bought by the 
Bundesbank.
In the second half of the year to date, equity 
markets across the globe initially drifted side -
ways before an adjustment phase set in follow -
ing the moderation of Chinese economic 
growth and the perceptible depreciation of the 
renminbi resulting from the introduction of a 
more flexible exchange rate regime. Consider -
able losses on all major equity markets were 
connected with concerns about lower growth 
rates in key emerging market economies. Fur -
thermore, the effects of a potential interest 
rate hike in the United States also weighed on 
the price expectations for equities until mid-September. At the same time, the option-
implied volatilities of share price indices rose 
almost as high as the levels seen in the crisis 
year of 2011. Negotiations with Greece placed 
a strain on equity prices in the euro area until 
an agreement on a third support package was 
reached on 12 July. However, following the 
Federal Reserve’s decision at its September 
meeting not to go ahead with an anticipated 
hike in official interest rates, which had already 
been largely priced in by market participants, 
and in light of speculation about further mon -
etary policy loosening in the euro area and 
Japan fuelled by the moderate inflation rates in 
both currency areas, share prices around the 
world rebounded. These price rises were partly 
caused by falling government bond yields, 
which, as a result of a lower discount rate, 
boosted the present value of future corporate 
earnings and made equity investment more 
attractive .
Overall, European and US shares were, at the 
time of going to press, close to their levels at 
the end of June, as measured by the broad 
Euro Stoxx and S&P 500 indices. Japanese equi -
ties (Nikkei) fell by 2.7% in the same period, in 
part owing to recent subdued economic data. 
In the euro area, price falls were observed 
above all in Greece and Spain. The closure of 
the Athens stock exchange for the whole of 
July and the election defeat of Spain’s ruling 
party at a regional election in Catalonia are 
likely to have contributed to this. Bank shares, 
particularly in Greece, Portugal and Spain, re -
corded greater losses than the market as a 
whole. In Germany, the price losses precipi -
tated by the Volkswagen emissions scandal had 
only limited effects on the overall index.
Dividend futures, which can be used to meas -
ure the present value of future dividends, show 
that the downward movements seen for a time 
on European equity markets are consistent 
with expectations of diminishing future divi -
dends and increased stock price uncertainty. 
The slide in prices was therefore probably not a 
specific exaggeration on the part of market Global equity 
markets fall  initially, before rising againInitial losses on equity  markets in the 
euro area 
 attributable to lower future dividends and increased  uncertaintyEquity market
8590100110120130Weekly averages
2014 2015
1 Implied volatility of options on the Nikkei index.
Deutsche BundesbankBeginning of 2014 = 100, log scale
Price indices
1020304050Lin scale
Volatility%Euro Stoxx
S&P 500
NikkeiCDAX
Japan 1Euro area VStoxx (Euro Stoxx 50)
USA VIX (S&P 500)Germany VDAXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
46

participants. Rather, the weakening growth 
rates of the major emerging market economies 
caused increased uncertainty about future 
profits and thus also about enterprises’ divi -
dends.
The price-earnings ratio, based on 12-month 
earnings expectations, was latterly at roughly 
the same level as the end of June, at 14.0 for 
the Euro Stoxx and 16.7 for the S&P 500. It 
therefore lay significantly above the respective 
five-year averages on both sides of the Atlantic, 
which, when looked at in isolation, indicates 
relatively high valuations on the equity mar -
kets. However, any assessment of the valuation 
level must also take into account changes in 
medium-term dividend expectations and in the 
risk-free interest rate as a discount rate or as a 
return on an alternative investment. In the third 
quarter, analysts slightly lowered their dividend 
expectations for the Euro Stoxx over the next 
few years, and the risk-free interest rate used 
as the discount rate fell. A dividend discount 
model that takes these variables into account 
reveals that the equity risk premium for the 
Euro Stoxx latterly stood at 8.6%, which is 
above its level at the end of June. Compared 
with the five-year average (8.7%), this does not 
indicate an excessively low risk aversion on the 
part of equity market participants.
Domestic enterprises issued €1½ billion worth 
of new shares in the third quarter of 2015, the 
majority of which were unlisted equities. The 
volume of foreign equities outstanding in the 
German market edged up only slightly, on bal -
ance. Equities were, on balance, acquired solely 
by domestic non-banks ( €21½ billion), includ -
ing investment companies, while domestic 
credit institutions and foreign investors reduced 
their share portfolios by €14½ billion and €5 
billion respectively.
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €22 
billion, after raising funds totalling €27 billion 
in the previous three-month period. The new 
inflows mainly benefited specialised funds re -Equity risk 
 premium down slightly
Equity issuance 
and acquisition
Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2014 r 2015 r
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I Current account + 53.8 + 56.9 + 63.2
1 Goods 1 + 59.9 + 69.1 + 67.5
2 Services 2 – 17.1 –  8.5 – 16.2
3 Primary income + 18.7 +  3.6 + 18.6
4 Secondary income –  7.8 –  7.3 –  6.8
II Capital account +  0.8 +  1.1 +  0.7
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 68.2 + 76.3 + 58.8
1 Direct investment + 22.5 +  3.9 +  6.2
Domestic investment 
abroad + 19.9 + 22.8 + 17.1
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country –  2.6 + 18.9 + 10.8
2 Portfolio investment + 28.1 + 52.7 + 47.6
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 29.4 + 27.3 + 27.7
Shares
3 –  0.6 + 10.7 +  1.4
Investment fund shares 4+ 12.9 +  8.1 +  4.7
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  2.5 –  1.3 +  0.4
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 19.5 + 11.1 + 28.5
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 14.9 +  2.0 + 22.6
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  2.4 –  2.7 –  6.8
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +  1.3 – 25.4 – 19.9
Shares 3 +  2.7 +  8.7 –  5.1
Investment fund shares –  3.0 –  3.8 +  3.7
Long-term debt  securities
5 –  5.6 – 28.5 – 23.3
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  6.5 – 18.3 – 23.0
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  7.1 –  1.9 +  4.9
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  9.5 +  5.9 +  2.6
4 Other investment 10 +  7.7 + 14.3 +  3.8
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 – 28.1 +  9.7 + 18.1
Enterprises and  households
12 –  5.8 +  6.4 – 14.5
General government +  8.5 +  4.8 +  3.4
Bundesbank + 33.0 –  6.6 –  3.2
5 Reserve assets 13 +  0.3 –  0.5 –  1.5
IV Errors and omissions 14 + 13.6 + 18.2 –  5.0
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
47

served for institutional investors ( €14½ billion). 
Among the asset classes, it was mainly mixed 
securities funds ( €8½ billion) and equity funds 
(€5½ billion) that placed new shares on the 
market. Foreign funds distributed in the Ger -
man market attracted new inflows totalling 
€4½ billion net in the third quarter of 2015. 
Domestic non-banks were the main buyers, 
adding mutual fund shares worth €24 billion to 
their portfolios. These were units of domestic 
funds for the most part. Foreign investors pur -
chased mutual fund shares for €3½ billion, 
while domestic credit institutions sold fund 
units worth €1 billion.
Direct investment
As with cross-border portfolio transactions, 
which recorded a net outflow of funds totalling 
€47½ billion, direct investment also saw net 
capital exports amounting to €6 billion in the 
form of direct investment in the third quarter of 
2015.
The largest contributing factor was funding 
provided by German enterprises to their subsid -
iaries abroad, which amounted to €17 billion in the third quarter. German enterprises increased, 
above all, their equity capital ( €12½ billion). 
Furthermore, over the same period, intra-group 
lending rose by €4½ billion, which was virtually 
entirely attributable to an expansion in financial 
credits. Overall, nearly one-third of direct in -
vestment originating from Germany was made 
in the Netherlands ( €5½ billion). Other import -
ant destinations were the United States ( €4 bil-
lion), Luxembourg ( €3 billion) and Austria ( €2 
billion).
Foreign investors upped their direct investment 
in Germany in the third quarter of 2015 ( €11 
billion). Intra-group loans, which were primarily 
issued in the form of financial credits, played an 
important role in this regard ( €8 billion). In add -
ition, foreign investors increased their equity 
interests in German subsidiaries by €3 billion. 
The inflows of funds from Sweden were par -
ticularly large ( €6 billion), with the bulk of these 
in the third quarter of 2015 being attributable 
to domestic parent companies receiving direct 
investment loans from their Swedish branches. 
A countervailing trend was seen in transactions 
with the Netherlands, as domestic direct invest -
ors paid back large volumes of direct invest -
ment loans from abroad ( €5½ billion).Capital exports 
in direct  investment
German direct 
investment 
abroadForeign direct investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
48

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy remained on its growth 
path in the third quarter. According to the Fed -
eral Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP 
in the third quarter of 2015 was up 0.3% on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. The pace of growth was thus somewhat 
more moderate than the figure of 0.4% re -
corded in the second quarter and was broadly 
in line with potential growth. Buoyant con -
sumption activity was the main driver of third- 
quarter economic growth, although it was not 
enough to fully offset the lack of stimuli from 
external demand. Aggregate capacity utilisa -
tion remained in the upper part of the corridor 
of normal capacity utilisation.
Consumption activity gave a new boost to do -
mestic demand in the third quarter. As in the 
fourth quarter of 2014 and the first quarter of 
2015, purchasing power gains owing to the de -
cline in crude oil prices were one of the factors 
behind the stronger pace of growth in private 
consumption. Households’ real income also 
benefited from the considerable acceleration in 
employment growth in the third quarter. Con -
sumer demand was additionally boosted by the 
mounting influx of refugees, which led to a rise 
in transfer payments as well as in expenditure 
on staff, accommodation and non- cash bene -
fits at central, state and local government 
levels. Housing construction investment prob -
ably continued its upward tendency, whereas 
enterprises remained cautious with regard to 
investment in machinery and equipment or 
new buildings. This may have been one of the 
reasons why external demand failed to provide 
any new impetus.
Export business did not show any further 
growth in the third quarter of 2015 following a 
strong upturn in the second quarter. Exports of 
goods were down slightly by ¼% on the quar -
ter in seasonal and price- adjusted terms. Goods exports to other euro-  area and non- euro- area 
countries are unlikely to have surpassed the 
sharply elevated level of the second quarter. 
According to the figures available up until 
 August, the majority of trading partners in the 
advanced and emerging market economies ex -
perienced a slowdown following a regionally 
broad- based upward movement since the 
second half of 2014. There was a significant fall 
in exports to the USA, which had previously 
shown considerable growth. Exports to China 
continued their steep downward movement 
which had begun at the start of the year. In July 
and August, exports to the People’s Republic 
were a striking 7¼% down on the year in terms 
of value. Exports of motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle parts to the People’s Republic of China 
contracted by almost one- sixth and  exports of 
machinery were down by nearly one- twelfth. 
The only exceptions to the weak export per -Continuation 
of growth path in 2015 Q3 …
… in the wake 
of buoyant  consumption  activity, but commercial  investment 
and external 
 demand lack 
impetus
Slowdown in 
 exports of goods broadly 
based in   regional 
terms …Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015949698100102104106108
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
49

formance in the third quarter were the central 
and east European EU countries, which showed 
a further distinct quarter- on- quarter rise in 
sales, and Japan. In addition, considerably 
more goods were being exported again to the 
OPEC countries, despite the low price of oil.
Most export sectors were lacking impetus, with 
exports of intermediate goods and capital 
goods undergoing a noticeable decline. Only 
export business in consumer goods continued 
to perform well in July and August.
Investment in machinery and equipment is 
again unlikely to have increased in the report -ing period. The slack order situation gave in -
dustrial enterprises little cause to acquire 
movable fixed assets. Furthermore, it was pos -
sible to process the existing stock of orders 
without any problems using available capacity 
at normal utilisation levels. Nevertheless, ve -
hicle fleets are likely to have seen some new 
additions, as is indicated by the increase in the 
number of new car registrations by commercial 
customers. Sales of computer, electronic and 
optical products and electrical equipment like -
wise increased at home and abroad. Enter -
prises remained reluctant to purchase new ma -
chinery, however.
Construction investment in the third quarter is 
likely to have shown only minor growth on the 
quarter. Following a sharp weather- boosted 
rise in the winter, construction output was up 
slightly on the clearly depressed level of the 
second quarter. In view of the upward ten -
dency in demand for housing construction, in -
vestment activity in this sector is likely to have 
been quite robust.
Domestic demand was driven by private con -
sumption in the third quarter. There was a sub -
stantial increase in households’ real spending 
capacity. This was not due solely to accelerated 
employment growth and considerable wage 
increases; additional relief came from lower 
 energy costs resulting from the marked fall in 
crude oil prices since July. Much of the growth 
in real incomes has been used by households 
to buy more. Retail sales showed a steep rise. 
Information and communications technology 
(ICT) equipment featured most prominently on 
consumers’ shopping lists. Hotels and restaur -
ants also benefited from buoyant consumer 
sentiment. Furthermore, consumers took ad -
vantage of the low heating oil prices and filled 
their tanks in anticipation of the upcoming 
heating period. There are also likely to have 
been more purchases of motor vehicles, as is 
indicated by the higher numbers of new car 
registrations. Volkwagen’s exhaust emission 
scandal is unlikely to have had an impact in the 
reporting period.… but exports 
of consumer goods continue to expandInvestment in machinery and 
equipment still 
subdued
Construction 
 investment also 
muted
Private 
 consumption 
driver of 
 domestic 
 demand90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015July-
Aug
8090100110120130
July-
Aug
120
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
50

Imports in the third quarter again managed to 
keep pace with the strong growth recorded in 
the final quarter of 2014 and the first three 
months of this year. There was a clear season -
ally and price-  adjusted quarter-  on- quarter 
 expansion (+3%) in imports of goods, with for -
eign manufacturers also benefiting from buoy -
ant consumption activity. In addition, energy 
imports rose considerably in price-  adjusted 
terms, and intermediate goods produced by 
foreign manufacturers were likewise in greater 
demand. By contrast, imports of capital goods 
showed little overall growth.
Sectoral trends
The earlier moderate upturn in industrial out -
put did not continue in the third quarter of 
2015. Manufacturers of intermediate goods cut 
back production somewhat more strongly than 
in the previous quarter (-¾%). Output of cap -
ital goods moved sideways, albeit with diver -
ging developments in the individual branches. 
The automotive industry, for example, ex -
panded its production substantially (+1¾%) 
given that their order books were still well-  
filled, despite the slump in demand in the third 
quarter. Output was markedly scaled back in 
the case of machinery and electrical equip -
ment, however. By contrast, production was 
stepped up in several consumer goods seg -
ments in the wake of buoyant consumption ac -
tivity.
Industrial capacity utilisation remained un -
changed despite the slight decline in industrial 
output. Enterprises taking part in the Ifo Insti -
tut’s October survey reported that utilisation 
was running at 84¼% of normal full capacity, 
as had been the case three months earlier. In -
dustrial capacity utilisation is thus still slightly 
above the long- term average of 84%, which 
may be interpreted as normal capacity utilisa -
tion.
Construction output was up slightly on the 
quarter (+¾%) after adjustment for seasonal variations.  Output declined distinctly in the 
main construction sector (-1%). In the finishing 
trades, the data for which are admittedly sub -
ject to considerable revision, there was a very 
sharp increase, however. Energy production in -
creased perceptibly by 1% in the third quarter.
The services sector is likely to have expanded 
strongly in the third quarter and supported 
economic growth to a significant extent. Strong 
stimuli were generated by dynamic consump -
tion activity. Retailers recorded a marked rise in 
sales, hotels and restaurants were flourishing 
and motor vehicle sales held up at the very 
high level of the previous quarter. The business 
of some, mainly industry-  oriented service pro -
viders is likely to have been dampened owing 
to weaker industrial activity. Wholesale sales 
were down again. All things considered, the 
positive knock- on effects of consumption activ -
ity are likely to have prevailed, including for 
business- related service providers. This is indi -
cated by their very favourable assessments of Steep rise 
in  imports
Industrial output down slightly
Manufacturing 
capacity utilisa-
tion still at a 
normal levelConstruction output some-what higher,  energy produc-tion increased
Considerable 
momentum in 
services sectorOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
51

the business situation reported to the Ifo Insti -
tute, which showed a further improvement in 
the summer.
Employment and labour 
 market
The labour market remained in very good 
shape in the third quarter. Employment growth 
gained momentum, the number of reported 
vacancies went up and unemployment held 
steady at a low level. The growing demand for 
labour is still being met to a considerable ex -
tent by immigrants, especially from other EU 
countries. By contrast, only a small proportion 
of the large number of refugees who have 
come to Germany this year is likely to have 
taken up gainful employment to date.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
employment in the third quarter of 2015 rose 
sharply by 119,000, or 0.3%, on the quarter. 
Furthermore, the employment situation in the 
first half of the year now looks even more posi -
tive following the sharp upward revision of the 
preliminary figures. In spite of the steep fall in 
persons working exclusively in low- paid part-  
time employment since the introduction of the 
minimum wage, employment growth, with an 
increase of 187,000 persons during the first 
half of the year, was not weaker than in previ -
ous years.
The very steep upturn in employment subject 
to social security contributions continued. 
 According to the initial figures of the Federal 
Employment Agency, an estimated 144,000 
additional workers were hired in positions sub -
ject to social security contributions in July and 
August alone, which represents an increase of 
0.5% on the average of the second quarter. 
Whereas job growth in the manufacturing and 
construction sectors was below average (+¼% 
in both cases), there was a sharp rise again in a 
number of services sectors. A particularly large 
number of new jobs were still being created in 
logistics and hotels and restaurants (+1% in Labour market 
in very good shape
Strong employ-
ment dynamics
Steep rise in 
 employment subject to social security  contributionsLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Oct40.541.041.542.042.543.0
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.0–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sand Year-on-year change
1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
AugDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
52

each case), in the health and welfare sector as 
well as in business- related services (¾% in each 
case). The growth rates of the first six months 
of this year were no longer being matched, 
however.
The substantial rise in the influx of refugees in 
the third quarter is unlikely to have had an im -
pact on the labour market so far. It is principally 
recognised refugees who are granted open ac -
cess to the labour market. However, processing 
times for asylum applications and a certain 
backlog in processing delay the decision about 
recognition of an application.1 In addition, 
refugees need time to acquire language skills 
and they often lack the qualifications and skills 
required in Germany, at least initially. Since the 
second quarter, asylum seekers have been able 
to take up employment as early as three 
months after making their application, but this 
has to be preceded by the Federal Employment 
Agency carrying out a priority check for a fur -
ther 12 months. Persons with uncertain resi -
dence status probably have very little chance of 
being employed under a normal work contract. 
This suggests that asylum seekers take up tem -
porary or low- paid part- time work at best.
The German labour market continues to absorb 
a large number of EU nationals who have re -
cently relocated to Germany. Although the in -
crease was somewhat smaller recently, the 
number of workers subject to social security 
contributions and low- paid part- time workers 
from other EU countries went up by 223,000 
between September 2014 and September 
2015. The number of immigrants from Romania 
and Bulgaria is particularly high at the current 
time; they have had unrestricted access to the 
German labour market since the beginning of 
2014. Since July 2015, freedom of movement 
has also been granted to Croatian nationals.
The number of persons registered as un -
employed has persisted at a low level for the 
past six months. On an average of the report -
ing period, the seasonally adjusted unemploy -
ment figure remained unchanged on the quar -ter at 2.79 million and the unemployment rate 
was 6.4%. Unemployment also remained at 
this level in October. However, the fact that the 
overall number was largely unchanged con -
ceals opposing lines of development with re -
gard to persons drawing unemployment bene -
fits and recipients of basic social security pay -
ments. On the one hand, the number of the 
more short- term unemployed claiming insur -
ance benefits continued to fall – albeit slowly – 
to 840,000 in October, thus reaching its lowest 
level since the extensive labour market reforms 
of more than ten years ago. On the other hand, 
bucking the trend of past years, the number of 
unemployed persons receiving basic social 
 security payments showed a slight increase.
According to the leading labour market indica -
tors, employment growth could be even 
stronger over the next few months. The Ifo em -
ployment barometer, which surveys the em -
ployment plans of trade and industry over the 
coming three months, rose to its highest level 
for around four years in October. The Federal 
Employment Agency’s BA-  X job index, which 
contains information on both the existing num -
ber of reported vacancies and their dynamics, 
stood at its highest level since its introduction 
in 2004. Job vacancies for more straightfor -
ward service activities appear to be particularly 
plentiful at present. Growth in vacancies for 
unsubsidised positions subject to social security 
contributions was reported, above all, in sec -
tors such as other business-  related services 
(which includes temporary employment agen -
cies, private security activities, cleaning of 
buildings, and call centres), the wholesale and 
retail trades as well as hotel and restaurant ser -
vices. The autumn survey conducted by the As -
sociation of German Chambers of Commerce Immigration 
of refugees: negligible  impact on  German labour market so far
Still high 
 immigration from EU  countries
Registered 
 unemployment stable at low level in Q3Outlook for 
 employment 
 remains positive
1 There has been a moderate increase so far this year in the 
number of recognised refugees. According to the immigra -
tion monitor of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) 
for October, only an estimated 47,000 refugees of working 
age were granted protection status and therefore unre -
stricted access to the German labour market in the first 
nine months of this year. See H Brücker, A Haupt -
mann, E Vallizadeh, Zuwanderungsmonitor Oktober 2015, 
IAB- Aktuelle Berichte, Nuremberg.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
53

and Industry (DIHK) on the employment plans 
of enterprises confirms that recruitment inten -
tions in the services sector are more marked 
overall than in the manufacturing and con -
struction sectors. The IAB labour market bar -
ometer, which is based on surveys of all man -
agers of local employment agencies, indicates 
that registered unemployment is likely to re -
main constant or show a marginal fall over the 
next three months.
Wages and prices
The rise in negotiated rates of pay including all 
additional benefits in the third quarter of 2015, 
at 2.4% on the year, was somewhat stronger 
than in the second quarter (+2.2%). The annual 
rate of growth in actual earnings in the third 
quarter is again likely to have been markedly 
higher than the increase in negotiated wages. 
The main reason for this is the introduction of 
the general statutory minimum wage at the be -
ginning of the year. In conformity with the 
transitional statutory provisions, rates below 
the hourly minimum wage of €8.50 will now 
be paid only in the lowest pay groups of indi -
vidual sectors. This will apply in eastern Ger -
many to temporary agency work, large laun -
dries and the textile industry until mid-2016 in 
most cases. The lowest sectoral minimum wage levels of €7.20 (east) and €7.40 (west) are cur -
rently set in agriculture and forestry and in 
horticulture. Moreover, the Minimum Wage 
Act (Mindestlohngesetz)  allows newspaper de -
livery firms to remunerate their staff at €6.38 
this year and €7.23 next year.
The price climate continues to be characterised 
by fluctuations in crude oil prices, which were 
on their way back down in the third quarter, 
causing prices at all stages of the economy to 
fall again. This movement was amplified some -
what by the falling prices of other commod -
ities. Consequently, even if energy is excluded, 
prices were also declining again at the up -
stream stages in some instances. Consumer 
prices, excluding energy, were still rising, how -
ever, albeit somewhat more slowly than in the 
previous quarter.
Import prices not only dropped sharply across 
the board by a seasonally adjusted 2.0% in the 
third quarter, they also showed a marked fall 
even if energy is not taken into account. Pri -
marily inputs, but also food products, became 
significantly less expensive as a result of the de -
cline in commodity prices. Other consumer and 
capital goods, which had undergone steep 
price increases in the preceding quarters in the 
wake of the euro’s depreciation, now became 
somewhat cheaper or were no longer showing 
an obvious price increase. Hence, the year- on- 
year figure for imports excluding energy, at 
+1.6%, was clearly more moderate than in the 
second quarter and, including energy, the de -
cline in prices, at 3%, was quicker than before. 
Domestic producer prices also went down in 
seasonally  adjusted terms. This was due solely 
to lower energy prices. Small reductions in in -
puts and food products offset price increases 
of similar magnitude in other consumer and 
capital goods. The latter were probably due to 
lagged effects of the euro’s past depreciation. 
The annual inflation rate thus remained clearly 
negative. It was still possible to achieve higher 
prices in foreign sales, even though the year-  
on- year rate was, at 0.8%, lower than in the 
second quarter. The terms of trade improved Stronger rise 
in negotiated pay rates in Q3 than in previous periods; higher growth in actual earnings  continuesPrices influenced by fluctuations in commodity prices
Decline in prices 
at upstream stages of the economyNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
Q1-Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
54

again due to the strong price reductions in the 
case of imports.
Construction prices continued to rise moder -
ately. The year- on- year rate of 1.4% was at 
much the same level as in the previous quar -
ters. Price inflation on the housing market has 
accelerated again in the course of the year so 
far. This has been due chiefly to rising prices for 
owner- occupied housing, while prices for free -
hold apartments have been going up at a simi -
lar rate to last year.
Following the steep rise in the second quarter, 
consumer prices declined slightly in the sum -
mer months by a seasonally adjusted 0.1% on 
the quarter. This was due mainly to significantly 
lower energy prices. Excluding energy, how -
ever, the upward pressure on prices was almost 
as strong as in the second quarter. While food 
prices remained unchanged overall, the prices 
of other commercial goods rose again steeply 
by 0.4%. A part in this was also played by the 
fact that it was not until the third quarter that 
cigarette prices were adjusted to the final stage 
of the increase in tobacco tax from January this 
year. Prices for services rose moderately and 
the increase in housing rents was also rather 
muted. Annual inflation as measured by the 
national consumer price index (CPI) fell from 
+0.5% to +0.1% and according to the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices from +0.4% to 
0.0%. Excluding energy, the rate remained at 
somewhat above 1% in both indices.
In October, consumer prices increased slightly 
on the whole after adjustment for seasonal 
variations. Although the price of crude oil in 
euro terms was somewhat above its September 
level, retail prices for energy continued to fall. 
This is likely to be due in part to something of 
a return to normal in refining margins, which 
had seen an exceptionally sharp increase in the 
summer months. There was a further increase 
in prices if energy is excluded. As there had 
been quite a significant decline in consumer 
prices in October last year, the overall annual 
CPI rate went up from 0.0% to +0.3% and the Moderate rise 
in construction prices
Rise in consumer 
prices, excluding 
energy, in 
 summer …
… continued 
in OctoberExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20159295100105110
97100105110
97100105 105110115
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Oct97100105110
OctDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
55

annual HICP rate increased from -0.2% to 
0.2%. Excluding energy, consumer prices were 
up from +1.1% in September to +1.4% accord -
ing to both the national CPI and the HICP . The 
headline inflation rate will probably continue to 
go up in the coming months on account of the 
sharp fall in crude oil prices in late 2014/early 
2015 and price inflation, in particular for ser -
vices.
Orders received and outlook
The slight slowdown in German economic 
growth in the third quarter of 2015 could also 
continue into the final quarter. The basic condi -
tions for robust growth in private consumption 
are still in place. Unfunded government trans -
fers for refugees are also likely to generate add -
itional stimuli. The favourable labour market 
outlook and persistently low mortgage rates 
are also boosting housing construction. Ac -
cording to the Ifo Institute, business expect -
ations in the retail trade, in the case of other 
service providers and in construction are cor -
respondingly positive.
Hardly any stimuli are to be expected from in -
dustrial activity before the end of the year, 
however. The sharp decrease in orders in the 
third quarter, especially from non- euro- area 
countries, indicates that industrial activity will 
remain weak up to the end of the year and that 
export activity will not gain traction either. This 
means that firms will probably be more cau -
tious in their investment planning. Their still 
fairly optimistic short- term export and produc -
tion expectations indicate that enterprises see 
the impact of a cooling of demand in China 
and other emerging market economies as 
limited.
According to the Ifo surveys, the outlook for 
business in trade and industry has brightened 
again somewhat recently. Nevertheless, uncer -
tainties regarding growth prospects in emer -
ging market economies and their effects on the 
advanced economies, too, have left their mark Economic 
growth still  sustained by consumption …
… but lack 
of stimuli from  exports in the 
short term
Uncertainties 
have increasedDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
July-
Aug
July-
Aug90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
56

on enterprises’ assessments. The latest DIHK 
survey indicates that foreign demand is now 
seen as the greatest risk to future business 
growth and that industry has slightly scaled 
back its medium- term investment and employ -
ment plans.
The reporting period saw a distinct deterior -
ation in demand conditions in industry on the 
back of a clear seasonally adjusted 2¾% 
quarter- on- quarter decline in incoming orders. 
This was due to the marked 8½% overall de -
cline in demand from non- euro- area countries. 
However, growth in orders from the euro area 
was markedly smaller, too. Although the inflow 
of orders from the euro area showed moderate 
growth, there was likewise a contraction leav -
ing aside orders from the aircraft and aero -
space industry, part of which is likely to origin -
ate from non-  euro-  area countries. In practical 
terms, domestic orders moved sideways.
In the third quarter, it was mainly capital goods 
manufacturers who felt the effects of the slow -
down in demand from non- euro- area coun -
tries. The automotive industry was hit particu -
larly hard. Following exceptionally robust de -
mand in the preceding quarters, orders slumped 
by almost one- fifth. In spite of further marked 
inflows of orders from the euro area, this sec -
tor thus recorded a 9% overall decline in orders 
in the third quarter. The manipulation of ex -
haust emissions at Volkswagen is unlikely to 
have been a significant factor as it did not be -
come known until shortly before the end of the 
quarter. However, there was less demand over -
all for intermediate and consumer goods than 
in the preceding quarter.Construction business activity is still pointing 
upwards. Even in the short term, the marked 
pick- up in demand for housing construction in 
the third quarter is likely to make itself felt. On 
an average of July and August, the number of 
permits and orders for housing were clearly up 
on their level in the first half of the year. By 
contrast, the other two construction subsectors 
were receiving no new stimuli. Demand for 
both commercial and public sector construc -
tion tailed off into the summer months and, in 
July and August, was significantly below the 
average of the first half of the year.
The favourable outlook for the labour market 
and pay, together with strong immigration, is 
creating the necessary conditions for buoyant 
consumption activity to continue. This is con -
sistent with assessment by the market research 
institution Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung 
(GfK) that consumer sentiment is still decidedly 
positive. The consumer climate has become 
somewhat gloomier in recent months, prob -
ably reflecting the fact that consumers no 
longer expect to be able to benefit from energy 
price- driven growth in purchasing power to the 
same extent as before. Moreover, the eco -
nomic outlook has been rated as much less 
 favourable. According to GfK data, however, 
this was mainly related to the more unfavour -
able assessment of the underlying conditions 
on the labour market as a result of the immi -
gration of refugees and only to a small extent 
to the individual workplace situation. This has 
had a relatively minor impact on the propensity 
to spend.Clear fall in 
 incoming orders due to sharp  decline in  demand from  
non- euro- area  countries
Automotive 
 industry particu-larly affected by decline in  demand from non- euro- area countriesHousing con-
struction still 
pointing up-
wards, lack of new impetus for commercial and 
public sector 
construction
Consumption 
activity still driver  
of domestic 
 demandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
57

Public finances*
General government budget
German public finances are continuing to de -
velop favourably in 2015. The surplus is likely to 
once again be up on the year (2014: 0.3% of 
gross domestic product (GDP)), although this is 
mainly attributable to temporary factors. 
Whereas court decisions temporarily had a 
negative impact on the 2014 fiscal balance, in -
flows of funds from the auction of radio fre -
quencies are having a positive effect this year.1 
By contrast, the impact of cyclical factors on 
the government budgets remains limited. Over -
all, in structural terms, the surplus could there -
fore amount to around ½% of GDP , as in the 
previous year. The revenue ratio, which is 
broadly stable, is being accompanied by a con -
tinued decline in the interest burden, on the 
one hand, but a relatively strong rise in other 
spending, on the other. The reasons for this in -
clude not only the strong rise in the number of 
refugees coming to Germany, particularly in the 
second half of the year, but also the pension 
benefits package that came into force in mid-
2014.
The debt ratio fell further during the first half 
of the year – from 74.9% at the end of 20142 
to 72.5% in mid-2015 – and this decline is set 
to continue. This was attributable to nominal 
GDP growth in the ratio’s denominator as well 
as a lower level of gross debt in the core 
budgets and a scaling- back of liabilities at 
 government- owned bad banks – although, in 
the case of said liabilities, developments may 
be subject to stronger fluctuations, irrespective 
of the portfolio reduction outlined here.
The surplus is expected to contract in 2016. As 
a result, the government budget could be more 
or less balanced, with the debt ratio continuing 
to fall. While positive cyclical developments 
and a further drop in interest expenditure could 
relieve budgets, no auction proceeds will be 
collected and various fiscal policy measures (tax cuts and additional expenditure on items such 
as infrastructure, education and research) will 
place a strain on public finances. In particular, 
the increase in expenditure related to the influx 
of refugees will have an impact.
However, it is very hard at present to gauge 
how the migration of refugees and the associ -
ated implications for public finances will pan 
out.3 Generally speaking, the impact on the 
budgets crucially hinges, first of all, on net im -
migration. In this regard, it is not only the num -
ber of persons entering the country but also 
the number leaving – for example, owing to 
their asylum applications being rejected – that 
plays a role. Second, the burdens for a given 
year depend on the annual average number of 
refugees that need to be provided for. For ex -
ample, there has been a sharp rise in immigra -
tion this year, but the resulting fiscal burdens 
are still fairly limited as this development has 
predominantly taken place during the second 
half of the year. Third, the specific amount of 
spending on individual immigrants is of signifi -
cance. Expenditure will fundamentally focus on 
basic needs (including accommodation and Rise in surplus 
in 2015 due to temporary  factors and …
… debt ratio 
falling
Contraction of 
surplus in 2016Considerable 
uncertainty 
 regarding 
 refugee influx
* The section entitled “General government budget” con -
cerns the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. The 
subsequent reporting on the budgets of central, state and 
local government and of the social security funds is based 
on the figures as defined in the government’s financial stat -
istics (which are generally in line with the budget accounts).
1 Temporary burdens of 0.3% of GDP were recorded in 
2014. These were due to expected tax refunds, which were 
reported as capital transfers in the national accounts at 
the time of the court ruling. The inflows of funds from the 
auction held by the Federal Network Agency in spring 2015 
amount to 0.2% of GDP .
2 As part of the 2015 autumn notification, the debt ratio 
was revised upwards by a total of 0.2 percentage point 
compared with the spring notification. Recording central 
government liabilities to KfW (Kreditanstalt für Wiederauf -
bau) in connection with student grants and loans, includ -
ing further government- initiated transactions and reclassi -
fying entities at local government level pushed up the ratio 
by 0.5 percentage point. Conversely, the upward revision 
of GDP lowered the ratio by 0.3 percentage point.
3 However, there is also uncertainty surrounding factors 
such as macroeconomic developments or, for instance, the 
specific impact of the measures announced by HSH Nord -
bank.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
58

healthcare),4 administration, childcare, educa -
tion and training. In the long term, the better 
and more quickly immigrants are integrated 
into the labour market, in particular, and earn -
ing their own income, the lower the burden on 
public finances will be. If it is likely that an im -
migrant will remain in Germany in the long 
term, it will be crucial for them to be effectively 
integrated into the labour market – the acquisi -
tion of German language skills and the training 
opportunities provided by schools and enter -
prises will be significant factors in this respect. 
The government has a role to play here, espe -
cially with regard to ensuring efficient cooper -
ation between public sector entities. It is ex -
tremely difficult to make any estimates at 
the  moment, not least given the uncertainty 
 surrounding future immigrant numbers. At 
present, additional government expenditure in 
the amount of up to ¼% of GDP this year and 
½% for the year ahead does not seem implaus -
ible.5 Additional receipts from taxes and social 
contributions paid by immigrants can initially 
be expected to be very limited.
The current situation demonstrates the advan -
tage of having a relatively favourable structural 
budgetary situation and safety margins to the 
limits set by European and national budgetary 
rules. Not least unexpected developments and 
additional burdens that are difficult to gauge 
can initially be absorbed in the budgets with -
out immediately having to take fiscal policy 
countermeasures or call into question the cred -
ibility of the rules by bending them.6 At this 
stage, the burdens in connection with the in -
flux of refugees, which can only be roughly es -
timated at best, could initially be cushioned 
without counterfinancing, thereby narrowing 
the safety margins.
Greater clarity regarding the continued influx of 
refugees, the direct budgetary impact and pol -
itical decisions in Germany and also in the 
European Union, as well as the resulting overall 
impact on government finances, may be ex -
pected going forward. Structural burdens – be -
cause, for example, it takes a long time to inte -grate the large number of immigrants into the 
labour market – should then be taken into ac -
count in future budget plans and counter -
financed. A moderate structural budget surplus 
for Germany is advisable not only to ensure 
compliance with the upper deficit limits. It 
would also be a good idea to continue redu -
cing the still high debt ratio swiftly, not least 
because this would effectively cap the interest 
burden in the long term – especially given the 
possibility of interest rates going back up in the 
future. This results in additional scope for man -
oeuvre, which could be used to address the fis -
cal policy challenges posed by unfavourable 
demographic developments, for instance. 
Sound public finances are not antithetical to 
tackling immigration, among other challenges, 
or to improving infrastructure and government 
educational programmes. Instead, they are pre -
cisely a key prerequisite for continuing to be 
able to cope with unexpected challenges in the 
future.
Safety margins 
allow unex-pected budget -
ary burdens to be accommo-dated without exceeding limits
In principle, 
moderate struc-tural surpluses for Germany  appropriate4 Cash payments and benefits in kind are granted pursuant 
to the Act on Benefits Granted to Persons Seeking Asylum 
(Asylbewerberleistungsgesetz), particularly while applica -
tions are being processed and, if an application is rejected, 
until the person concerned has left the country. If the ap -
plicant is granted refugee status, for example, the regular 
social security system will ultimately assume responsibility 
for payments. If the need arises, the person concerned is 
then entitled, for instance, to claim unemployment bene -
fit II (welfare- related benefit) and have accommodation 
costs refunded.
5 Owing to the uncertainties, the German Council of Eco -
nomic Experts, for example, has calculated the expected 
costs for various scenarios, resulting in estimates for add -
itional expenditure ranging between €3½ billion and €6 
billion in 2015 and €6½ billion up to €12 billion in 2016. 
See German Council of Economic Experts, Zukunftsfähig -
keit in den Mittelpunkt, Jahresgutachten 2015/ 16, pp 16 f.
6 Generally speaking, this also applies to surprises such as 
those relating to macroeconomic developments. For ex -
ample, identifying trends in key macroeconomic reference 
variables (or in potential output), which are factored into 
the estimation of the structural budgetary situation, is, as a 
general rule, fraught with uncertainty. After the Federal 
Government had previously regularly reported a distinct 
underutilisation at the current end, it recently projected 
– following a reassessment – that the output gap will be 
more or less closed in 2016, which seems more plausible. 
Consequently, the structural budget balance is now less 
 favourable. If a safety margin had not been factored in, this 
revision would, in and of itself, have made it necessary to 
take consolidation measures in the short term to comply 
with the structural budget ceilings.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
59

In the context of the Stability and Growth Pact, 
the European Commission announced that it 
would make concessions when assessing com -
pliance with the rules  regarding the additional 
financial burden associated with the influx of 
refugees. Non- compliance would be justifiable 
only if this development could be classified as 
unexpected and meant that fiscal rules were 
bent merely on a short- term and temporary 
basis due to no more than specifically docu -
mented direct net additional burdens. A further 
option potentially on the table – factoring out, 
on a longer- term basis, any additional refugee- 
related burdens – would, however, not be con -
sistent with the Pact’s aim of ensuring sound 
public finances. A structural public spending 
requirement therefore ought to be covered by 
corresponding income so as to keep govern -
ment debt at a comfortably sustainable level. 
This does not mean that tasks considered to be 
important cannot be carried out, but that these 
should be  financed in a sustainable manner.
With regard to the orientation of public fi -
nances in the euro area as a whole, there have 
been calls from some quarters for countries 
that have built in safety margins below the 
European deficit limits –  this applies to Ger -
many, in particular – to make use of this leeway 
and adopt a more expansionary fiscal policy 
stance, thereby steering overall demand in the 
euro area. However such a recommendation, 
which amounts to centralised fiscal policy 
(fine-)tuning for the euro area, is not convin -
cing. Under the existing regulatory framework 
of European monetary union, member states 
are responsible for their own national fiscal pol -
icies and have agreed to comply with the upper 
limits of the common budgetary rules. The 
automatic stabilisers can take effect and there 
is scope for the respective countries to pursue 
active fiscal policies provided they do not ex -
ceed the prescribed limits. This means that fis -
cal policy can take into account country-specific  
macroeconomic developments, while monet -
ary policy pursues its objective of price stability 
in a centralised manner, looking at the euro 
area as a whole. Macroeconomic fine- tuning is extremely difficult, even for an individual coun -
try, and attempts to achieve this in the past 
have often had unintended procyclical conse -
quences owing to diagnostic and implementa -
tion problems. A symmetrically more restrictive 
stance in good times – as would be required 
under a systematic stabilisation policy, but 
also to avoid unintended debt growth – has 
also often been unsuccessful. Looking at the 
European level as a whole, it seems that it 
would be  worth considering a coordinated ap -
proach on an exceptional basis, at best, if there 
was a threat of an extensive crisis – such as a 
self-  reinforcing deflationary spiral – which even 
monetary policy can do little to tackle. How -
ever, this is currently not the case. Fine- tuning 
attempts at the European level using fiscal pol -
icy instruments are therefore not advisable. It 
does not seem appropriate, for example, to put 
fiscal policy in Germany on a more expansion -
ary course – disregarding the rather favourable 
economic outlook – in order to indirectly stimu -
late demand in other euro- area countries, as 
this would amount to a  U-turn  on Germany’s 
basic position, which is generally considered 
sensible. It is likely that the scale of the fiscal 
loosening being contemplated would, in any 
case, have only a comparatively minor impact 
on demand.
Against this backdrop, the mandate of the 
European Fiscal Board – the latter was recently 
agreed on by the European Commission  – 
should be viewed in a critical light. This Board, 
set up within the European Commission, has 
not only been given the task of evaluating on 
the Commission’s behalf whether the Stability 
and Growth Pact has been appropriately imple -
mented but also of providing an assessment of 
what it considers a suitable fiscal stance for the 
euro area as a whole going forward. This is an -
other example of the Stability and Growth Pact, 
with its objective of sound public finances, 
being merged with macroeconomic govern -
ance. Consequently, there is a risk of the goal 
of sound public finances being pushed into the 
background. By contrast, a welcome develop -
ment would be the establishment of an inde -At most tempor-
ary deviations from fiscal limits compatible with European rules’ objectives
Fiscal fine- tuning 
at European level not  convincing
Sustainability of public 
 finances not 
focus of pro-
posed European Fiscal BoardDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
60

pendent European fiscal council outside the 
European Commission that has the sole specific 
task of budgetary surveillance in the sense of 
monitoring compliance with the rules, and 
would assume the European Commission’s 
tasks in this respect.7 This would mean that, 
while the Ecofin Council would still make the 
final decisions, a clearer process focusing on 
sound public finances could be created.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue8 in the third quarter of 2015 was 
up by 6% on the year. The growth in receipts 
recorded during the first six months of the 
year was therefore maintained (see the chart 
above and the table on page 62). Wage tax 
revenue continued to record strong growth, 
but this was somewhat weaker than in the 
first  half of the year. At 12%, revenue from 
profit- related taxes rose sharply. This was, how -
ever, partly due to intra- year payment deferrals 
for non-  assessed taxes on earnings. Receipts 
from  consumption- related taxes recorded 
somewhat stronger growth than they had 
done of late, rising by 3%.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
forecast to rise by 4½% for the year as a whole. 
This growth primarily reflects underlying macro -
economic developments9 as well as the positive 
effects of fiscal drag.10 Legislative changes are 
causing small- scale revenue shortfalls on bal -
ance. These shortfalls are attributable, in par -
ticular, to the gradual changeover to down -
stream taxation of pensions and the rise in 
child benefit, which is deducted from wage tax 
revenue. By contrast, the increases in real es -
tate acquisition tax, which were implemented 
in some federal states at the start and in the 
middle of 2015, have bolstered receipts. Fur -
thermore, marked shortfalls were assumed for corporation tax, local business tax and turnover 
tax, in particular, as a result of court rulings.11
In 2016, tax revenue is expected to rise at a 
subdued pace of only 2%. Although growth in 
macroeconomic reference variables for tax rev -
enue is forecast to be roughly the same as in Further consider-
able growth in tax revenue in 2015 Q3
Revenue growth 
for year as a whole mainly reflects macro-economic  developmentsSubdued growth in 2016 …Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 201501234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
7 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Ap -
proaches to strengthening the regulatory framework of 
European monetary union, Monthly Report, March 2015, 
pp 15-37.
8 Including transfers to the EU budget – which are de -
ducted from German tax revenue – but excluding receipts 
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for 
the quarter under review.
9 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection. For 2015, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 1.7% and nominal growth 4.0% (May: 
+1.8% and +3.8%, respectively). GDP growth for 2016 is 
forecast to be 1.8% in real terms and 3.4% in nominal 
terms (May: +1.8% and +3.3%, respectively). For 2017, 
GDP growth is estimated to be 1.5% in real terms and 
3.3% in nominal terms (May: +1.3% and +3.2%, respect -
ively). In the medium term, nominal growth of around 3% 
per annum is still forecast.
10 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” denotes the over -
all positive revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax -
ation and the negative impact of the fact that specific 
 excise duties are largely independent of prices.
11 For 2015, this predominantly relates to the rulings by 
the Federal Fiscal Court of 25 June 2014 (I R 33/ 09) and of 
30 July 2014 (I R 74/ 12) on section 40a of the Act on Asset 
Management Companies (Gesetz über Kapital anlage gesell-
schaften) and STEKO (section 8b (3) of the Corporation Tax 
Act (Körperschaftsteuergesetz)) (see also Bundestags-  
Drucksache 18/ 5560). In the national accounts, the impact 
of these rulings pushed up expenditure in 2014. Further -
more, shortfalls in turnover tax revenue are expected. The 
impact of these rulings was taken into account in the 
 national accounts in 2013 and 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
61

2015, this is outweighed by the dampening im -
pact of legislative changes and court rulings on 
revenue growth. With regard to legislative 
changes, the measures to provide income tax 
relief passed in summer 2015 (increases in tax 
allowances and child benefit as well as a right -
ward shift in the income tax rates) will lead to 
revenue shortfalls. With respect to court rul -
ings, some of which were made some time 
ago, tax refunds are expected to be signifi -
cantly higher overall than in 2015.12 The damp -
ening impact of the court rulings will then 
largely no longer apply in 2017. This situation 
and the assumption of a sound macroeconomic 
setting mean that revenue growth is expected 
to be considerable again, at 4½%, in 2017. 
Average annual increases of 3½% are forecast 
for 2018 to 2020. Developments will then pri -
marily be determined by macroeconomic 
growth assumptions and fiscal drag, the effect 
of which significantly outweighs the relief pro -
vided by the changeover to downstream tax -
ation of pensions. The tax ratio (as defined in the government’s financial statistics) is therefore 
projected to increase to 22.4% by the end of 
the forecast period in 2020 (2014: 22.1%).
The May forecast has thus been revised up -
wards considerably for 2015 (+€5 billion). This is 
mainly attributable to tax revenue so far having 
developed more favourably than expected in 
terms of cash receipts. This is also set to con -
tinue, to some extent, in the years to come. The 
somewhat more favourable macroeconomic 
setting compared with the May estimate also 
results in a slight upward revision in and of it -
self. In 2016, these effects will, however, be 
more than offset by the impact of the previ -
ously outlined legislative changes concerning 
income tax, which had not yet been included in … and increases 
expected to be somewhat sharper again in subsequent yearsRevenue expect -
ations raised for 2015 but revised downwards for 2016Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2015 1,2Q3
2014 2015 2014 2015
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 428.9 453.4 + 24.5 + 5.7 + 4.5 144.5 153.3 + 8.8 +  6.1
of which
Wage tax 120.3 129.1 +  8.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 40.5 43.3 + 2.7 +  6.7
Profi  t-related taxes 3 68.7 72.9 +  4.2 + 6.1 + 4.2 20.3 22.8 + 2.5 + 12.1
Assessed income tax 33.8 36.1 +  2.3 + 6.9 + 6.7 10.0 10.7 + 0.6 +  6.4
Corporation tax 15.0 15.7 +  0.7 + 5.0 + 4.6 4.3 4.5 + 0.1 +  3.2
Investment income 
tax4 19.9 21.0 +  1.1 + 5.7 – 0.4 6.0 7.6 + 1.7 + 28.1
Turnover taxes 5 150.8 155.8 +  5.0 + 3.3 + 3.1 51.1 53.2 + 2.1 +  4.0
Energy tax 24.6 24.4 –  0.2 – 0.8 + 0.2 10.0 10.2 + 0.1 +  1.3
Tobacco tax 9.9 9.9 –  0.0 – 0.3 + 0.2 3.7 4.0 + 0.2 +  6.6
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2015. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and invest-
ment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover 
tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
12 This primarily concerns the shortfalls arising from the 
above- mentioned court rulings pertaining to section 40a of 
the Act on Asset Management Companies, which are likely 
to be higher than in 2015. Moreover, shortfalls are ex -
pected as a result of the ruling by the European Court of 
Justice of 20 October 2011 on the taxation of dividends 
paid to EU/EEA companies (case C-284/ 09).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
62

the May estimate,13 as well as the shortfalls that 
are now also expected owing to court rulings. 
On balance, revenue expectations for 2016 
were thus substantially lowered (-€5 billion). 
However, tax revenue is expected to be some -
what higher again from 2017,14 with the some -
what more favourable macroeconomic assump -
tions and the continued extrapolation of cash 
receipts from the current year contributing to 
this. By contrast, revenue will be reduced by the 
cut in income tax, in particular.
Central government budget
At around €3 billion, the central government 
budget deficit for the third quarter of 2015 re -
corded hardly any increase on the year. Receipts 
rose significantly by 4% (€3½ billion), which 
was solely attributable to an increase in tax rev -
enue. Expenditure grew at a slightly higher rate 
of 4½%. On balance, the main reason for this 
was the one-  off transfer of €3½ billion to the 
fund to promote municipal investment, which 
was set up in parallel with the first supplemen -
tary budget for 2015. While interest expenditure 
once again fell markedly (-9½%, or -€1 billion), 
this was offset by strong growth in other oper -
ating expenditure (particularly payments for 
military procurements) and an increase in trans -
fers to state government (€½ billion each). With 
a year-  on- year rise of 3%, no major additional 
expenditure has yet been incurred in connection 
with unemployment benefit II, which persons 
granted refugee status who are in need of as -
sistance are entitled to claim and which will 
therefore draw on greater resources in the near 
future.
Following the deliberations of the Budget Com -
mittee in early November, the draft of a second 
supplementary budget also envisages no net 
borrowing for 2015 as a whole. Notable differ -
ences with the first supplementary budget in -
clude additional revenue from the frequency 
auction in June (less the associated spending 
authorisations) of almost €4 billion, additional 
tax revenue of €1 billion (after deducting cen -tral government transfers from turnover tax 
revenue to state government that are primarily 
intended to cover the higher costs of benefits 
for asylum seekers) and a €2 billion reduction 
in spending attributed to the departmental 
budget “Federal debt”. However, these alleviat -
ing effects are now offset mainly by additional 
transfers of €1½ billion to the Energy and Cli -
mate Fund, additional spending of €½ billion in 
connection with unemployment benefit II and 
the allocation of €5 billion to a reserve.15 The 
reserve is intended to cover additional strains 
placed on the central government budget in 
the years to come owing to the influx of refu -
gees. The transfer to the reserve means that 
the 2015 fiscal year will again be closed with 
net borrowing of €0, ie with a balanced 
budget. However, the transfer has no effect on 
the financial balance, resulting in a surplus of 
just over €4½ billion.16
The national debt brake will limit central gov -
ernment’s structural deficit to 0.35% of GDP 
(around €10 billion initially) from 2016. The Fed -
eral Ministry of Finance took into account net 
borrowing in its determination of the structural 
balance (pursuant to the draft of the second 
supplementary budget for 2015 as revised by 
the Budget Committee, ie €0). Cyclical influ -
ences (in this case, providing marginal relief) Scarcely any 
deficit increase in 2015 Q3  despite  pre-funding of fund to promote  municipal 
 investment
Draft of second 
supplementary 
budget for 2015 
utilises leeway 
to create a 
 reserve without 
posting any net 
borrowing2015 debt brake requirements comfortably met
13 The Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting esti -
mates tax revenue on the basis of the current tax legisla -
tion. The changes to income tax were not adopted until 
after the May tax estimate had been completed.
14 Thus, revenue was raised by €2 billion in both 2017 and 
2018 and by €1 billion in 2019.
15 Moreover, if the 2015 fiscal year is closed with an add -
itional financial surplus (above the amount earmarked for 
the reserve), it is envisaged that the reserve will be in -
creased accordingly. It was originally planned that any sur -
pluses – such as an amount of €½ billion in 2014 – would 
not be recorded as such, but rather paid out in the form of 
additional expenditure to the Investment and Repayment 
Fund for repayment purposes.
16 The transfer to reserves mentioned is classified as an 
expense in main budget category 9 (“Special financing 
transactions”). In the absence of such a transfer, a net re -
payment would have to be recorded. By contrast, the 
budgeted transactions in main budget category 9 are 
 excluded from the financial balance reported in the cash 
statistics, resulting in a surplus being recorded. In the 
 national accounts – to which European budgetary rules are 
pegged – transfers to reserves (as well as financial transac -
tions) have no effect on expenditure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
63

and the effect of financial transactions (provid -
ing relief of €1½ billion) were then eliminated. 
Furthermore, individual off- budget entities that 
are to be consolidated were factored into the 
equation (no figures were estimated for them, 
but rather a balanced budget was assumed). As 
a result, the new budget plan envisages struc -
tural net borrowing of €1½ billion for 2015, 
which is well below the limit specified under the 
debt brake. If, by contrast, the surplus that the 
fund to promote municipal investment is ex -
pected to record as a result of advance pay -
ments from the central government budget 
were incorporated and the transfer to the re -
serve were eliminated (like a financial transac -
tion, to which it is, in principle, comparable), 
this would result in a marked structural surplus 
– just as it does for the financial balance. In the 
event of future reserve withdrawals and deficits 
in the special funds, a correspondingly less fa -
vourable budgetary situation would be shown. 
Overall, central government’s structural position 
could be better captured by taking such a con -solidated approach. This would also be appro -
priate with respect to the corresponding provi -
sions on European deficit limits.
The November tax estimate, which was not yet 
available when the Budget Committee revised 
the second supplementary budget, forecasts 
additional revenue of €1½ billion for 2015. 
Moreover, several other budgeted figures 
– such as those for return flows from the EU 
budget and not least for military procure -
ments – still appear to have been calculated 
cautiously. Notwithstanding the further reduc -
tion already forecast in the draft supplementary 
budget in the light of the highly limited debt 
service outstanding by the end of 2015, add -
itional interest expenditure savings vis- à- vis the 
budget plans could also be made. All in all, it is 
therefore likely that the transfer to the reserve 
will be markedly higher.
No net borrowing was envisaged in the 2016 
draft central government budget,17 approved 
by the Federal Cabinet at the start of July, 
 either. However, it did not include estimates for 
expenditure arising in connection with the 
marked increase in refugee numbers. Agree -
ments on burden sharing with state govern -
ment were later implemented in October under 
the Asylum Procedures Acceleration Act (Asyl-
verfahrensbeschleunigungsgesetz).  Central 
government will cede €3½ billion from its 
shares in turnover tax revenue for 2016 to state 
government. This sum is intended to cover a 
large proportion of the costs of benefits for 
asylum seekers estimated to be incurred at 
state and local government level. The core 
element of this legislation is a case- based 
 lump-sum payment of €670 a month per asy -
lum seeker by central government. It was an -
nounced in the explanatory memorandum ac -
companying the draft act that a final settle -
ment taking into account the actual number of 
refugees will be calculated at the end of each 
year; the final payments will then be made to -Result set to 
be somewhat  better than  projected
Agreements 
on cost sharing with state  government in connection 
with refugee 
 influx putting strain on 2016 
central govern-
ment budgetCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
2015
20142013Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201320152014€ billion
17 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
 Report, August 2015, p 70.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
64

gether with the as yet undetermined advance 
payments for the following year.18 In addition, 
improvements to childcare are envisaged by 
passing on savings of €½ billion via the afore -
mentioned ceding of tax revenue shares – 
these savings have arisen as a result of the Fed -
eral Constitutional Court deeming the childcare 
supplement granted by central government un -
constitutional. Moreover, a fixed amount will 
be allocated to cover the increase in costs asso -
ciated with unaccompanied child refugees. Be -
sides the tax transfer, the federal states will re -
ceive an additional €½ billion per annum  for 
the years 2016 to 2019 to boost the promotion 
of housing construction. Furthermore, separate 
legislation provided for higher state govern -
ment shares in energy tax revenue to promote 
local public rail transport (€½ billion).
A large share of additional general government 
expenditure incurred once asylum seekers have 
been granted refugee status is borne by central 
government. For example, spending on the 
basic allowance for job seekers looks set to rise 
more sharply from 2016 onwards. As well as 
bearing financial responsibility for unemploy -
ment benefit  II, central government also pays 
around one- third of the accommodation costs 
(this amount varies slightly from federal state to 
federal state) that, as a general rule, should be 
covered by local government. Given the fore -
seeable demand for language and vocational 
training for the majority of refugees, it is likely 
that their successful integration into the labour 
market will, in many cases, take an extended 
period of time. Accordingly, it is safe to assume 
that a large number of refugees will draw basic 
allowance benefits for a prolonged period. As 
any income that the refugees earn – which is 
to be offset against transfers from the govern -
ment – will probably only be low to start with, 
the amount of funds required per refugee 
could substantially exceed the average level of 
benefits drawn by recipients up to now.
Following the Budget Committee’s final delib -
erations on the 2016 central government 
budget, the expenditure volume provided for in the budget is now €5 billion higher than it was 
in the draft budget of summer 2015. Of this, 
€2½ billion has been set aside for the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (which is 
responsible for unemployment benefit II and 
central government’s share of accommodation 
costs). Against the backdrop of refugee migra -
tion, budget provisions were also increased by 
€1 billion for the Federal Ministry of the Interior 
(not least for the Federal Office for Migration 
and Refugees, which is responsible for asylum 
procedures) and by €½ billion for the Federal 
Foreign Office (for humanitarian aid and crisis- 
prevention measures). The November tax esti -
mate forecasts revenue shortfalls of €2 billion 
in the 2016 central government budget com -
pared with the figures in the draft budget of 
summer 2015. However, once adjusted for the 
aforementioned ceding of tax revenue shares 
to state government, this already equates to an 
upward revision of €2 billion. In order to avoid 
any net borrowing, thereby ensuring a “black 
zero” (ie a balanced budget), there are plans to 
make a substantial withdrawal of €6 billion 
from the reserve that is to be created in 2015.
Under the debt brake, cyclical relief (of €½ bil -
lion) and a slight surplus from financial transac -
tions are projected for 2016. The budgets of 
the off- budget entities to be incorporated were 
forecast to be balanced overall19 in the summer 
draft – forgoing any net borrowing, this results 
in a small structural deficit. However, if the 
more appropriate approach described on 
page 64 were adopted, whereby reserve with -
drawals are treated like financial transactions 
and the expected balances of the relevant off- Growing burden 
arising from basic allowance benefits for  asylum seekers granted refugee statusExtensive 
 recourse  
to reserve  envisaged 
in 2016
Margin to deficit 
limit shrinking
18 There will be an advance payment of €3 billion based 
on an estimate of 800,000 persons who will remain in Ger -
many for an average duration of 5½ months before they 
are granted refugee status or repatriated. Responsibility for 
repatriations lies at state government level. Funding will 
not be provided by central government if rejected appli -
cants remain in Germany for more than one month after 
their applications have been rejected. In view of the repat -
riation procedures adopted thus far, this would put signifi -
cant  financial pressure on state and local government; con -
sequently, there remains a financial incentive to accelerate 
the departure of these persons.
19 Details from the adjustment meeting were not yet avail -
able at the time this report went to press.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
65

budget entities are taken into account, a not -
able structural deficit would be on the cards. As 
things currently stand, however, this would 
likely still be below the limit of 0.35% of GDP .
As usual, the financial plan up to 2019 was not 
updated during the final budget deliberations. 
However, the revenue and expenditure figures 
included in the plan do not take into account 
the growing budget burden – particularly with 
respect to unemployment benefit II and central 
government’s share of accommodation costs – 
arising from the influx of refugees. The level of 
future transfers of tax revenue to state govern -
ment envisaged in the explanatory memoran -
dum accompanying the Asylum Procedures Ac -
celeration Act to cover the costs of benefits for 
asylum seekers will depend on refugee num -
bers and the implementation of the measures 
adopted to speed up asylum procedures. Given 
the current high level of uncertainty, it would 
seem sensible for the time being to forgo coun -
terfinancing measures in the short term and 
henceforth use the established safety margins 
as a buffer. In the event of reduced margins 
vis- à- vis the debt brake requirements and a 
possible need to significantly increase integra -
tion measures, the question of counterfinanc -
ing will, however, likely be raised in future due 
to the level of additional structural expenditure 
having become evident by then. In this case, it 
would then also make sense to once again fac -
tor in safety margins vis- à- vis the deficit ceilings 
until a certain structural surplus level has been 
reached.
Central government’s off- budget entities20 that 
are summarised in the quarterly overviews by 
the Federal Ministry of Finance reported a sur -
plus of €4½ billion in the third quarter of 2015 
following a surplus of €½ billion one year pre -
viously. The bulk of this came from the fund to 
promote municipal investment (€3½ billion) as 
it was pre- funded by central government dur -
ing this period. The surpluses recorded by the 
civil servants’ pension reserve and the civil ser -
vants’ pension fund in 2014 climbed slightly to 
a total of €½ billion. After breaking even in the same period last year, the Financial Market Sta -
bilisation Fund (SoFFin) achieved a surplus of 
€1 billion following the repayment of a capital 
injection by Deutsche Pfandbriefbank , which 
was formerly part of Hypo Real Estate. By con -
trast, the surplus of €½ billion generated by 
the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions in 
the third quarter of previous years has now 
been all but eliminated following the transfer 
of larger banks’ levies to the European level. 
Much like in previous quarters, outflows from 
the assistance fund set up in summer 2013 to 
tackle flood damage remained relatively limited. 
However, in particular, plans enshrined by cen -
tral government in the first supplementary 
budget of 2015 to reclaim €½ billion to com -
pensate for transfers from turnover tax revenue 
to state government in connection with higher 
costs of benefits for asylum seekers are ex -
pected to accelerate spending in the last quar -
ter of the year. In addition to the high surplus 
recorded by the fund to promote municipal in -
vestment, the net transfers to the precaution -
ary off- budget entities and the repayments 
made to SoFFin, central government now plans 
to make an advance payment of €1½ billion to 
the Energy and Climate Fund during the re -
mainder of the year. Overall, the off- budget en -
tities included here are therefore likely to close 
the year significantly more favourably in 2015 
than in 2014 (surplus of around €4 billion, of 
which €2 billion was attributable to the Invest -
ment and Repayment Fund’s share of the Bun -
desbank’s profit, which was €0 this year).
State government budgets21
State government core budgets also recorded 
a better result in year- on- year terms in the 
third quarter of 2015. The surplus increased by 
just over €½ billion to €2 billion. Revenue rose Spending higher 
than in  medium-term plan, too
Significantly 
higher surplus recorded by  off-budget  entities in 2015 
Q3 and also to be expected for year as a whole
20 This notably does not include bad banks and entities 
keeping commercial accounts. 
21 The development of local government finances in the 
second quarter of 2015 was analysed in greater detail in 
the short articles in the Bundesbank’s October 2015 
Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
66

by 6% (just over €4½ billion), still bolstered by 
the strong surge in tax receipts (+7%, or €4 
billion). Revenue from public administrations 
also rose sharply (by €1 billion) owing to the 
marked increase in central government funds 
– a large part of which is transferred by indi -
vidual state governments to their local author -
ities. Growth in expenditure shot up to just 
over 5% (€4 billion). Half of this increase was 
attributable to higher transfers to public ad -
ministrations, particularly local authorities 
(+10½%, or €2 billion). Furthermore, person -
nel expenditure (+3%) and, in particular, 
growth in other operating expenditure (+12%) 
both accounted for around €1 billion, while 
the decline in interest expenditure (-4½%) was 
somewhat weaker.
The surplus posted by the state government 
core budgets came to just over €5 billion for 
the first three quarters of 2015 and was thus 
up by €4 billion on the year. The figure for the 
year as a whole is therefore expected to signifi -
cantly exceed the previous year’s result (surplus 
of just over €½ billion). Although payments to 
local government, particularly in connection 
with the rising costs of benefits for asylum 
seekers, are likely to be higher again in the final 
quarter, this will probably be offset by central 
government ceding a larger part of its turnover 
tax revenue shares to state government – a 
measure it recently passed for 2015, too. In the 
coming years, macroeconomic conditions are 
likely to remain favourable, tax revenue is ex -
pected to record steady growth and interest 
expenditure is set to continue to decline at first. 
Compared with the May forecast, the latest tax 
estimate projects additional receipts for state 
government of €5 billion in 2015 and €3½ bil -
lion in 2016, although the latter are mostly at -
tributable to central government transferring 
part of its tax revenue shares to state govern -
ment to compensate for the higher burdens 
arising from asylum seeker benefits.
At the same time, state government is expected 
to incur considerable additional expenditure in 
this regard. In line with its recent decisions, central government will initially provide relief 
for state government (and local government) 
by means of lump- sum payments totalling €2 
billion in 2015, and then via a kind of payments 
on account (including fixed components such 
as higher funds for local public rail transport) in 
the amount of around €5 billion in 2016. Ultim -
ately, however, central government plans to 
 refund case- based lump- sum payments accord -
ing to the actual number of immigrants. It an -
nounced that, at the end of 2016 (and there -
after annually), it will make a final settlement 
based on the case- based lump- sum payments. 
However, it is likely that this lump- sum rate will 
not be sufficient to actually cover the expected 
case- by- case costs including education needs. 
State and local government will therefore also 
have to make financial contributions. This is 
likewise the case after an application for asy -
lum has been approved. Central government 
then assumes the costs of basic allowance 
benefits for unemployed persons as well as a 
large share of the accommodation costs. How -
ever, the remaining accommodation costs and, 
in particular, payments for education and child -
care will also have to be met by state and local 
government, which will therefore shoulder a 
large part of the costs and should, at the same 
time, be interested in providing the services in 
a cost- efficient manner. In particular, the 
agreed regulations set specific incentives, en -
couraging the authorities to ensure that appli -
cants leave if their applications have been re -
jected. It is not yet possible to gauge the pre -
cise financial impact on state government 
budgets. But it at least looks likely that sur -
pluses at state government level will be re -
duced in 2016.Continued 
 improvement in state govern-ment budgets in 2015 Q3 despite higher expend-iture growth
Significantly 
higher surplus in 2015, …
… but future 
rise in burdens owing to  refugee influxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
67

Social security funds22
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of just over €2½ billion in the 
third quarter of 2015. The generally favourable 
financial developments were masked by the 
pension benefits package (especially higher 
pensions for raising children and the full pen -
sion without actuarial deductions from the age 
of 63 for persons who have been insured for 
a  long period of time) and the year-  on- year 
 financial deterioration thus continued. Al -
though the new regulations entered into force 
on 1 July 2014, the full impact of the expanded 
benefits on expenditure unfolded with a time 
lag during the second half of 2014. Contribu -
tion receipts rose – despite the cut in the con -
tribution rate from 18.9% to 18.7% – by al -
most 3% (and, after being adjusted for the contribution rate cut, by as much as close to 
4%). Overall, however, the increase in revenue 
was weaker (at just over 2%) because the in -
stalments of the central government grant had 
been somewhat higher in the third quarter of 
2014 owing to the late approval of the central 
government budget. Although, at 5%, expend -
iture growth was still very strong, it was already 
weaker than it had been in the two previous 
quarters, which reflects the waning impact of 
the pension benefits package on year- on- year 
growth rates.
The mid- year pension increase in 2015 (2.1% in 
western Germany and 2.5% in eastern Ger -
many) pushed up pension expenditure some -
what more strongly than the previous year’s 
increase.23 Otherwise, however, growth in 
these payments was not up on the quarter. This 
would have been expected solely on account 
of the likely continued increase in the number 
of persons taking early retirement from the age 
of 63. However, it would appear that there is a 
fundamental trend in the other direction, par -
ticularly owing to the gradual rise in the statu -
tory retirement age to 67 and the fact that 
pressure on expenditure from the especially 
high number of persons born at the end of the 
baby boom period entering retirement has not 
yet come to bear. The component of the pen -
sion benefits package to generate the most ex -
penditure by far is the inclusion of an additional 
child-  raising year in the pension calculation 
(higher “mothers’ pensions”). The rise in ex -
penditure associated with this has ground to a Further deterior-
ation in 2015 Q3 with add-itional expend-iture owing to pension benefits packageGradual easing of spending pressure  towards end of yearFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015626466687072
–4–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
22 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2015 was discussed in the short articles of the 
Bundesbank’s September 2015 Monthly Report. These are 
the most recent data available.
23 As a result of the revision of the national accounts in 
the summer of 2014, the adjustment was around 1 per -
centage point lower. Gross wages and salaries per em -
ployee are thus around 1% lower. For the pension adjust -
ment, this figure for 2014 was – as stipulated – compared 
with the unadjusted figure for 2013 that had already been 
used. However, as pensions generally stay in line with the 
income subject to contributions of persons in the statutory 
pension insurance scheme – which is not affected by the 
revision and for which data are only available at a later 
date – a correspondingly higher pension increase will be 
made in 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
68

halt following the jump recorded in the previ -
ous year.
For 2015 as a whole, developments are set to 
be more favourable than originally expected. 
The deficit of €4 billion that had been envis -
aged when the contribution rate was set is 
now likely to be lower than expected. The re -
serves will thus be considerably higher than the 
regular upper limit of 1.5 times the scheme’s 
monthly expenditure, meaning that, in hind -
sight, a somewhat further- reaching cut in the 
contribution rate would have been advisable. 
As no change in the contribution rate is planned 
for 2016, the upper limit for the reserves could 
once again be exceeded at the end of next 
year. However, as a sizeable deficit is on the 
cards at the current rate, the upper limit is likely 
to be undershot by 2017 at the latest; conse -
quently, a cut in the contribution rate is no 
longer envisaged going forward. The deficit is 
set to increase further in subsequent years, not 
least as a result of demographic trends.24 The 
current rate could, however, probably be main -
tained until the end of the decade at least 
without any risk of the reserves undershooting 
their statutory lower limit of 0.2 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
surplus of just over €1 billion in the third quar -
ter of 2015, which – as in the preceding quar -
ters – was €½ billion higher than at the same 
time last year. At just over 4%, growth in con -
tribution receipts was still substantial. By con -
trast, on the expenditure side, spending on un -
employment benefit  I (insurance-  related bene -
fit) was down by almost 4%. There were also 
significant reductions –  of around 40%  – in 
subsidies for phased retirement, which is grad -
ually being brought to an end. Expenditure on 
active labour market policy measures was once 
again virtually unchanged on the year. How -
ever, the administrative costs of the Federal 
Employment Agency recorded stronger growth of just over 4%. Overall, revenue was up by 
4%, while expenditure was down by 3%.
The Federal Employment Agency is set to re -
cord a surplus of between €3 billion and €4 Contribution 
rate probably stable in  medium term
Further improve-
ment in Agency’s  
finances in 
2015 Q3Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 20157.07.58.08.59.09.5
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Revenue1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total 
expenditure 2
24 The current influx of refugees is likely to result in a grad -
ual rise in contribution receipts, while pension expenditure 
will initially probably hardly increase at all in view of the 
age structure of the immigrants. If the overall level of em -
ployment were higher in Germany, this would, on the one 
hand, reduce the dampening impact on pensions arising 
from the sustainability factor as well as from the generally 
expected increase in the contribution rate, and there would 
be a somewhat sharper increase in pensions as a result. On 
the other hand, the below- average earnings of immigrants 
would likely dampen per capita wage developments, which 
would result in lower pension increases.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
69

billion at the end of 2015, having forecast a 
figure of only €½ billion in its budget plan 
(each of these figures excludes the precaution -
ary fund). The increase in immigration is likely 
to have hardly any direct impact on the Federal 
Employment Agency’s finances in 2015 – and 
this is expected to be the case for 2016, too – 
because most immigrants is expected to have 
to acquire qualifications before entering regular 
employment (which is what pushes up the 
Agency’s receipts), and this qualification phase is unlikely to be financed from the Agency’s 
budget. On the expenditure side, the Federal 
Employment Agency offers insurance benefits, 
with the general prerequisite of contributions 
having been paid for one year. Therefore, im -
migrants able to work are initially only entitled 
to claim means- tested benefits in connection 
with the basic allowance for job seekers (par -
ticularly unemployment benefit II). It is central 
government – and, in part, local government – 
that bears financial responsibility in this regard.High surplus 
 expected for 2015; refugee influx initially likely to have  little impact on Agency’s  financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2015  
70

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ...........  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  79•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 1 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2015
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.2 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.1 2.4 1.3 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.16 0.29 2.6         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.1 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.4
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.25 0.32 2.2         June 5.4 2.4 1.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 0.08 0.24 2.0
         July 5.6 2.5 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.9 2.7 2.1 2.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.02 0.19 1.7         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 2.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct 6.2 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 6.9 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5         Dec 8.0 3.7 3.7 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan 9.0 4.0 3.9 3.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 9.2 4.1 4.2 4.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 10.1 4.6 4.7 4.7 0.7 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.05 0.03 0.8
         Apr 10.6 5.0 5.4 5.0 1.0 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.3 5.0 5.0 5.1 1.3 0.6 − 3.3 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.8 5.2 4.9 5.1 1.3 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July 12.3 5.5 5.3 5.1 1.9 0.9 − 3.3 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.5 5.1 4.9 5.0 2.2 1.1 − 3.3 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.7 5.2 4.9 ... 2.2 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2014          Jan 
− 720 + 4,433 − 16,156 − 6,485 − 36,207 + 4,543 + 19,313 + 2,679 1.3610 103.0 99.5
         Feb + 10,502 + 19,771 − 25,445 − 16,349 − 59,575 + 1,315 + 49,619 − 455 1.3659 103.2 99.6
         Mar + 21,987 + 22,896 + 116,084 + 31,947 + 49,974 + 4,075 + 29,848 + 240 1.3823 104.3 100.6
         Apr + 14,939 + 19,446 + 14,905 + 20,947 + 19,798 + 373 − 26,614 + 400 1.3813 104.2 100.4
         May + 2,061 + 20,702 − 1,159 + 4,517 − 69,457 + 3,471 + 59,828 + 482 1.3732 103.6 99.5         June + 18,878 + 21,097 + 47,064 + 11,583 − 37,375 + 385 + 72,918 − 447 1.3592 102.7 98.7
         July + 30,977 + 26,332 + 20,134 + 4,710 + 26,050 + 347 − 10,261 − 712 1.3539 102.3 98.2
         Aug + 13,256 + 10,632 + 5,805 − 4,743 + 2,064 + 3,978 + 3,242 + 1,264 1.3316 101.5 97.5         Sep + 33,050 + 25,478 + 81,891 + 9,141 + 86,258 + 13,481 − 25,043 − 1,946 1.2901 99.9 95.9
         Oct + 30,262 + 29,215 + 50,705 − 4,220 + 65,580 + 4,621 − 16,321 + 1,045 1.2673 99.1 95.0
         Nov + 26,317 + 25,047 + 52,039 + 7,905 + 5,736 + 3,120 + 34,580 + 698 1.2472 99.0 94.9         Dec + 39,536 + 26,674 − 42,771 − 14,620 + 19,914 + 2,216 − 51,402 + 1,121 1.2331 99.0 94.8
2015          Jan + 8,553 + 12,757 − 52,903 − 4,788 − 53,196 + 4,685 − 885 + 1,280 1.1621 95.2 91.1
         Feb + 14,394 + 26,119 − 18,805 + 20,843 − 41,057 + 9,514 − 12,310 + 4,205 1.1350 93.3 89.5         Mar + 30,892 + 26,835 + 109,260 + 91,459 − 19,366 + 8,421 + 28,492 + 254 1.0838 90.6 86.9
         Apr + 24,070 + 27,948 − 55,809 − 14,905 + 24,303 + 5,138 − 66,428 − 3,917 1.0779 89.7 86.1
         May + 7,976 + 25,064 + 20,747 − 5,771 + 45,219 + 2,933 − 19,823 − 1,810 1.1150 91.6 87.9         June + 35,079 + 33,349 + 59,363 − 19,771 + 56,702 − 4,279 + 23,488 + 3,223 1.1213 92.3 88.5
         July + 37,881 + 36,007 + 45,808 + 30,149 + 62,899 + 10,535 − 50,776 − 6,999 1.0996 91.3 p 87.5
         Aug + 13,655 + 15,210 + 3,945 + 2,866 + 29,747 − 7,161 − 22,901 + 1,394 1.1139 93.0 p 89.0         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1221 93.8 p 89.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1235 93.6 p 89.3
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2012 − 0.8 0.1 0.4 5.2 − 1.4 0.2 − 7.3 0.1 − 2.8 4.0
2013 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.6 − 1.1 0.7 − 3.2 1.4 − 1.7 3.02014 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.9 − 0.4 0.2 0.6 5.2 − 0.4 2.4
2014          Q2 0.7 1.4 1.0 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.2 0.4 7.0 − 0.5 2.3
         Q3 0.8 1.5 1.2 2.7 − 0.5 0.1 2.0 3.7 − 0.4 2.3         Q4 0.9 1.2 1.6 3.4 − 0.5 0.2 1.2 6.0 − 0.6 2.1
2015          Q1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.1 − 0.2 1.0 0.2 7.2 0.2 1.8
         Q2 1.5 1.5 1.6 2.0 0.2 1.1 1.7 6.7 0.9 2.8         Q3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2012 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 6.3 6.22013 − 0.7 0.9 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 0.42014 0.8 1.0 1.3 2.4 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.5 − 0.9
2014          Q2 0.9 2.1 0.9 2.4 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 2.8 22.8 0.0 − 0.2
         Q3 0.6 0.0 0.7 3.2 − 2.1 0.0 − 3.0 21.6 − 1.4 − 0.8         Q4 0.3 − 1.5 0.7 5.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 0.1 25.9 − 1.4 − 0.7
2015          Q1 1.6 0.0 0.7 2.5 − 3.0 1.7 1.8 24.9 − 0.2 1.6
         Q2 1.3 − 1.7 1.7 − 1.7 − 2.0 1.3 − 3.1 9.4 1.0 5.1         Q3
e 1.9 ... p 1.3 − 4.4 − 0.2 0.5 1.7 p 17.9 2.0 3.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2013 78.4 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 71.6 72.02014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.22015 81.2 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2014          Q3 80.3 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.5 70.4 − 73.6 71.5
         Q4 80.5 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 73.9 73.3
2015          Q1 81.0 79.7 84.8 71.2 78.6 81.9 69.2 − 74.6 71.3
         Q2 81.2 79.8 84.4 70.7 79.1 82.6 67.7 − 76.1 72.2         Q3 81.1 80.0 84.0 72.7 79.0 82.9 63.5 − 75.5 71.4         Q4 81.5 79.2 84.6 71.0 80.1 83.5 64.2 − 75.9 71.0
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2012 11.4 7.6 5.4 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.02013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.92014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015          Apr 11.1 8.7 4.8 6.5 9.3 10.3 25.3 9.7 12.3 9.5
         May 11.0 8.8 4.7 6.4 9.4 10.4 24.8 9.6 12.4 9.7         June 11.0 8.9 4.7 6.1 9.5 10.5 25.0 9.5 12.5 10.1
         July 10.9 8.8 4.6 5.8 9.5 10.6 25.0 9.5 12.0 10.1
         Aug 10.9 8.8 4.5 5.7 9.5 10.8 ... ... 11.9 9.9         Sep 10.8 8.7 4.4 ... 9.5 10.7 ... ... 11.8 9.8
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.32013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.02014
8 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015          May 9 0.3 0.8 0.7 0.5 0.1 0.3 − 1.4 0.2 0.2 1.2
         June 0.2 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 − 1.1 0.4 0.2 0.7
         July 0.2 0.9 0.1 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 − 1.3 0.2 0.3 − 0.2
         Aug 0.1 0.8 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.2         Sep − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.8 0.0 0.2 − 0.4
         Oct 
e 0.0 ... 0.2 ... ... ... − 0.1 ... e 0.3 − 0.1
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2012 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 4.8 − 8.8 − 8.0 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 4.1 − 12.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 0.9
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.5
 
General government debt 10
 
2012 89.3 104.1 79.7 9.5 52.9 89.6 159.4 120.2 123.2 41.4
2013 91.1 105.1 77.4 9.9 55.6 92.3 177.0 120.0 128.8 39.1
2014 92.1 106.7 74.9 10.4 59.3 95.6 178.6 107.5 132.3 40.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. justed data. 3  ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for wor-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual king-day variations. 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- January, April, July and October. 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
3.8 − 0.8 2.5 − 1.1 0.8 − 4.0 1.5 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 2.4 2012
3.6 4.3 2.6 − 0.5 0.3 − 1.1 1.4 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 5.9 2013
3.0 4.1 3.5 1.0 0.4 0.9 2.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.5 2014
3.8 2.1 2.8 1.2 0.5 1.1 2.6 3.3 1.1 − 1.7 2014          Q2
2.6 3.8 3.1 1.2 0.3 1.4 2.4 3.6 1.7 − 2.0          Q3
1.7 6.6 4.8 1.6 − 0.2 0.3 2.4 2.8 2.1 − 1.9          Q4
1.2 5.3 4.9 2.5 0.4 1.6 3.1 2.8 2.8 0.2 2015          Q1
1.4 3.0 5.2 1.8 0.7 1.6 3.2 2.6 3.2 1.2          Q2
1.8 ... ... ... 0.9 ... ... ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production1,4
 
3.7 − 5.0 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 8.0 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.6 2012
3.3 − 3.2 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 5.2 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 2013
0.2 4.5 − 5.5 − 3.0 0.9 1.8 3.7 1.7 1.3 − 0.9 2014
4.7 4.5 − 8.2 − 1.9 1.2 2.6 5.3 1.6 2.3 0.2 2014          Q2
− 0.6 3.8 − 5.5 0.4 − 0.3 1.8 2.3 2.7 0.8 − 0.2          Q3
3.5 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.4 0.3 − 0.2 0.6 2.3 0.5 − 0.8          Q4
4.2 3.3 4.6 3.9 1.7 0.3 5.6 5.5 1.7 − 0.1 2015          Q1
4.6 0.4 8.5 − 4.5 0.6 1.9 3.6 4.9 3.1 2.9          Q2
3.8 ... p 6.9 p − 6.9 ... 2.7 6.4 p 4.8 4.3 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
73.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 77.1 78.3 73.3 49.3 2013
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 77.7 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 2015
75.1 65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 83.2 80.8 75.3 54.5 2014          Q3
75.1 66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 81.1 81.2 76.9 54.5          Q4
74.4 66.4 80.5 80.6 84.1 78.0 81.0 85.1 78.1 54.9 2015          Q1
74.4 65.6 78.7 82.3 84.2 77.6 79.1 83.4 77.2 60.3          Q2
73.6 69.0 77.2 82.2 84.4 77.7 86.2 83.6 77.6 56.4          Q3
74.3 72.2 77.9 82.2 83.4 77.6 83.4 82.3 78.1 61.1          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
13.4 5.1 6.3 5.8 4.9 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 2012
11.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 2013
10.7 6.0 5.9 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.5 5.9 5.5 7.0 5.9 12.8 11.6 9.5 22.7 15.6 2015          Apr 
9.5 5.9 5.3 6.9 6.0 12.4 11.4 9.6 22.5 15.3          May
9.5 5.9 5.3 6.9 5.8 12.3 11.3 9.5 22.3 15.2          June
9.6 5.9 5.2 6.8 5.8 12.2 11.2 9.4 22.0 15.2          July
9.6 5.9 5.1 6.8 5.7 12.3 11.1 9.3 21.8 15.2          Aug 
9.5 5.8 5.1 6.8 5.7 12.2 11.0 9.2 21.6 15.1          Sep 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.2 2.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
1.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 2013
0.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.1 0.4 1.3 0.7 1.0 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.7 2015          May
− 0.2 0.5 1.1 0.5 1.0 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.9 0.0 − 2.1          June
− 0.2 0.2 1.2 0.8 1.1 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.7 0.0 − 2.4          July
− 1.0 0.1 1.4 0.4 0.9 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.9          Aug 
− 0.8 − 0.2 1.6 0.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.9          Sep 
− 0.4 − 0.1 1.6 0.4 ... 0.7 ... − 1.1 ... − 1.8          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 3.1 0.2 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 5.7 − 4.2 − 4.1 − 10.4 − 5.8 2012
− 2.6 0.7 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 2.6 − 15.0 − 6.9 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 1.4 − 2.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 5.9 − 8.9 2014
 
General government debt 10
 
39.8 22.1 67.6 66.4 81.6 126.2 51.9 53.7 85.4 79.3 2012
38.8 23.4 69.6 67.9 80.8 129.0 54.6 70.8 93.7 102.5 2013
40.7 23.0 68.3 68.2 84.2 130.2 53.5 80.8 99.3 108.2 2014
seasonally adjusted. 7  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation 10  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition); Euro-area aggregate and
based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. member states: European Central Bank, Germany: Federal Statistical Office and
8  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 9  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. Bundesbank calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          Feb − 5.1 − 9.2 − 16.4 4.1 12.3 32.5 16.1 − 16.4 − 11.9 − 5.9 0.1 − 11.3 5.2
         Mar 7.7 6.1 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.6 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.4
         Apr − 6.1 − 6.2 − 17.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 64.8 74.2 − 24.9 − 31.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 7.4
         May − 25.7 − 36.4 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.6 37.0 − 14.6 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.0         June 9.3 23.6 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.3 − 34.0 − 103.4 − 15.4 − 10.6 − 1.4 − 22.3 18.8
         July − 25.9 − 15.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.2 61.1 34.0 − 6.8 − 12.4 0.6 − 10.3 15.2
         Aug − 45.7 − 51.0 − 15.6 5.3 15.9 − 1.3 − 5.8 − 4.5 0.2 − 5.0 1.3 − 5.9 9.8         Sep 34.8 26.2 − 14.5 8.6 9.2 − 25.0 − 17.7 7.3 − 6.0 − 16.5 0.3 − 12.0 22.1
         Oct 5.0 − 24.0 − 9.0 29.0 23.1 10.4 − 4.0 − 14.4 − 37.0 − 13.9 − 0.2 − 26.5 3.6
         Nov 33.7 25.6 5.5 8.1 5.2 60.2 76.5 16.3 − 13.3 1.1 − 0.4 − 13.1 − 0.9         Dec − 47.1 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 36.0 − 44.0 − 0.4 − 109.0 − 108.5 − 37.7 − 1.0 2.3 − 40.2 1.1
2015          Jan 91.0 17.6 4.3 73.5 51.7 − 18.1 192.0 210.1 − 17.4 − 14.3 0.3 − 11.8 8.4
         Feb 9.3 19.7 2.4 − 10.4 − 0.5 − 23.7 − 18.8 4.9 − 18.8 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 9.7 0.9         Mar 77.6 44.4 − 1.2 33.2 30.0 10.9 − 29.5 − 40.3 − 18.9 − 12.4 − 1.3 − 25.5 20.3
         Apr 51.9 15.4 16.2 36.6 32.2 − 58.1 37.6 95.6 − 48.5 − 20.3 − 2.1 − 15.3 − 10.8
         May 22.8 6.1 − 1.8 16.7 31.4 25.3 − 56.1 − 81.4 − 26.2 − 9.5 − 1.7 − 24.1 9.1         June 8.3 − 15.1 − 26.8 23.4 24.6 54.5 − 86.8 − 141.3 − 14.3 − 12.0 − 1.2 − 12.8 11.8
         July 60.5 56.8 51.5 3.8 4.1 − 66.7 − 0.0 66.6 − 6.5 11.4 − 0.7 − 21.6 4.5
         Aug 14.5 − 23.8 5.9 38.4 47.3 − 20.6 12.0 32.6 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 8.9 11.6         Sep 31.3 − 8.5 − 6.6 39.8 45.4 − 8.3 − 96.8 − 88.4 − 13.1 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 24.6 15.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.8 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.7 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.9 − 11.4 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 2.8 0.5         Sep 10.2 6.2 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 2.5 − 3.2 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.5 1.5
         Oct 5.3 − 4.2 − 4.5 9.5 2.4 16.5 10.9 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.1
         Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8         Dec − 15.5 1.5 5.4 − 17.1 − 10.0 − 5.7 − 33.1 − 27.4 − 17.5 − 7.3 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.2
2015          Jan 28.5 13.0 7.0 15.4 6.5 − 57.6 52.2 109.8 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.0 1.8 0.8
         Feb 9.4 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.9 − 11.1 − 13.9 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.3 2.3         Mar 15.2 9.7 8.4 5.6 7.2 − 12.1 − 19.0 − 6.9 − 15.3 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 9.1 − 0.1
         Apr 17.3 3.3 0.7 14.0 4.9 7.7 33.9 26.2 − 13.2 − 10.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4
         May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4         June − 0.9 − 2.7 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.2 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 1.8 3.7
         July 32.7 24.1 21.3 8.6 6.4 − 28.8 − 8.3 20.6 12.5 16.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 21.0 − 0.9 20.1 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0         Sep 11.4 3.5 − 2.4 7.9 8.5 15.8 − 1.9 − 17.7 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.3 − 0.4
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
36.9 − 13.6 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.1 − 0.8 − 4.9 2014          Feb 
− 5.3 3.0 − 12.3 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 12.8 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 6.8 − 26.8 27.9 38.2 5.3 32.9 − 7.9 − 2.4 − 8.9 5.4 − 11.9          Apr 
33.1 − 50.1 − 63.8 57.8 54.9 7.1 47.8 1.0 1.9 − 13.9 − 4.1 8.6          May
26.4 51.1 − 16.6 23.1 44.4 6.4 38.0 − 19.4 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.4          June
− 23.1 2.4 − 28.8 15.0 10.3 9.4 0.9 6.4 − 1.6 2.7 16.9 − 7.3          July− 46.4 − 48.2 − 47.5 40.7 34.9 2.0 32.8 3.5 2.4 2.9 3.7 2.4          Aug − 6.1 22.8 − − 0.8 14.7 33.4 0.3 33.1 − 12.8 − 5.8 − 18.3 − 11.6 6.0          Sep 
− 6.5 33.8 − 25.2 8.8 38.3 3.5 34.8 − 20.6 − 8.9 25.6 14.6 − 4.3          Oct 
25.9 − 11.4 − 92.7 90.5 100.6 6.2 94.4 − 14.5 4.4 − 2.7 5.6 0.6          Nov 
− 46.5 17.4 − 19.3 30.6 50.8 23.8 27.0 − 17.8 − 2.4 − 13.8 − 17.7 20.3          Dec 
80.8 − 35.6 − 45.2 24.5 54.4 − 2.7 57.1 − 37.2 7.3 22.8 20.2 − 4.4 2015          Jan 
− 28.6 − 12.7 − 45.7 21.4 28.3 4.1 24.2 − 8.5 1.6 36.5 8.7 2.2          Feb 
22.6 51.3 − 33.5 57.2 54.7 7.7 47.0 − 5.4 7.9 1.8 − 9.5 − 7.4          Mar 
− 43.3 − 26.4 − 112.1 77.0 90.8 8.8 82.0 − 15.6 1.8 − 18.4 21.9 6.3          Apr 
44.1 2.5 − 27.7 61.5 91.9 6.7 85.2 − 35.1 4.8 − 4.3 − 9.1 − 6.8          May
14.0 56.9 − 6.2 39.9 65.4 10.7 54.7 − 25.6 0.1 − 22.6 − 17.6 8.2          June
− 42.3 − 28.9 − 71.5 40.9 40.0 14.2 25.8 1.4 − 0.6 − 3.4 24.1 − 12.2          July− 14.8 − 5.7 − 15.4 10.6 12.4 − 1.9 14.3 − 5.4 3.6 2.1 11.8 − 4.5          Aug 
29.0 27.4 − − 20.4 7.4 24.6 − 2.8 27.4 − 9.1 − 8.1 − 4.2 − 15.7 − 1.4          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6 2014          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.5 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.0 3.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.7 0.0 0.6          Sep 
− 1.3 6.5 3.2 0.8 18.2 25.6 − 9.3 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.4          Oct 
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8          Nov − 1.3 12.2 3.6 5.0 − 14.6 − 18.1 8.2 2.2 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.6          Dec 
6.3 − 59.5 2.4 − 0.8 24.9 26.3 − 5.1 − 1.1 3.4 0.0 1.4 2015          Jan 
− 6.7 − 11.4 2.1 0.8 28.6 23.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.0 2.3          Feb 
2.9 10.3 2.3 2.2 5.2 5.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.8          Mar 
− 2.7 5.0 2.2 1.8 35.9 29.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 3.8 − 0.1 4.1          Apr 
1.4 − 4.7 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1          May2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
− 3.2 − 18.6 4.7 3.3 13.1 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 1.2 0.0 − 0.6          July− 0.3 − 13.2 2.4 − 0.5 12.0 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2          Aug 
1.8 16.7 2.8 − 0.8 20.4 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.7          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2         Dec 24,648.0 16,161.5 12,802.4 10,649.6 1,360.8 792.1 3,359.1 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,487.3 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,041.7 16,241.9 12,803.5 10,640.4 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,680.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,985.6 16,222.0 12,771.6 10,635.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,671.5 4,092.2
         Mar 24,905.6 16,233.6 12,772.9 10,638.7 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,638.6 4,033.4
         Apr 25,042.7 16,233.3 12,767.4 10,647.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,697.2 4,112.3
         May 25,173.8 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.8 4,186.0
         June 25,131.3 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,751.1 4,170.9
         July 25,303.6 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,853.0 4,274.6
         Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,873.0 16,228.5 12,673.2 10,631.9 1,273.0 768.2 3,555.3 1,132.4 2,422.9 4,979.6 4,664.9
2015          Jan 26,922.2 16,393.6 12,750.7 10,698.9 1,275.9 776.0 3,642.9 1,158.4 2,484.5 5,398.4 5,130.1
         Feb 26,861.6 16,416.5 12,778.5 10,716.3 1,278.1 784.2 3,638.0 1,143.6 2,494.5 5,392.8 5,052.3
         Mar 27,244.5 16,512.0 12,832.6 10,765.9 1,275.3 791.4 3,679.4 1,148.2 2,531.2 5,467.7 5,264.9
         Apr 26,911.0 16,534.6 12,829.7 10,749.0 1,273.1 807.5 3,704.9 1,152.3 2,552.6 5,406.5 4,969.9
         May 26,746.6 16,546.7 12,838.1 10,759.5 1,273.7 804.9 3,708.6 1,137.8 2,570.9 5,400.4 4,799.5
         June 26,192.0 16,506.7 12,800.3 10,757.1 1,252.6 790.6 3,706.5 1,136.2 2,570.3 5,260.9 4,424.3
         July 26,412.1 16,590.6 12,861.8 10,760.6 1,299.3 801.9 3,728.8 1,134.8 2,594.0 5,281.2 4,540.3
         Aug 26,258.3 16,567.2 12,809.3 10,720.4 1,301.8 787.1 3,757.9 1,125.9 2,632.1 5,232.7 4,458.5
         Sep 26,203.0 16,598.0 12,786.1 10,710.7 1,303.2 772.2 3,811.9 1,120.3 2,691.6 5,146.9 4,458.1
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.6 3,696.6 2,931.7 2,527.7 143.6 260.3 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.5 3,728.6 2,948.2 2,536.5 142.2 269.4 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.5 3,739.6 2,954.1 2,542.4 142.3 269.4 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.4 3,758.4 2,967.3 2,546.4 144.1 276.7 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,203.1 3,772.8 2,967.1 2,546.0 135.6 285.5 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.7 3,771.0 2,972.4 2,555.9 135.0 281.5 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.9 3,767.4 2,967.5 2,557.3 133.3 276.9 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.5 3,803.2 2,993.2 2,561.0 153.8 278.4 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.9 3,813.2 2,996.3 2,567.5 155.4 273.4 817.0 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,042.4 3,824.7 2,997.0 2,572.5 157.5 267.1 827.7 364.5 463.2 1,257.0 960.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4 2013          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,900.4 10,351.8 10,401.3 4,310.6 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.1 10,348.6 10,399.4 4,304.6 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.2 10,338.5 10,382.8 4,307.7 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,966.6 10,355.6 10,399.0 4,332.6 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.4 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.1 10,350.7 10,394.3 4,364.8 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.1 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,020.7 10,387.2 10,425.8 4,414.7 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,050.7 10,387.6 10,424.2 4,447.5 1,104.4 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,022.8 10,378.1 10,420.0 4,448.9 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,156.9 10,547.3 10,629.2 4,746.2 1,090.1 399.6 2,218.6 2,087.7 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,302.7 10,590.5 10,692.3 4,818.0 1,073.9 389.0 2,213.3 2,109.9 88.2 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,285.9 10,597.8 10,694.5 4,838.1 1,039.2 389.0 2,231.1 2,110.2 87.0          Feb 
990.9 11,356.3 10,635.3 10,744.5 4,893.8 1,040.0 384.7 2,222.0 2,118.1 85.7          Mar 
999.8 11,348.4 10,678.3 10,776.2 4,965.1 1,030.6 378.5 2,198.9 2,119.3 83.7          Apr 
1,006.4 11,440.7 10,718.8 10,812.3 5,040.0 1,001.7 374.1 2,190.4 2,124.0 82.2          May
1,017.1 11,463.3 10,720.6 10,819.6 5,088.8 977.6 370.1 2,177.9 2,124.2 81.1          June
1,031.3 11,461.4 10,752.6 10,866.3 5,125.2 983.2 367.8 2,187.7 2,121.9 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,445.1 10,749.4 10,857.4 5,126.5 981.5 362.4 2,183.7 2,124.3 79.1          Aug 
1,026.6 11,480.1 10,765.5 10,865.5 5,153.1 976.3 358.9 2,179.9 2,119.1 78.2          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0 2013          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.5 175.8 32.2 669.1 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of 
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.5 287.7 404.8 2,586.5 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.8 279.3 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 306.7 295.2 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 293.9 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.9 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9         Dec 220.4 307.3 138.0 96.9 11.5 39.6 16.3 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.6 2,476.7 1,812.3
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 134.9 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.8 5.4 321.5 311.3 438.6 2,505.8 1,797.1
         Feb 272.1 319.3 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.3 5.3 358.1 348.0 447.3 2,502.8 1,782.8         Mar 294.7 317.1 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 20.1 5.3 360.3 354.1 437.8 2,492.5 1,762.2
         Apr 251.4 320.8 145.0 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.4 5.1 341.5 333.8 459.7 2,461.9 1,743.2
         May 295.5 333.0 157.3 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 337.4 330.8 450.6 2,443.0 1,718.5         June 309.5 334.1 157.1 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 314.6 311.1 433.0 2,431.0 1,704.1
         July 267.3 327.8 148.2 100.3 13.4 38.8 22.3 4.9 311.4 308.2 457.0 2,403.1 1,680.3
         Aug 252.6 335.1 154.3 100.4 13.4 38.8 23.4 4.8 313.2 308.0 456.4 2,372.5 1,670.8         Sep 281.9 332.7 152.4 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 309.0 301.4 450.6 2,342.9 1,658.3
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 546.9 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9 2013          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,309.4 2,340.0 − 62.6 3,953.9 − 5,444.5 9,249.4 9,852.3 7,310.4 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,474.4 2,384.6 − 44.8 4,108.0 − 5,418.6 9,224.2 9,854.7 7,354.6 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,428.5 2,405.2 − 31.4 4,039.0 − 5,427.9 9,235.1 9,866.7 7,337.6 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,392.4 2,422.0 − 30.0 3,981.3 − 5,461.0 9,273.8 9,879.1 7,344.7 106.1          Mar 
37.8 32.6 2,474.0 3,463.5 2,433.5 − 23.1 4,060.2 − 5,498.8 9,301.1 9,903.1 7,324.3 104.5          Apr 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,477.3 2,426.9 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,556.5 9,362.8 9,970.8 7,313.8 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,375.2 2,456.9 − 50.4 4,138.9 − 5,600.8 9,386.0 9,986.6 7,300.5 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,438.4 2,469.0 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,611.4 9,402.4 10,016.6 7,300.4 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
63.1 42.9 2,370.8 3,562.7 2,466.8 − 40.3 4,557.9 − 5,956.2 9,679.2 10,312.1 7,187.8 112.3          Dec 
58.4 42.3 2,405.0 3,905.6 2,544.9 − 99.0 5,023.0 − 6,021.7 9,744.9 10,402.2 7,296.9 110.6 2015          Jan 
58.6 43.3 2,401.0 3,932.9 2,537.8 − 115.4 4,928.9 − 6,051.6 9,742.7 10,423.4 7,302.2 109.1          Feb 
51.5 44.3 2,396.7 3,964.9 2,567.1 − 65.4 5,140.2 − 6,113.6 9,809.8 10,468.4 7,316.0 109.5          Mar 
55.3 45.8 2,360.7 3,992.4 2,534.2 − 72.9 4,846.0 − 6,196.8 9,877.1 10,569.5 7,222.3 107.6          Apr 
52.5 42.1 2,348.5 3,948.8 2,542.6 − 67.5 4,644.4 − 6,292.9 9,944.1 10,603.1 7,208.6 110.0          May
56.9 44.8 2,329.4 3,782.8 2,525.7 − 60.8 4,285.4 − 6,353.6 9,978.4 10,602.5 7,159.9 112.4          June
44.2 45.1 2,313.8 3,880.3 2,524.7 − 68.8 4,411.7 − 6,397.6 10,028.3 10,683.0 7,150.3 114.8          July
34.0 46.9 2,291.6 3,873.8 2,523.5 − 67.7 4,312.1 − 6,404.6 10,031.8 10,674.8 7,121.5 116.3          Aug 
30.2 46.2 2,266.5 3,797.5 2,529.4 − 55.6 4,322.7 − 6,428.1 10,040.1 10,661.9 7,098.1 117.6          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 − 2013          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.1 5.8 524.9 755.0 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.7 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.8 8.0 517.2 736.7 554.0 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.2 1,836.5 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors
Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2013          Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase programme and the Eurosystem’s securitiesthe Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following other banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the Euro-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a system and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the accountingsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8 2013          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June
− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June
+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4 2013          Apr − 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb 
− 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May
+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
value
of the euro banknotes in circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 euro
ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the
remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference
likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation”
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency
residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2015 Feb                27 2,155.8 343.9 278.5 79.4 199.1 33.0 22.0 22.0 −
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 343.9 277.4 79.5 197.9 35.1 22.9 22.9 −
                              13 2,142.1 343.8 279.8 80.8 199.0 35.1 24.3 24.3 −
                              20 2,157.8 343.8 279.3 77.4 201.9 33.1 24.9 24.9 −
                              27 2,250.8 343.8 281.4 77.4 204.1 31.2 24.8 24.8 −
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 384.0 306.2 83.5 222.7 37.4 22.3 22.3 −
                              10 2,349.0 384.0 305.3 83.4 221.9 38.4 22.6 22.6 −
                              17 2,344.1 384.0 303.0 83.4 219.6 39.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              24 2,360.8 384.0 303.6 83.4 220.2 39.1 20.3 20.3 −
         May                  1 2,372.6 384.0 304.5 83.4 221.1 38.4 20.7 20.7 −
                                8 2,377.9 384.0 302.8 83.1 219.8 39.5 21.1 21.1 −
                              15 2,388.6 384.0 301.5 82.3 219.2 39.5 21.2 21.2 −
                              22 2,402.6 384.0 302.4 82.3 220.1 38.9 21.0 21.0 −
                              29 2,416.7 384.0 302.7 82.3 220.4 39.6 21.7 21.7 −
         June                  5 2,428.3 384.0 302.5 82.3 220.2 39.6 21.5 21.5 −
                              12 2,442.1 384.0 303.8 82.3 221.5 40.8 22.1 22.1 −
                              19 2,451.9 384.0 304.2 81.9 222.3 40.3 21.0 21.0 −
                              26 2,539.5 384.0 306.7 82.2 224.5 38.7 21.8 21.8 −
         July                  3 2,497.0 364.5 292.8 80.5 212.3 38.4 20.1 20.1 −
                              10 2,508.2 364.5 292.1 80.5 211.6 38.8 21.0 21.0 −
                              17 2,519.0 364.5 290.6 80.5 210.2 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              24 2,525.2 364.5 289.4 78.4 210.9 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              31 2,536.6 364.5 287.8 78.5 209.4 40.5 20.3 20.3 −
2015 Aug                  7 2,536.6 364.5 290.3 79.1 211.2 39.9 20.0 20.0 −
                              14 2,541.9 364.5 290.2 79.1 211.1 39.1 19.7 19.7 −
                              21 2,549.3 364.5 292.3 79.2 213.1 36.9 19.4 19.4 −
                              28 2,558.8 364.5 289.5 79.2 210.3 41.0 19.3 19.3 −
         Sep                  4 2,568.3 364.5 289.6 79.1 210.4 40.7 19.5 19.5 −
                              11 2,587.3 364.5 288.8 79.1 209.6 42.0 21.1 21.1 −
                              18 2,602.3 364.5 290.2 79.1 211.1 41.0 20.6 20.6 −
                              25 2,620.6 364.5 291.6 79.2 212.5 39.9 21.1 21.1 −
         Oct                  2 2,626.8 348.8 287.9 78.9 209.0 41.0 21.5 21.5 −
                                9 2,632.3 348.8 288.4 78.8 209.5 39.5 19.9 19.9 −
                              16 2,640.6 348.8 286.4 78.6 207.8 41.8 19.2 19.2 −
                              23 2,653.2 348.8 287.3 78.6 208.7 41.5 19.4 19.4 −
                              30 2,665.0 348.9 289.9 78.8 211.1 38.9 20.2 20.2 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
488.7 165.4 323.0 − − 0.3 0.0 124.9 611.6 234.2 377.4 26.7 226.6 2015 Feb                27
470.9 147.9 323.0 − − 0.0 0.0 121.4 613.9 237.1 376.7 26.7 222.8          Mar                  6
465.3 141.8 323.0 − − 0.5 0.0 120.6 624.0 249.4 374.6 26.7 222.4                               13465.6 142.4 323.0 − − 0.2 − 117.7 643.4 268.8 374.6 26.7 223.3                               20
538.3 120.5 417.6 − − 0.2 0.0 121.3 662.6 287.0 375.6 26.7 220.7                               27
521.2 103.6 417.6 − − 0.1 − 124.1 679.3 300.7 378.6 26.7 232.8          Apr                  2
525.9 108.3 417.6 − − 0.1 − 121.0 690.8 312.7 378.1 26.7 234.3                               10
514.1 96.6 417.6 − − 0.0 − 121.7 701.8 325.0 376.8 26.7 232.5                               17
513.3 95.7 417.6 − − 0.0 − 123.6 717.5 339.8 377.7 26.7 232.6                               24
517.3 108.5 408.7 − − 0.0 − 127.1 724.9 350.8 374.1 25.7 229.9          May                  1
504.0 95.2 408.7 − − 0.1 − 128.6 742.3 367.2 375.1 25.7 229.8                                 8
499.5 90.6 408.7 − − 0.1 − 130.3 757.9 384.0 373.9 25.7 229.1                               15
497.2 88.4 408.7 − − 0.1 − 131.5 771.7 398.0 373.8 25.7 230.1                               22
495.5 100.1 395.4 − − 0.1 − 131.6 787.0 413.5 373.4 25.7 228.9                               29
488.0 92.5 395.4 − − 0.1 − 135.1 802.8 428.9 373.9 25.7 229.1          June                  5
485.8 90.4 395.4 − − 0.1 − 133.2 816.9 442.2 374.7 25.7 229.8                               12
485.4 89.7 395.4 − − 0.4 − 136.9 824.9 451.2 373.7 25.7 229.5                               19
555.6 88.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 134.7 839.2 465.1 374.1 25.7 233.2                               26
544.1 76.4 467.1 − − 0.6 − 134.9 845.1 477.6 367.5 25.7 231.5          July                  3
541.8 74.5 467.1 − − 0.2 − 137.0 857.5 491.9 365.6 25.6 229.9                               10
542.7 75.5 467.1 − − 0.1 − 139.4 866.2 505.2 361.0 25.6 228.5                               17
542.6 75.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 139.7 875.2 514.7 360.5 25.2 227.4                               24
543.6 80.0 463.5 − − 0.1 − 138.2 888.2 528.3 360.0 25.2 228.3                               31
534.7 71.0 463.5 − − 0.2 − 137.7 899.2 540.9 358.3 25.2 225.2 2015 Aug                  7
534.0 69.7 463.5 − − 0.8 − 133.4 911.9 552.8 359.1 25.2 224.0                               14
533.2 69.6 463.5 − − 0.1 − 130.0 919.0 560.8 358.2 25.2 228.8                               21
528.5 70.1 456.2 − − 2.2 − 131.8 931.7 572.5 359.2 25.2 227.3                               28
527.4 71.0 456.2 − − 0.1 − 130.5 945.1 585.6 359.5 25.2 225.9          Sep                  4
527.2 70.9 456.2 − − 0.1 − 134.1 961.1 602.8 358.3 25.2 223.4                               11
527.0 70.7 456.2 − − 0.1 − 136.6 975.5 617.2 358.3 25.2 221.8                               18
527.3 71.1 456.2 − − 0.0 − 138.4 990.0 631.1 358.9 25.2 222.6                               25
539.5 72.6 466.3 − − 0.6 − 137.1 1 001.7 642.5 359.1 25.2 224.1          Oct                  2
536.9 70.6 466.3 − − 0.0 − 135.5 1 015.9 656.7 359.2 25.2 222.2                                 9
535.9 69.5 466.3 − − 0.1 − 136.9 1 028.1 668.9 359.1 25.2 218.3                               16
532.3 65.9 466.3 − − 0.1 − 137.0 1 043.3 683.2 360.2 25.2 218.3                               23
531.2 68.5 462.7 − − 0.0 − 138.7 1 053.8 695.7 358.1 25.2 218.3                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8 2013          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2015 Feb                27 2,155.8 1,007.0 272.0 235.0 37.1 − − − 5.3 − 97.4 52.4 45.0
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 1,009.7 254.0 206.6 47.5 − − − 5.3 − 101.5 56.2 45.3
                              13 2,142.1 1,010.8 268.0 222.7 45.2 − − − 5.2 − 101.5 55.8 45.7
                              20 2,157.8 1,010.9 275.2 229.6 45.7 − − 0.0 5.2 − 118.1 67.2 51.0
                              27 2,250.8 1,012.9 356.6 293.0 63.6 − − − 5.4 − 130.0 81.3 48.6
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 1,024.8 349.2 263.3 85.9 − − 0.0 5.6 − 126.6 68.4 58.2
                              10 2,349.0 1,021.0 364.9 276.8 88.0 − − 0.1 5.6 − 132.1 75.0 57.1
                              17 2,344.1 1,018.1 373.6 282.6 90.6 − − 0.4 5.5 − 126.0 67.3 58.7
                              24 2,360.8 1,018.4 355.6 269.4 86.2 − − 0.0 5.5 − 159.8 101.5 58.3
         May                  1 2,372.6 1,026.6 407.8 300.2 107.6 − − 0.0 5.4 − 112.7 50.3 62.4
                                8 2,377.9 1,027.3 407.5 299.0 108.5 − − − 5.5 − 116.4 54.4 62.0
                              15 2,388.6 1,028.9 407.3 306.3 101.1 − − − 5.5 − 132.5 70.0 62.5
                              22 2,402.6 1,027.6 396.6 303.6 93.0 − − 0.0 5.5 − 157.0 92.1 65.0
                              29 2,416.7 1,032.0 415.1 316.2 98.9 − − 0.0 5.2 − 147.4 82.8 64.6
         June                  5 2,428.3 1,035.0 424.8 322.8 102.1 − − 0.0 5.3 − 146.1 82.9 63.3
                              12 2,442.1 1,034.1 450.9 354.1 96.7 − − 0.1 5.6 − 135.4 72.9 62.5
                              19 2,451.9 1,036.1 421.3 339.8 81.4 − − 0.1 5.5 − 175.4 110.5 64.9
                              26 2,539.5 1,039.0 475.7 389.3 86.3 − − 0.1 5.2 − 204.0 137.6 66.4
         July                  3 2,497.0 1,047.4 504.8 392.2 112.5 − − 0.1 5.0 − 164.1 98.4 65.8
                              10 2,508.2 1,050.6 507.3 383.4 123.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 165.0 96.9 68.1
                              17 2,519.0 1,052.5 533.2 414.4 118.6 − − 0.2 5.2 − 145.0 74.4 70.6
                              24 2,525.2 1,052.4 503.8 386.5 117.1 − − 0.1 5.3 − 181.4 120.3 61.1
                              31 2,536.6 1,057.0 549.5 412.4 137.0 − − 0.1 5.2 − 141.7 75.9 65.8
2015 Aug                  7 2,536.6 1,059.4 581.8 443.9 137.7 − − 0.1 5.2 − 105.7 39.1 66.6
                              14 2,541.9 1,058.8 578.3 424.0 154.2 − − 0.1 5.5 − 121.9 52.8 69.1
                              21 2,549.3 1,054.5 597.9 428.6 169.1 − − 0.1 5.2 − 116.9 50.1 66.8
                              28 2,558.8 1,053.2 593.0 438.5 154.4 − − 0.1 4.8 − 132.2 67.0 65.3
         Sep                  4 2,568.3 1,055.1 616.8 449.7 167.0 − − 0.1 4.6 − 116.3 49.7 66.6
                              11 2,587.3 1,053.9 626.5 466.5 159.9 − − 0.1 4.8 − 125.2 58.1 67.1
                              18 2,602.3 1,051.9 609.0 469.4 139.5 − − 0.1 4.8 − 155.4 80.3 75.0
                              25 2,620.6 1,051.6 580.6 457.5 123.0 − − 0.1 4.9 − 194.0 115.4 78.6
         Oct                  2 2,626.8 1,054.2 621.8 473.3 148.3 − − 0.2 5.0 − 167.6 88.7 78.9
                                9 2,632.3 1,054.6 644.3 472.3 171.8 − − 0.2 4.9 − 163.2 83.6 79.6
                              16 2,640.6 1,052.8 622.1 462.9 159.1 − − 0.2 4.9 − 195.6 114.4 81.2
                              23 2,653.2 1,050.6 613.8 444.2 169.4 − − 0.2 5.0 − 216.4 131.6 84.8
                              30 2,665.0 1,053.9 632.7 474.5 157.8 − − 0.4 5.0 − 199.2 112.0 87.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
62.5 2.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.4 220.1 − 330.9 95.5 2015 Feb                27
57.5 2.1 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 215.6 − 330.9 95.5          Mar                  6
54.9 1.8 7.2 7.2 − 56.4 210.0 − 330.9 95.5                               13
47.9 2.1 7.0 7.0 − 56.4 208.6 − 330.9 95.5                               20
45.0 1.9 7.1 7.1 − 56.4 208.7 − 330.9 95.9                               27
38.8 1.8 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 219.8 − 403.3 96.0          Apr                  2
39.6 1.9 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 216.1 − 403.3 96.0                               10
37.4 1.9 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 214.1 − 403.3 96.0                               17
36.5 1.8 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 215.5 − 403.3 96.1                               24
34.7 2.3 7.1 7.1 − 60.7 216.0 − 403.3 96.1          May                  1
33.8 2.2 8.1 8.1 − 60.7 217.0 − 403.3 96.1                                 8
28.1 2.1 7.1 7.1 − 60.7 217.0 − 403.3 96.1                               15
28.3 2.4 7.0 7.0 − 60.7 218.1 − 403.3 96.0                               22
28.7 2.3 7.8 7.8 − 60.7 218.1 − 403.3 96.0                               29
30.6 2.1 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 215.9 − 403.3 96.8          June                  5
28.8 2.5 7.3 7.3 − 60.7 216.7 − 403.3 96.8                               12
28.8 2.3 6.6 6.6 − 60.7 213.6 − 403.3 98.5                               19
29.6 2.3 6.4 6.4 − 60.7 215.0 − 403.3 98.4                               26
32.0 2.0 5.7 5.7 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4          July                  3
36.8 2.3 5.2 5.2 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4                               10
40.2 2.3 4.9 4.9 − 59.5 210.5 − 367.4 98.4                               17
38.0 2.5 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 211.2 − 367.4 98.4                               24
38.2 3.0 3.9 3.9 − 59.5 212.7 − 367.4 98.4                               31
41.4 2.7 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 209.9 − 367.4 98.4 2015 Aug                  7
40.8 2.4 5.2 5.2 − 59.5 203.8 − 367.4 98.4                               14
35.0 2.4 4.5 4.5 − 59.5 207.6 − 367.4 98.4                               21
33.9 2.4 4.6 4.6 − 59.5 210.6 − 367.4 97.2                               28
34.7 2.3 4.1 4.1 − 59.5 210.3 − 367.4 97.2          Sep                  4
33.6 2.2 4.8 4.8 − 59.5 212.2 − 367.4 97.2                               11
35.9 2.3 5.1 5.1 − 59.5 213.7 − 367.4 97.2                               18
40.3 2.1 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 217.8 − 367.4 97.2                               25
47.3 2.0 4.3 4.3 − 59.2 217.4 − 350.7 97.2          Oct                  2
39.6 2.0 4.0 4.0 − 59.2 212.5 − 350.7 97.2                                 9
39.8 2.0 4.2 4.2 − 59.2 212.0 − 350.7 97.2                               16
38.3 2.1 4.9 4.9 − 59.2 215.0 − 350.7 97.2                               23
43.0 2.2 5.0 5.0 − 59.2 216.9 − 350.7 97.2                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0 2013          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2013          Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4         Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.6 15.4 2,107.0 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 524.6 363.3 161.3 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.6 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.5 15.4 2,096.3 1,578.2 1,195.7 382.4 518.2 362.5 155.7 3,698.4 3,275.9 2,681.1 2,397.4         Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.7 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.3 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,694.2 2,407.4         June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,692.1 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.4 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,717.2 2,421.1         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,041.5 1,547.1 1,200.0 347.1 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.4 3,301.5 2,717.4 2,426.3
 Changes 3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.3 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.1 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 27.7 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.2 10.2 9.6 9.6 7.1         Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 54.1 3.6 − 53.3 − 33.9 − 28.0 − 6.0 − 19.4 − 18.4 − 1.0 − 15.5 − 12.7 2.9 − 0.82015          Jan 278.4 − 3.8 75.6 46.7 46.9 − 0.2 28.9 26.3 2.6 28.5 21.9 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 11.8 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 10.6 12.1 5.8 8.3
         Mar 86.5 0.1 23.5 28.4 27.5 0.9 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 6.1 4.4 6.9 1.0
         Apr − 63.9 0.6 − 14.1 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 11.3 11.9 3.2 − 0.2
         May − 92.5 0.3 − 9.5 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.3 2.7 9.0         June − 191.7 − 1.1 − 55.0 − 20.9 − 11.2 − 9.8 − 34.0 − 31.0 − 3.0 − 7.8 − 5.9 − 0.8 6.7
         July 59.1 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 26.1 27.9 23.3 1.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 12.9 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 8.4 0.3 − 17.6 − 26.8 − 20.9 − 6.0 9.3 8.7 0.6 3.8 1.0 1.6 5.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.6 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013          Dec 268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6          Sep 
270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 276.6 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8          Dec 
285.4 588.6 336.7 251.9 423.2 273.3 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,136.5 885.6 1,180.2 2015          Jan 
283.7 594.9 339.8 255.1 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,128.8 880.6 1,122.6          Feb 290.7 592.7 339.0 253.7 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.2 872.6 1,196.3          Mar 
293.5 601.1 347.6 253.5 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.8 585.1 336.3 248.8 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May279.1 579.7 332.5 247.2 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
300.9 583.2 333.2 250.0 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
296.1 584.4 330.3 254.1 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 291.1 584.1 330.1 254.0 426.9 279.4 146.0 147.5 30.0 117.5 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
Changes 3
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 4.0 − 0.2 4.2 − 12.8 − 17.7 − 17.4          Sep 
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 3.7 − 15.6 − 7.2 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 − 30.9 − 33.1 42.1          Dec 
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 1.0 2.5 5.5 0.6 4.9 53.7 49.4 124.4 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.2 − 7.8 − 57.6          Feb 
5.8 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 1.5 1.6 2.8 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 17.0 − 24.3 73.7          Mar 3.4 8.7 8.7 0.0 − 0.6 0.0 2.8 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.1 32.6 34.1 − 94.4          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.7 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 25.1 − 28.1 − 102.8          June
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 1.8 0.8 1.1 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 6.6 − 3.5 32.0          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.5 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug − 4.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 2.8 1.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 0.2 1.2 − 2.2 − 1.6 7.2          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2013          Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.6 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,114.1 1,530.7 976.8 292.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.5 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.3 3,220.8 3,126.5 1,543.4 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
 Changes 4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 27.7 − 13.1 − 8.4 − 4.7 0.4 − 1.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 4.5 0.6 0.1 0.9 3.2         Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 54.1 − 25.6 − 5.4 − 20.2 − 1.3 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 7.3 2.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.42015          Jan 278.4 54.4 23.1 31.3 13.8 5.2 14.5 − 8.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.1 2.2 2.5
         Feb − 70.0 − 14.9 − 4.3 − 10.7 5.9 12.1 12.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7
         Mar 86.5 10.9 − 1.2 12.0 − 4.6 − 8.0 − 1.9 − 4.0 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.2 1.8
         Apr − 63.9 − 11.7 − 15.3 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.5 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.8 18.8 25.9 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.7         June − 191.7 − 39.1 − 12.4 − 26.7 − 5.2 − 7.8 2.9 − 9.0 − 5.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.9 1.2
         July 59.1 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3
         Sep − 8.4 0.7 3.5 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 7.8 − 0.5 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 200653.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013          Dec 40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6          Sep 
40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 18.0 12.7 6.8 3.5 1,103.7 44.2 614.3 543.2 1,256.2 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,104.3 44.7 610.1 557.4 1,188.7          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.4 1,263.6          Mar 
41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.4 43.5 606.7 577.2 1,018.1          Sep 
Changes 4
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.2 2014
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan 
− 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.7 0.0 − 4.4 0.8 5.7 − 2.6 − 10.9          Sep 
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 13.5 − 1.9 − 31.8 − 6.2 30.6          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.4 1.2 3.4 0.0 8.1 4.0 63.5 3.9 131.3 2015          Jan − 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 7.0 − 3.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 5.7 13.6 − 68.4          Feb − 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 6.5 1.2 6.4 5.4 75.3          Mar 
0.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.8 0.6 − 98.3          Apr 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.7 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 36.0 − 1.8 − 100.8          June
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 19.0 − 0.7 26.6          July− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.3 9.7 − 23.8          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.7 7.1 − 28.1 4.1 19.6          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
 
 Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2015          Apr 1,804 8,134.2 127.3 2,673.5 2,075.9 584.1 4,001.3 406.5 2,794.0 0.6 792.6 128.7 1,203.4
         May 1,803 8,053.5 130.5 2,656.1 2,063.1 580.3 3,995.2 397.2 2,804.8 0.6 784.6 129.9 1,141.9         June 1,798 7,848.3 148.3 2,566.7 1,985.1 570.1 3,966.1 380.6 2,799.5 0.5 775.6 129.2 1,038.0
         July 1,791 7,916.2 150.6 2,579.3 2,003.8 566.1 3,988.7 373.3 2,808.2 0.5 799.2 127.9 1,069.7
         Aug 1,789 7,888.4 168.3 2,558.9 1,991.4 559.3 3,992.4 373.9 2,812.7 0.6 797.4 127.6 1,041.3         Sep 1,783 7,877.1 172.0 2,537.4 1,974.4 556.3 3,991.6 376.1 2,814.6 0.6 792.7 127.5 1,048.5
Commercial banks 6
2015          Aug 272 3,097.5 92.3 1,044.9 955.5 88.0 1,138.1 189.6 689.7 0.3 253.7 64.4 757.9
         Sep 271 3,089.7 88.8 1,038.9 951.6 86.6 1,131.7 191.8 690.8 0.3 244.3 64.3 766.0
   Big banks 7
2015          Aug 4 1,903.6 31.9 616.5 574.3 42.1 477.3 97.6 253.3 0.1 122.5 57.2 720.7
         Sep 4 1,904.8 14.9 630.9 589.8 41.0 472.0 99.8 253.6 0.1 115.0 57.2 729.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2015          Aug 160 895.2 34.3 232.0 187.4 44.0 592.3 70.9 401.2 0.2 119.5 5.6 31.0
         Sep 160 894.9 40.3 229.1 184.7 43.7 589.9 69.9 402.0 0.2 117.2 5.5 30.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2015          Aug 108 298.7 26.1 196.4 193.7 1.9 68.5 21.1 35.2 0.0 11.7 1.6 6.2
         Sep 107 290.0 33.6 178.9 177.0 1.9 69.9 22.1 35.2 0.0 12.1 1.6 6.0
Landesbanken
2015          Aug 9 1,014.8 13.2 323.4 228.6 93.4 541.5 60.8 374.6 0.1 105.0 11.2 125.5
         Sep 9 1,015.9 13.6 327.7 231.7 94.4 539.5 59.6 372.9 0.1 105.6 11.2 124.0
Savings banks
2015          Aug 414 1,132.1 18.0 202.5 76.1 125.9 881.6 50.6 684.7 0.1 146.0 14.4 15.7
         Sep 414 1,131.7 17.8 197.7 72.0 125.2 886.1 51.6 686.2 0.0 148.0 14.4 15.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2015          Aug 2 279.0 4.2 154.0 122.4 31.6 65.9 11.9 23.1 0.0 30.7 14.2 40.8         Sep 2 282.7 4.5 154.2 122.1 32.0 66.5 12.1 23.2 0.0 31.1 14.2 43.4
Credit cooperatives
2015          Aug 1,036 800.5 11.3 166.7 56.7 109.8 589.0 32.0 464.2 0.1 92.6 14.7 18.9
         Sep 1,031 802.4 12.5 163.3 54.0 109.1 593.0 33.0 465.6 0.1 94.3 14.7 19.0
Mortgage banks
2015          Aug 16 367.2 1.0 80.2 54.0 25.9 270.6 5.1 202.4 − 63.2 0.4 15.0
         Sep 16 362.0 0.6 76.2 50.8 25.4 269.5 5.7 201.4 − 62.4 0.4 15.3
Building and loan associations
2015          Aug 21 213.3 0.0 61.8 44.2 17.6 146.3 1.5 123.5 . 21.3 0.3 4.9
         Sep 21 214.4 0.2 61.8 44.2 17.6 147.2 1.4 124.3 . 21.5 0.3 4.9
Special purpose banks
2015          Aug 19 984.0 28.2 525.5 453.8 67.1 359.5 22.3 250.6 − 85.0 8.2 62.6
         Sep 19 978.3 34.1 517.6 447.9 66.0 358.1 20.9 250.3 − 85.5 8.2 60.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2015          Aug 143 962.1 53.2 377.4 337.5 38.9 432.8 71.5 244.7 0.2 113.6 4.9 93.6
         Sep 142 951.5 61.7 357.8 319.8 37.7 433.5 71.6 245.5 0.2 113.3 4.9 93.5
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2015          Aug 35 663.3 27.1 181.1 143.8 37.0 364.3 50.4 209.5 0.2 101.9 3.4 87.5
         Sep 35 661.5 28.1 178.9 142.8 35.9 363.6 49.5 210.3 0.2 101.2 3.4 87.5
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,847.4 511.5 1,335.8 3,406.1 1,719.3 306.5 697.8 76.9 610.7 536.3 71.8 1,191.1 470.8 1,218.8 2015          Apr 
1,817.0 522.0 1,295.0 3,424.2 1,740.0 310.5 693.5 76.9 609.2 536.5 70.9 1,180.9 473.6 1,157.7          May1,761.5 492.8 1,268.6 3,392.3 1,727.8 296.7 690.1 55.3 607.5 536.1 70.1 1,162.2 478.1 1,054.1          June
1,770.2 495.3 1,274.8 3,423.7 1,744.9 296.2 708.4 58.8 605.6 535.7 68.7 1,164.1 478.3 1,079.8          July
1,754.0 483.5 1,270.4 3,447.4 1,766.0 299.8 709.5 69.3 604.3 536.0 67.9 1,155.0 478.8 1,053.2          Aug 1,748.0 499.6 1,248.4 3,421.4 1,759.0 284.5 707.3 54.1 603.6 536.8 67.0 1,158.2 478.9 1,070.6          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
767.3 305.3 461.9 1,304.2 777.8 174.0 220.7 50.1 109.2 98.0 22.5 148.3 163.0 714.8 2015          Aug 772.3 315.7 456.6 1,278.3 765.4 161.7 220.5 36.1 108.3 97.7 22.4 148.8 162.9 727.3          Sep 
Big banks 7
482.1 183.6 298.5 558.2 313.1 102.8 68.6 49.7 67.9 66.0 5.8 107.2 97.1 659.0 2015          Aug 486.7 196.5 290.1 540.5 306.1 92.6 68.5 36.0 67.5 65.7 5.8 108.0 97.1 672.5          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
145.8 50.5 95.2 604.0 373.7 51.4 122.4 0.4 40.9 31.7 15.6 40.3 57.0 48.2 2015          Aug 154.8 50.6 104.1 595.8 367.8 49.9 122.2 0.1 40.4 31.8 15.4 39.9 57.0 47.4          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
139.4 71.3 68.2 142.0 91.0 19.8 29.7 − 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.8 8.9 7.6 2015          Aug 130.8 68.5 62.3 142.1 91.5 19.2 29.8 − 0.4 0.3 1.2 0.9 8.9 7.4          Sep 
Landesbanken
286.4 49.2 237.1 300.8 127.4 53.3 106.2 16.5 13.8 10.5 0.0 239.7 56.3 131.6 2015          Aug 281.8 61.3 220.5 304.1 134.9 50.3 105.0 14.9 13.8 10.5 0.0 243.2 56.3 130.6          Sep 
Savings banks
139.1 13.7 125.4 840.3 475.6 21.1 15.1 − 295.5 259.0 33.1 15.0 95.3 42.5 2015          Aug 
140.4 13.9 126.5 837.7 474.0 20.8 15.0 − 295.2 259.2 32.7 15.0 95.3 43.2          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
141.0 42.3 98.6 30.4 13.0 6.0 9.6 1.7 − − 1.7 51.1 15.7 40.9 2015          Aug 
142.6 40.3 102.2 29.7 12.9 5.8 9.4 1.6 − − 1.5 51.2 15.7 43.6          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
101.3 5.3 96.0 596.2 351.7 31.3 18.5 − 185.3 168.0 9.5 7.4 64.2 31.3 2015          Aug 102.4 4.3 98.1 596.1 350.9 31.7 18.3 − 185.8 168.9 9.4 7.3 64.3 32.3          Sep 
Mortgage banks
82.0 7.0 75.0 139.9 8.5 8.5 122.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 111.5 14.8 19.0 2015          Aug 80.8 7.4 73.4 139.5 8.6 8.6 122.2 − 0.1 0.1 . 107.4 14.8 19.4          Sep 
Building and loan associations
24.3 3.2 21.1 162.2 1.0 0.6 159.4 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.7 9.6 14.4 2015          Aug 24.5 3.2 21.3 162.7 0.9 0.6 159.9 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.8 9.6 14.7          Sep 
Special purpose banks
212.7 57.4 155.4 73.3 11.0 5.1 57.3 1.0 − − . 579.3 59.9 58.8 2015          Aug 203.3 53.5 149.8 73.3 11.5 4.8 57.0 1.5 − − . 582.3 59.9 59.4          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
284.6 129.8 154.8 504.9 339.6 56.5 77.8 8.6 21.5 21.1 9.5 24.2 51.0 97.3 2015          Aug 281.2 132.2 149.0 497.2 335.8 53.2 77.5 7.0 21.3 21.0 9.3 24.5 50.9 97.6          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
145.2 58.6 86.6 362.9 248.6 36.6 48.2 8.6 21.1 20.8 8.4 23.4 42.1 89.8 2015          Aug 150.5 63.7 86.7 355.1 244.3 34.0 47.7 7.0 20.9 20.7 8.2 23.6 42.1 90.2          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)
Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2014          Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9
         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.3 2,697.0 0.3 1.8 448.1
         July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8
         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
         Oct 15.2 61.8 1,493.6 1,126.5 0.0 2.3 364.8 1.6 3,169.0 2,711.8 0.3 1.2 455.7
         Nov 15.4 52.8 1,486.8 1,121.2 0.0 2.3 363.3 1.6 3,178.9 2,719.7 0.3 0.9 458.1
         Dec 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015          Jan 15.2 69.3 1,490.7 1,128.5 0.0 2.7 359.4 1.7 3,191.5 2,725.6 0.4 1.1 464.5
         Feb 15.2 69.7 1,486.0 1,125.7 0.0 3.1 357.2 1.6 3,205.1 2,736.8 0.4 1.3 466.6
         Mar 15.2 97.5 1,488.9 1,127.0 0.0 3.2 358.6 1.6 3,212.0 2,738.7 0.3 1.5 471.5
         Apr 15.9 91.7 1,473.6 1,117.3 0.0 3.4 352.8 1.6 3,221.1 2,745.0 0.4 1.5 474.2
         May 16.1 95.0 1,466.4 1,114.3 0.0 3.5 348.6 1.6 3,207.9 2,743.3 0.3 1.7 462.5
         June 15.1 115.4 1,424.2 1,082.1 0.0 3.3 338.8 1.6 3,200.4 2,745.2 0.3 2.4 452.5
         July 15.4 116.6 1,430.3 1,092.4 0.0 2.7 335.2 1.6 3,228.7 2,748.4 0.3 2.4 477.6
         Aug 15.2 133.6 1,418.0 1,086.8 0.0 2.1 329.1 1.6 3,230.9 2,751.1 0.3 1.9 477.5
         Sep 15.6 139.8 1,384.6 1,059.7 0.0 2.3 322.7 1.6 3,230.8 2,756.0 0.3 1.7 472.8
Changes *
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009
− 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011
− 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2014          Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
         July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
         Oct + 0.1 − 19.0 + 5.1 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Nov + 0.2 − 9.0 − 6.9 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.4
         Dec + 3.6 + 28.5 − 60.8 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 11.7 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
2015          Jan − 3.8 − 12.0 + 63.8 + 62.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 26.4 + 15.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 10.5
         Feb − 0.0 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 11.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.1         Mar + 0.1 + 27.8 + 3.0 + 1.4 − + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.9
         Apr + 0.6 − 5.7 − 15.3 − 9.7 − + 0.2 − 5.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8
         May + 0.3 + 3.3 − 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 13.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 11.7         June − 1.1 + 20.4 − 42.1 − 32.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.1
         July + 0.3 + 1.2 + 6.1 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 29.2 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.1
         Aug − 0.1 + 17.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         Sep + 0.3 + 6.3 − 33.3 − 27.1 − + 0.2 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4 2014          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,144.5 166.2 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.2 155.7 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
− 26.5 95.2 1,122.7 149.1 973.6 0.0 11.5 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 606.1 68.6 31.1          Oct 
− 26.5 95.1 1,116.1 155.8 960.2 0.0 11.5 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 605.3 66.5 31.1          Nov − 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9          Dec 
− 26.1 93.1 1,137.9 174.9 963.1 0.0 11.3 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 606.6 64.7 30.8 2015          Jan 
− 26.2 92.3 1,133.5 169.2 964.3 0.0 11.3 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 606.1 63.8 30.8          Feb − 25.9 92.3 1,134.4 178.0 956.4 0.0 11.2 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 603.9 63.0 30.7          Mar 
− 25.8 92.5 1,117.5 163.4 954.0 0.0 11.2 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 601.5 61.9 30.2          Apr 
− 25.7 92.8 1,103.0 164.4 938.6 0.0 11.1 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 600.0 61.0 30.2          May− 25.3 92.5 1,090.2 161.7 928.4 0.0 11.1 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 598.3 60.4 29.6          June
− 25.0 92.4 1,079.6 152.5 927.1 0.0 10.8 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 596.4 59.5 29.5          July
− 25.0 92.1 1,072.5 149.0 923.4 0.0 10.8 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 595.2 58.8 29.5          Aug − 24.9 92.0 1,076.0 153.1 922.9 0.0 10.8 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 594.6 58.1 29.5          Sep 
Changes *
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1 2014          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 19.2 + 13.8 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5          June
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.6 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 6.7 + 12.1 − − 0.3 + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 6.8 − 13.4 − − 0.0 + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.0 − 28.0 + 23.0 − + 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.4 − 1.2 + 26.1 + 47.1 − 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 2015          Jan 
− + 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.4 − 5.6 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 8.8 − 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 17.0 − 14.6 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.3 − 14.4 + 1.0 − 15.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5          June
− − 0.3 − 0.2 − 10.5 − 9.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)
Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2014          Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
         July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
         Oct 0.2 1,119.6 878.5 628.7 249.8 8.6 232.5 1.1 738.3 429.8 110.3 319.5 7.7 300.8
         Nov 0.2 1,151.0 907.8 658.2 249.7 8.7 234.5 1.1 749.8 433.9 113.5 320.4 8.3 307.6         Dec 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015          Jan 0.2 1,213.2 966.6 684.2 282.4 10.9 235.7 1.1 770.7 445.3 117.5 327.8 7.0 318.4
         Feb 0.2 1,198.1 956.6 687.3 269.3 9.3 232.2 1.1 766.7 444.5 115.7 328.9 6.6 315.5         Mar 0.3 1,186.6 944.4 654.9 289.5 10.9 231.4 1.1 777.0 447.4 113.2 334.2 7.2 322.4
         Apr 0.2 1,199.9 958.7 675.5 283.1 10.0 231.3 1.1 780.2 455.7 124.6 331.1 6.1 318.4
         May 0.3 1,189.7 948.9 665.0 284.0 9.1 231.7 1.1 787.3 459.0 127.1 331.8 6.3 322.0         June 0.3 1,142.5 903.1 617.1 286.0 8.1 231.3 1.1 765.7 435.1 104.4 330.7 7.5 323.1
         July 0.3 1,149.0 911.5 625.0 286.5 6.6 230.9 1.1 760.0 433.4 103.3 330.1 5.0 321.6
         Aug 0.3 1,140.9 904.7 619.3 285.3 6.1 230.2 1.1 761.5 435.8 106.9 328.8 5.8 319.9         Sep 0.3 1,152.8 914.7 627.4 287.4 4.4 233.7 1.1 760.8 434.9 106.6 328.4 6.0 319.9
Changes *
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2014          Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
         July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 23.9 + 24.7 + 23.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.9 − 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.2
         Nov + 0.0 + 32.4 + 29.3 + 30.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 6.0
         Dec − 0.0 − 33.1 − 30.7 − 44.4 + 13.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 20.8 − 23.1 − 20.2 − 2.9 − 1.9 + 4.1
2015          Jan + 0.0 + 62.4 + 57.8 + 50.3 + 7.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 20.6 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 17.1 − 12.0 + 2.2 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 3.6 − − 5.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.2
         Mar + 0.0 − 24.0 − 24.5 − 39.9 + 15.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.1
         Apr − 0.0 + 25.3 + 26.1 + 27.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 14.3 + 12.7 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.9
         May + 0.0 − 17.8 − 17.3 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.9         June + 0.0 − 41.3 − 40.1 − 44.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 20.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.7
         July + 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − − 8.4 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 2.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.7
         Sep + 0.0 + 14.0 + 12.2 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0 2014          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
14.6 37.8 597.5 289.0 308.5 220.4 88.2 0.1 260.0 137.5 122.5 62.6 59.9 1.3          Oct 
14.7 37.6 627.5 301.3 326.3 238.4 87.8 0.1 258.6 132.1 126.5 65.7 60.8 1.3          Nov 14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7          Dec 
14.0 35.8 691.4 338.7 352.6 260.2 92.5 0.1 260.9 141.4 119.5 59.2 60.3 0.7 2015          Jan 
14.0 35.7 672.5 310.8 361.7 269.4 92.3 0.1 263.7 143.1 120.7 61.8 58.9 0.8          Feb 14.1 36.1 712.5 369.6 342.9 256.1 86.9 0.1 253.6 131.2 122.4 64.7 57.7 0.9          Mar 
13.8 36.0 729.9 348.1 381.8 297.3 84.5 0.1 265.1 146.9 118.2 62.3 55.9 0.9          Apr 
13.8 36.8 714.0 357.6 356.4 270.8 85.7 0.1 265.4 142.7 122.7 70.8 51.9 0.9          May13.6 36.4 671.4 331.2 340.2 256.3 83.9 0.1 240.5 127.7 112.8 61.6 51.2 0.9          June
13.6 35.3 690.6 342.8 347.7 266.7 81.0 0.1 244.4 131.9 112.5 62.0 50.5 0.9          July
13.7 35.2 681.5 334.5 347.0 264.5 82.5 0.1 253.6 135.3 118.3 65.9 52.4 0.9          Aug 13.7 35.2 672.0 346.4 325.5 244.3 81.2 0.1 234.5 128.3 106.3 53.2 53.1 0.9          Sep 
Changes *
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2014          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 − 0.7 − − 0.3 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 30.0 + 12.2 + 17.8 + 18.1 − 0.3 − − 1.4 − 5.4 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 2.1 − 22.0 − 25.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 39.3 − 19.8 − 19.5 − 18.4 − 1.1 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 68.7 + 56.0 + 12.8 + 11.5 + 1.3 − + 35.9 + 26.3 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 2015          Jan 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 20.1 − 28.2 + 8.1 + 8.6 − 0.5 − + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 + 32.7 + 56.4 − 23.8 − 17.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 12.6 − 13.0 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 2.0 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.0 + 25.2 − 17.7 + 42.9 + 44.3 − 1.3 − + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 20.1 + 8.0 − 28.1 − 28.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 4.8 + 3.9 + 8.2 − 4.3 − 0.0          May− 0.2 − 0.3 − 39.2 − 25.0 − 14.1 − 12.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 23.9 − 14.5 − 9.3 − 8.9 − 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 − 1.2 + 17.6 + 10.6 + 7.0 + 9.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 4.3 + 2.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.5 + 12.0 − 21.5 − 20.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 18.9 − 7.0 − 11.9 − 12.6 + 0.7 + 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2014          Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5         June 3,147.3 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
         July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.3 220.9 220.3 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.7
         Oct 3,169.0 2,712.1 265.6 212.6 211.8 0.8 53.0 52.5 0.5 2,903.4 2,364.9
         Nov 3,178.9 2,720.0 265.7 214.6 214.1 0.4 51.1 50.7 0.4 2,913.3 2,375.5         Dec 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015          Jan 3,191.5 2,726.0 267.9 214.7 214.0 0.7 53.1 52.8 0.4 2,923.7 2,388.4
         Feb 3,205.1 2,737.1 275.8 218.9 217.8 1.0 57.0 56.7 0.2 2,929.2 2,391.5         Mar 3,212.0 2,739.0 278.1 220.4 219.4 1.0 57.7 57.1 0.6 2,933.9 2,399.1
         Apr 3,221.1 2,745.4 284.0 216.6 215.7 1.0 67.3 66.8 0.5 2,937.1 2,403.4
         May 3,207.9 2,743.6 272.4 215.8 214.7 1.1 56.6 55.9 0.7 2,935.5 2,407.1         June 3,200.4 2,745.5 279.2 223.8 222.5 1.3 55.4 54.3 1.1 2,921.2 2,397.0
         July 3,228.7 2,748.7 273.0 215.4 214.0 1.3 57.6 56.5 1.1 2,955.7 2,430.2
         Aug 3,230.9 2,751.4 269.4 214.0 212.9 1.1 55.5 54.6 0.9 2,961.4 2,432.5         Sep 3,230.8 2,756.3 271.8 218.5 217.6 0.9 53.3 52.5 0.8 2,959.0 2,428.3
Changes *
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2014          Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.0 − 4.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.1
         July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
         Oct + 4.1 + 4.7 − 4.7 − 8.3 − 8.5 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 4.1
         Nov + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 9.8 + 10.7
         Dec − 11.7 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 6.8 − 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.6 + 5.1
2015          Jan + 26.4 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.9
         Feb + 13.5 + 11.2 + 8.0 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 3.1
         Mar + 7.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 7.6
         Apr + 9.1 + 6.4 + 5.9 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.3
         May − 13.1 − 1.6 − 11.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 3.8
         June − 7.5 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 14.3 − 10.1
         July + 29.2 + 4.1 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 8.1 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 35.1 + 32.6
         Aug + 2.3 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 2.6         Sep − 0.1 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 4.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2 2014          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May
2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 534.0 277.8 32.3 245.5 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
2,167.0 251.8 1,915.3 197.8 24.4 538.6 280.7 34.5 246.3 257.9 − 2.1          Oct 
2,175.1 252.6 1,922.5 200.5 24.3 537.7 280.1 33.8 246.3 257.6 − 2.1          Nov 2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1          Dec 
2,175.2 252.5 1,922.7 213.2 24.0 535.3 284.0 32.7 251.3 251.3 − 2.1 2015          Jan 
2,179.6 251.4 1,928.1 212.0 24.1 537.7 283.1 32.7 250.4 254.6 − 2.1          Feb 2,180.6 251.7 1,928.9 218.6 23.8 534.8 281.9 32.3 249.5 252.9 − 2.1          Mar 
2,182.1 250.5 1,931.7 221.3 23.7 533.7 280.8 29.5 251.3 252.9 − 2.1          Apr 
2,192.6 253.2 1,939.4 214.5 23.6 528.4 280.4 29.5 250.9 248.0 − 2.1          May2,190.5 251.5 1,939.0 206.5 23.3 524.2 278.3 28.7 249.5 246.0 − 2.0          June
2,201.5 250.8 1,950.6 228.7 23.0 525.5 276.6 28.5 248.2 248.9 − 2.0          July
2,208.2 251.0 1,957.2 224.4 22.9 528.9 275.7 28.2 247.6 253.1 − 2.0          Aug 2,208.7 251.1 1,957.5 219.7 22.9 530.6 277.5 29.3 248.2 253.1 − 2.0          Sep 
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0 2014          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May
− 4.0 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.1 + 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 7.8 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2015          Jan 
+ 4.4 − 1.1 + 5.4 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.4 − −          Feb 
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.6 − 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 10.6 + 2.8 + 7.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.9 − − 0.0          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.0 − − 0.1          June
+ 10.4 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 22.2 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 6.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2013 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Sep 2,380.6 1,187.9 1,177.1 945.6 231.5 1,293.2 322.9 127.1 98.7 60.3 125.9 47.8 69.4 110.2
         Dec 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Mar 2,400.0 1,229.7 1,192.0 987.3 204.7 1,305.7 329.9 127.4 99.6 60.9 125.0 48.2 70.0 129.2
         June 2,413.0 1,234.8 1,205.1 992.0 213.1 1,309.4 334.8 128.1 99.4 61.4 123.2 49.1 67.1 130.2         Sep 2,426.3 1,244.5 1,218.5 1,001.2 217.3 1,309.0 336.5 127.5 100.6 61.7 125.3 50.0 65.6 128.8
 Short-term lending
2013 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Sep 220.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 184.2 4.3 34.5 5.6 12.7 42.9 4.0 6.3 25.6
         Dec 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Mar 219.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 184.4 3.9 34.7 6.0 13.0 42.3 3.9 6.3 25.6
         June 222.5 − 8.3 − 8.3 188.3 4.2 35.5 5.5 12.9 41.4 4.3 6.0 27.7
         Sep 217.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 183.3 4.3 34.6 5.3 12.8 43.5 4.4 5.2 26.6
 Medium-term lending
2013 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Sep 250.3 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 12.7 24.5 5.6 9.7 16.9 4.2 11.7 35.9
         Dec 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Mar 251.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 179.1 13.2 24.6 5.3 10.0 16.4 4.2 11.7 39.4
         June 251.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 177.9 13.6 24.3 5.2 10.2 16.1 4.3 11.5 39.3
         Sep 251.2 − 35.5 − 35.5 176.8 13.4 24.0 5.1 10.3 15.8 4.4 11.3 39.3
 Long-term lending
2013 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Sep 1,910.0 1,187.9 1,133.4 945.6 187.8 932.4 305.8 68.2 87.5 38.0 66.0 39.6 51.4 48.8         Dec 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Mar 1,928.9 1,229.7 1,149.0 987.3 161.7 942.2 312.9 68.1 88.4 38.0 66.3 40.1 52.1 64.2
         June 1,939.0 1,234.8 1,161.1 992.0 169.1 943.3 317.0 68.3 88.8 38.3 65.7 40.5 49.7 63.2         Sep 1,957.4 1,244.5 1,174.5 1,001.2 173.3 948.9 318.8 68.8 90.2 38.5 66.0 41.2 49.0 63.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2014          Q3 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 4.6 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 3.7         Q4 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 8.3 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 17.9 + 4.0 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 15.6 + 1.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 4.1
         Q2 + 13.3 + 4.7 + 12.6 + 7.5 + 5.2 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 1.8         Q3 + 13.6 + 9.8 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 4.3 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
 Short-term lending
2014          Q3 − 2.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.6
2015          Q1 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Q2 + 3.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.9 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 2.1         Q3 − 4.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2
 Medium-term lending
2014          Q3 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3         Q4 + 1.6 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 0.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 − 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 + 0.2 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2014          Q3 + 14.2 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7         Q4 + 14.5 + 8.5 + 9.9 + 8.3 + 1.6 + 8.6 + 3.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 2.6
2015          Q1 + 9.4 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 6.8 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6
         Q2 + 10.2 + 4.7 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 4.1 + 1.3 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2         Q3 + 17.8 + 9.8 + 13.7 + 9.3 + 4.4 + 4.8 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.1
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5 2013
653.8 192.3 38.0 175.4 389.3 49.1 1,074.2 850.7 223.5 149.3 11.9 13.2 3.5 2014          Sep 
644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8          Dec 
645.3 188.6 33.8 173.5 390.9 48.2 1,080.0 858.2 221.8 150.0 11.3 14.4 3.9 2015          Mar 
650.7 190.9 34.8 174.6 393.1 48.1 1,089.6 866.8 222.8 151.6 11.0 14.1 3.5          June649.6 191.5 32.0 175.9 394.7 47.7 1,103.0 878.4 224.6 153.6 11.0 14.2 3.6          Sep 
Short-term lending
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0 2013
52.6 8.5 6.3 12.2 27.3 6.9 35.3 4.1 31.2 1.6 11.9 0.8 0.0 2014          Sep 
52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0          Dec 
52.6 8.3 5.9 11.1 27.2 6.6 34.4 3.8 30.6 2.1 11.3 0.7 0.0 2015          Mar 
54.9 8.6 6.9 10.9 27.0 6.6 33.7 4.1 29.5 1.9 11.0 0.6 0.0          June51.0 8.6 6.2 10.4 26.1 6.3 33.7 4.2 29.5 1.7 11.0 0.6 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0 2013
68.2 9.9 7.2 20.0 32.0 3.6 73.1 22.5 50.6 45.4 − 0.5 0.0 2014          Sep 
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.6 9.7 7.2 19.1 31.9 3.5 72.1 22.1 50.1 45.0 − 0.5 0.0 2015          Mar 
66.9 9.9 7.0 19.4 32.1 3.6 73.2 22.0 51.2 46.2 − 0.5 0.0          June
66.5 9.9 7.0 19.5 32.3 3.5 73.9 22.1 51.9 46.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5 2013
533.0 173.8 24.5 143.2 330.0 38.6 965.8 824.1 141.7 102.2 − 11.8 3.5 2014          Sep 
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7          Dec 
525.1 170.5 20.7 143.3 331.8 38.1 973.5 832.3 141.2 102.9 − 13.2 3.9 2015          Mar 
528.8 172.4 20.8 144.3 333.9 37.9 982.7 840.6 142.1 103.6 − 13.0 3.5          June
532.1 173.0 18.8 146.0 336.3 37.9 995.3 852.1 143.2 105.0 − 13.2 3.6          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2014          Q3+ 8.4 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 4.2 + 6.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2          Q4
+ 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 4.9 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.6 + 8.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3          Q2− 0.3 + 0.6 − 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 11.5 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014          Q3+ 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
+ 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 3.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2014          Q3+ 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 8.3 + 7.9 + 0.4 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2014          Q3
+ 5.7 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − + 0.3 + 0.3          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.2 − 0.3          Q2
+ 3.4 + 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 12.7 + 11.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.42014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2014          Oct 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 252.2 676.0 28.1 647.8 606.1 68.6 31.1 27.2 1.9
         Nov 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 250.6 676.1 29.2 646.9 605.3 66.5 31.1 26.6 1.7         Dec 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015          Jan 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 253.1 666.4 28.6 637.8 606.6 64.7 30.8 25.8 3.2
         Feb 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 254.3 664.0 29.3 634.7 606.1 63.8 30.8 23.7 3.6         Mar 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 254.0 662.0 30.8 631.1 603.9 63.0 30.7 23.4 3.6
         Apr 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 251.8 653.4 31.3 622.1 601.5 61.9 30.2 23.3 4.0
         May 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 247.2 653.2 32.3 620.9 600.0 61.0 30.2 23.2 2.2         June 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 242.7 650.2 32.9 617.4 598.3 60.4 29.6 23.1 2.2
         July 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 241.8 668.6 33.6 635.1 596.4 59.5 29.5 22.8 1.7
         Aug 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 241.4 667.7 33.5 634.2 595.2 58.8 29.5 22.7 2.7         Sep 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 238.9 664.6 33.2 631.4 594.6 58.1 29.5 22.7 2.6
Changes*
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2014          Oct + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 9.8 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8
         Nov + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2         Dec + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.7 − 6.7 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
2015          Jan + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.6
         Feb + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.3         Mar − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.2 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3
         May + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8         June − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1
         July + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 0.8 + 18.5 + 0.7 + 17.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Aug + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.1         Sep − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2014          Oct 178.4 44.6 128.4 80.6 47.9 5.8 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.8
         Nov 182.6 46.6 130.7 82.3 48.3 6.4 42.0 3.5 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.5
         Dec 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015          Jan 184.5 50.7 127.6 84.0 43.6 7.4 36.1 3.8 2.4 29.1 4.8 2.2
         Feb 186.8 52.4 128.0 85.4 42.7 8.0 34.7 3.8 2.6 29.0 2.9 2.4
         Mar 187.3 52.9 127.8 84.9 42.9 9.1 33.8 3.8 2.7 28.9 2.8 2.4
         Apr 185.0 52.3 126.1 83.1 43.0 9.2 33.8 3.8 2.8 28.8 2.8 2.8
         May 191.9 58.6 126.5 82.9 43.6 9.6 34.0 3.9 2.9 28.7 2.8 1.3
         June 193.8 57.8 129.1 84.7 44.3 9.7 34.7 3.8 3.2 28.3 2.8 1.4
         July 189.2 54.0 128.1 84.2 43.9 9.7 34.2 3.7 3.4 28.2 2.8 1.3
         Aug 197.1 60.8 129.2 85.3 43.8 9.7 34.1 3.7 3.5 28.2 2.8 1.9
         Sep 197.4 59.8 130.4 86.4 44.0 9.7 34.3 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 2.1
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2014          Oct − 10.7 − 3.1 − 7.7 − 7.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Nov + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         Dec − 0.3 + 4.1 − 5.1 + 1.2 − 6.3 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
2015          Jan − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.4 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2         Mar + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 6.9 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6         June + 1.8 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July − 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug + 7.9 + 6.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 0.6         Sep + 0.2 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.72014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2014          Oct 2,918.9 1,449.9 799.7 171.6 628.1 22.3 605.8 602.6 66.7 1.8 22.6 1.1
         Nov 2,933.8 1,471.3 796.0 168.3 627.7 22.8 604.9 601.8 64.6 1.8 22.0 1.2         Dec 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2015          Jan 2,944.1 1,487.2 791.9 169.0 622.8 21.2 601.6 602.8 62.3 1.8 21.0 1.1
         Feb 2,950.9 1,497.1 790.3 169.0 621.3 21.3 600.0 602.3 61.2 1.8 20.9 1.2         Mar 2,944.4 1,495.9 788.2 169.1 619.1 21.7 597.4 600.1 60.2 1.8 20.6 1.2
         Apr 2,955.9 1,520.0 779.1 168.7 610.4 22.1 588.3 597.7 59.1 1.4 20.5 1.2
         May 2,966.9 1,538.7 773.9 164.4 609.6 22.7 586.9 596.2 58.0 1.4 20.4 0.9         June 2,957.9 1,542.3 763.8 157.9 605.9 23.2 582.7 594.6 57.2 1.4 20.3 0.8
         July 2,990.1 1,558.9 782.3 157.6 624.7 23.8 600.9 592.7 56.1 1.4 20.0 0.4
         Aug 2,996.7 1,569.9 780.0 156.1 623.9 23.8 600.1 591.5 55.3 1.4 19.9 0.8         Sep 2,989.4 1,570.9 773.0 152.4 620.6 23.5 597.1 590.9 54.6 1.4 19.8 0.5
Changes*
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2014          Oct + 15.5 + 22.8 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 15.0 + 21.5 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1         Dec + 2.0 − 4.3 + 5.0 + 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 12.6 + 21.8 − 6.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 6.6 + 9.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Mar − 6.5 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Apr + 11.5 + 24.2 − 9.1 − 0.4 − 8.7 + 0.4 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 10.9 + 18.7 − 5.1 − 4.3 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 8.8 + 3.6 − 10.0 − 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         July + 32.2 + 16.6 + 18.8 − 0.1 + 18.9 + 0.7 + 18.2 − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4
         Aug + 6.6 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 7.1 + 0.9 − 6.7 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2014          Oct 1,014.9 458.3 532.8 104.2 428.6 9.5 419.1 7.6 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.1
         Nov 1,008.1 456.6 529.2 100.9 428.2 10.6 417.7 7.4 14.9 1.8 16.7 1.2
         Dec 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015          Jan 1,013.7 467.2 524.8 102.7 422.1 10.3 411.9 6.8 14.8 1.8 16.2 1.1
         Feb 1,008.7 464.6 522.4 102.3 420.2 10.3 409.9 6.8 14.7 1.8 16.2 1.2
         Mar 1,007.9 465.9 520.4 102.7 417.7 10.4 407.2 7.0 14.7 1.8 16.0 1.2
         Apr 1,007.8 474.3 511.9 102.9 408.9 10.6 398.3 7.0 14.6 1.4 16.0 1.2
         May 1,006.3 477.1 507.6 100.0 407.6 11.2 396.5 7.0 14.5 1.4 16.0 0.9
         June 997.9 476.9 499.5 95.6 403.9 11.7 392.2 7.1 14.4 1.3 16.0 0.8
         July 1,025.2 483.1 521.0 97.1 423.9 12.2 411.7 7.1 14.0 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Aug 1,029.4 488.2 520.1 97.0 423.1 12.1 411.0 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.8
         Sep 1,024.3 489.3 514.0 94.5 419.5 11.8 407.7 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.5
Changes*
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2014          Oct + 3.3 + 8.9 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov − 6.8 − 1.7 − 3.7 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1         Dec + 1.3 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 5.7 + 10.1 − 4.3 − 1.5 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Feb − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Mar − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Apr − 0.2 + 8.5 − 8.5 + 0.2 − 8.8 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 1.5 + 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2         June − 8.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 4.0 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July + 27.5 + 6.2 + 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 + 0.5 + 19.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 5.0 + 1.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits
Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015          Apr 1,948.1 1,045.7 1,015.4 177.0 699.9 138.5 30.3 267.2 252.8 27.2 183.8 41.8
         May 1,960.6 1,061.6 1,030.5 178.8 711.3 140.4 31.1 266.3 252.0 26.9 183.5 41.6
         June 1,960.1 1,065.4 1,033.8 176.9 716.6 140.3 31.5 264.4 250.2 26.5 182.4 41.3
         July 1,964.8 1,075.8 1,043.6 183.0 720.0 140.6 32.2 261.3 247.5 26.2 180.6 40.7
         Aug 1,967.3 1,081.6 1,049.4 185.7 722.7 141.0 32.2 259.9 246.3 25.8 180.0 40.6
         Sep 1,965.2 1,081.6 1,048.9 181.6 725.1 142.2 32.7 259.0 245.6 25.1 179.8 40.6
Changes*
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2015          Apr + 11.7 + 15.7 + 16.0 + 4.8 + 9.8 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1
         May + 12.5 + 15.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1
         June − 0.7 + 3.8 + 3.3 − 1.9 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.3
         July + 4.8 + 10.4 + 9.7 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.5
         Aug + 2.5 + 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.2
         Sep − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 4.1 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015          Apr 185.0 9.4 2.9 3.0 3.4 0.1 14.6 48.6 13.0 18.6 16.3 0.8 13.8
         May 191.9 9.5 3.0 3.0 3.4 0.1 14.6 45.0 12.6 15.4 16.3 0.7 13.7
         June 193.8 10.9 3.5 4.1 3.3 0.1 14.3 47.6 13.3 17.2 16.4 0.7 13.6
         July 189.2 8.9 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.1 14.3 47.0 12.8 17.2 16.3 0.8 13.5
         Aug 197.1 9.7 3.2 3.5 3.0 0.1 14.3 48.1 13.1 18.0 16.2 0.8 13.5
         Sep 197.4 10.5 3.5 3.9 2.9 0.1 14.3 52.1 14.6 20.4 16.4 0.8 13.5
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2015          Apr − 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 6.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         June + 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 7.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0         Sep + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 201314.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
14.4 65.7 201.5 11.5 190.0 590.7 581.2 9.5 44.5 0.0 4.5 − 2015          Apr 
14.3 64.4 201.9 11.5 190.4 589.1 579.7 9.4 43.5 0.0 4.4 −          May14.2 62.4 202.0 11.5 190.5 587.5 578.2 9.3 42.8 0.0 4.3 −          June
13.8 60.5 200.8 11.6 189.2 585.6 576.3 9.3 42.1 0.0 4.2 −          July
13.5 59.1 200.7 11.7 189.1 584.4 575.1 9.3 41.4 0.0 4.2 −          Aug 13.4 57.9 201.1 11.7 189.4 583.8 574.5 9.3 40.7 0.0 4.1 −          Sep 
Changes*
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2015          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
− 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
− 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
− 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 201348.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 2014
44.0 22.1 9.7 7.3 4.9 0.4 83.1 14.3 51.8 16.0 0.9 − 2015          Apr 
49.4 26.6 10.3 7.5 5.0 0.3 88.2 16.4 54.3 16.5 1.0 −          May47.6 24.8 10.0 7.7 5.1 0.4 87.8 16.2 53.5 17.0 1.0 −          June
46.4 24.0 9.7 7.5 5.1 0.4 86.9 14.0 54.8 16.9 1.2 −          July
51.9 28.7 10.3 7.7 5.2 0.4 87.5 15.8 53.6 17.0 1.1 −          Aug 49.4 25.8 10.5 7.9 5.2 0.4 85.3 15.8 51.6 16.8 1.1 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2015          Apr 
+ 5.4 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 −          May− 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 −          June
− 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 −          July
+ 5.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 − + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Aug − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 −          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.62014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015          May 609.2 600.0 529.0 389.1 71.0 57.4 9.2 7.5 0.2 70.9 61.0 48.6 9.9
         June 607.5 598.3 528.7 380.4 69.7 56.0 9.2 7.5 0.2 70.1 60.4 48.3 9.7
         July 605.6 596.4 528.3 378.7 68.2 54.5 9.1 7.4 0.2 68.7 59.5 43.7 9.2
         Aug 604.3 595.2 528.5 379.6 66.6 52.9 9.1 7.4 0.2 67.9 58.8 43.2 9.1         Sep 603.6 594.6 529.3 377.9 65.2 51.5 9.0 7.4 0.2 67.0 58.1 42.8 8.9
Changes*
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2015          May − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.0
         June − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.8 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2
         July − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5
         Aug − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1         Sep − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up toand including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non-
maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.12014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015          May 1,143.9 254.3 29.5 396.2 93.4 112.5 2.6 24.0 5.6 1,007.4 0.5 0.2 37.0 1.2
         June 1,125.1 248.2 28.4 388.6 86.3 104.2 2.5 23.2 5.4 997.8 0.3 0.2 37.1 1.2
         July 1,126.9 242.5 28.8 394.1 83.5 102.1 2.7 23.3 5.6 1,001.5 0.3 0.2 37.2 0.7
         Aug 1,118.0 237.6 30.6 390.0 85.2 105.6 2.5 24.7 5.7 987.7 0.2 0.2 37.0 0.7         Sep 1,121.2 232.0 32.9 388.1 92.2 115.4 2.3 25.9 5.5 979.9 0.2 0.2 37.0 0.5
Changes*
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2015          May − 10.3 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 6.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0         June − 18.7 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 7.6 − 7.1 − 8.3 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 9.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −
         July + 1.7 − 5.7 + 0.4 + 5.5 − 2.8 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5
         Aug − 8.9 − 4.9 + 1.8 − 4.1 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 −         Sep + 3.3 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 1.9 + 7.0 + 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015          July 21 213.2 44.5 0.0 17.6 17.0 90.2 17.5 21.3 2.0 22.3 157.3 5.1 2.6 9.6 8.2
         Aug 21 213.3 44.2 0.0 17.6 16.8 90.7 17.5 21.3 2.0 22.3 157.1 5.1 2.7 9.6 7.8
         Sep 21 214.4 44.4 0.0 17.6 16.5 91.7 17.6 21.5 2.0 22.5 157.4 5.3 2.8 9.6 8.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          July 12 148.1 27.7 − 9.7 12.3 70.4 14.9 9.0 1.3 18.2 103.6 4.9 2.6 6.4 5.1         Aug 12 148.1 27.4 − 9.6 12.2 70.8 14.9 9.0 1.3 18.4 103.4 4.8 2.7 6.4 4.9         Sep 12 149.1 27.7 − 9.6 12.0 71.6 15.1 9.0 1.3 18.5 103.8 5.0 2.8 6.4 5.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          July 9 65.1 16.8 0.0 8.0 4.7 19.8 2.6 12.3 0.7 4.0 53.6 0.3 − 3.2 3.1         Aug 9 65.2 16.8 0.0 7.9 4.6 20.0 2.6 12.3 0.7 3.9 53.7 0.3 − 3.2 2.9         Sep 9 65.3 16.7 0.0 8.0 4.5 20.1 2.5 12.5 0.7 4.0 53.6 0.3 − 3.2 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015          July 2.3 0.1 0.8 6.1 3.9 5.2 2.8 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.9 16.7 8.5 0.9 0.0
         Aug 2.2 0.0 0.6 4.2 2.5 3.8 1.7 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.6 16.6 8.5 0.7 0.0
         Sep 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.6 2.0 3.5 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.7 16.2 8.3 0.8 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          July 1.5 0.0 0.4 4.9 3.1 4.1 2.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.5 11.8 5.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.8 2.9 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 11.7 5.0 0.5 0.0         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.4 2.6 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.4 11.6 5.0 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          July 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.5 0.2 0.0         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.5 0.2 0.0         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.62014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2014          Nov 56 205 1,982.6 540.6 525.7 173.6 352.1 14.9 616.5 499.1 14.0 485.1 117.3 825.5 549.8
         Dec 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015          Jan 54 202 2,269.7 609.8 593.0 222.4 370.7 16.8 656.5 532.1 14.6 517.5 124.4 1,003.3 714.1
         Feb 53 202 2,152.9 589.9 573.2 208.7 364.5 16.7 666.9 539.4 14.7 524.7 127.5 896.1 626.0         Mar 53 200 2,175.3 602.0 585.8 218.5 367.3 16.2 668.1 547.7 14.9 532.8 120.4 905.2 660.9
         Apr 53 200 2,127.8 622.4 606.5 210.0 396.5 15.9 660.4 535.8 14.8 521.0 124.6 845.1 588.5
         May 53 200 2,109.5 630.1 613.5 198.6 414.9 16.6 650.5 521.1 14.7 506.4 129.4 828.9 576.7
         June 53 200 1,970.5 578.9 561.3 196.5 364.8 17.6 642.2 520.2 14.5 505.6 122.1 749.3 513.7
         July 52 201 1,983.3 579.6 561.7 199.1 362.6 17.9 632.2 512.8 14.5 498.3 119.5 771.5 538.8
         Aug 51 200 1,966.9 602.1 584.4 189.0 395.4 17.7 627.2 511.0 14.3 496.7 116.2 737.6 544.1
Changes *
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2014          Dec − − − 75.7 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 27.6 − 29.6 + 1.4 − 32.1 − 33.9 − 0.1 − 33.8 + 1.8 − 42.8 + 2.2
2015          Jan − 2 − 3 + 294.7 + 38.7 + 39.0 + 21.1 + 17.9 − 0.4 + 39.0 + 38.9 + 0.7 + 38.2 + 0.1 + 217.1 + 162.1
         Feb − 1 − − 122.8 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 13.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 + 6.5 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 107.4 − 88.0
         Mar − − 2 − 7.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 10.1 − 0.8 − 13.0 − 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 9.2 + 7.1 + 34.8
         Apr − − − 21.6 + 31.9 + 31.9 − 8.5 + 40.5 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 6.1 − 58.9 − 72.4
         May − − − 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 11.4 + 12.4 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 20.6 − 0.1 − 20.5 + 3.7 − 16.1 − 16.7
         June − − − 137.5 − 45.7 − 46.8 − 2.1 − 44.7 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 3.9 − 6.5 − 78.1 − 59.0
         July − 1 + 1 + 11.1 − 4.4 − 4.5 + 2.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 16.6 − 13.0 − 0.1 − 12.9 − 3.6 + 20.5 + 21.1
         Aug − 1 − 1 − 14.3 + 28.9 + 28.9 − 10.1 + 38.9 + 0.0 + 4.2 + 6.1 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 31.9 + 10.5
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2014          Nov 29 64 395.0 155.5 138.1 84.7 53.4 17.4 174.5 140.1 21.4 118.7 34.3 65.1 −
         Dec 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015          Jan 28 63 410.8 164.8 147.7 86.7 61.0 17.1 181.3 148.0 22.5 125.5 33.4 64.7 −
         Feb 28 63 405.8 161.7 146.7 85.2 61.5 15.0 183.5 150.7 22.4 128.3 32.8 60.6 −         Mar 28 63 412.4 163.5 148.5 86.9 61.6 15.0 187.0 154.5 22.4 132.1 32.6 61.8 −
         Apr 27 62 404.1 161.8 147.0 85.9 61.1 14.8 184.1 152.7 22.3 130.4 31.5 58.2 −
         May 27 62 406.3 165.5 151.2 88.4 62.8 14.3 185.7 155.1 22.1 132.9 30.6 55.0 −
         June 27 62 386.0 140.5 124.6 67.1 57.4 15.9 188.8 155.6 22.9 132.7 33.1 56.7 −
         July 25 60 377.2 131.4 116.0 65.2 50.9 15.4 190.0 156.3 22.5 133.8 33.7 55.8 −
         Aug 25 60 382.5 136.1 121.6 67.2 54.4 14.5 185.4 152.3 22.4 129.9 33.1 61.0 −
Changes *
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2014          Dec − 1 − 1 − 8.2 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 −2015          Jan − − + 13.8 + 6.5 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 −
         Feb − − − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 4.1 −
         Mar − − + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 1.2 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 − 4.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 −
         May − − + 0.1 + 2.7 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 3.2 −
         June − − − 18.7 − 24.3 − 26.0 − 21.3 − 4.8 + 1.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 1.7 −
         July − 2 − 2 − 10.4 − 9.9 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 7.2 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 −
         Aug − − + 7.9 + 5.8 + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.5 − 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 5.3 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2015
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,099.5 753.2 411.7 341.5 346.3 21.8 17.3 4.4 324.5 132.7 42.9 707.6 555.5 2014          Nov 
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5          Dec 
1,172.6 800.9 443.0 357.9 371.8 23.5 18.4 5.2 348.3 133.2 46.4 917.4 718.3 2015          Jan 
1,161.1 786.5 436.9 349.6 374.6 24.1 18.9 5.2 350.5 139.4 47.8 804.6 625.6          Feb 1,153.3 781.8 424.9 356.9 371.5 24.9 19.6 5.3 346.6 145.8 48.4 827.7 661.5          Mar 
1,189.2 819.1 428.2 390.9 370.1 24.4 19.0 5.3 345.7 142.2 47.7 748.8 586.8          Apr 
1,191.2 822.8 425.5 397.2 368.4 22.5 17.1 5.4 345.9 144.3 48.2 725.9 574.7          May1,139.6 798.9 433.8 365.1 340.7 20.4 15.3 5.1 320.3 144.5 47.7 638.7 509.5          June
1,143.4 792.8 417.7 375.1 350.5 20.4 15.8 4.7 330.1 144.1 47.6 648.1 536.0          July
1,144.2 797.5 416.5 381.0 346.7 19.9 15.4 4.6 326.8 138.3 47.3 637.1 537.1          Aug 
Changes *
− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014
− 65.6 − 20.5 + 4.6 − 25.1 − 45.1 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 43.9 − 4.2 + 2.4 − 8.2 + 2.0 2014          Dec 
+ 94.4 + 42.7 + 26.7 + 16.0 + 51.7 + 2.9 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 48.8 + 4.8 + 1.2 + 194.2 + 160.7 2015          Jan 
− 15.5 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 10.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2 + 1.4 − 114.8 − 92.7          Feb − 27.6 − 15.6 − 11.9 − 3.7 − 11.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 12.8 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 13.5 + 35.8          Mar 
+ 53.4 + 47.1 + 3.3 + 43.8 + 6.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 70.6 − 74.6          Apr 
− 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 22.9 − 17.4          May− 46.0 − 18.5 + 8.3 − 26.8 − 27.5 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 25.5 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 87.2 − 60.9          June
− 1.6 − 11.3 − 16.1 + 4.9 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 9.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 22.1          July
+ 7.6 + 11.2 − 1.2 + 12.4 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.8 − 0.3 − 11.0 + 6.7          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
304.2 179.1 100.6 78.5 125.2 20.6 14.5 6.1 104.6 16.1 26.3 48.4 − 2014          Nov 
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 −          Dec 
311.9 183.0 104.6 78.4 128.9 19.7 14.4 5.4 109.2 19.4 26.5 53.0 − 2015          Jan 
310.6 183.8 105.1 78.7 126.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 108.7 17.8 26.7 50.8 −          Feb 
316.1 182.7 102.1 80.6 133.4 18.5 13.3 5.2 114.9 17.6 27.1 51.6 −          Mar 
313.7 179.1 99.3 79.8 134.5 14.9 13.1 1.8 119.7 16.4 26.2 47.9 −          Apr 
320.5 185.9 102.2 83.7 134.6 14.0 12.3 1.8 120.6 13.4 26.9 45.5 −          May
296.1 157.1 79.5 77.6 139.0 14.1 11.6 2.5 125.0 18.4 26.8 44.7 −          June
289.0 155.5 78.2 77.3 133.5 14.2 11.7 2.5 119.4 17.9 26.4 43.9 −          July
298.2 160.9 82.3 78.6 137.3 13.9 11.4 2.5 123.3 14.3 26.2 43.8 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
− 9.1 − 6.7 + 0.5 − 7.2 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 2014          Dec 
+ 9.7 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 2.5 − 2015          Jan 
− 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.3 −          Feb 
+ 2.6 − 2.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 −          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 3.4 + 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.9 −          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 5.8 + 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.8 − 3.0 −          May
− 23.1 − 28.0 − 22.7 − 5.3 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 4.8 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 −          June
− 8.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 −          July
+ 11.0 + 6.5 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2015
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance
Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2009 10,530.2 210.6 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.02011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.02012 
8 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 
9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015          July 11,320.1 113.2 112.7 428.4 315.7 0.0         Aug ......
         Sep 11,368.6 113.7 113.2 465.3 352.1 0.0         Oct  
p 11,351.4 113.5 113.1 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance
German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2009 2,507,906 23.8 50,158 49,971 50,297 326 02010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 02011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 12012 
8 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015          July 3,113,332 27.5 31,133 30,960 135,857 104,897 0         Aug .......
         Sep 3,121,668 27.5 31,217 31,045 151,238 120,193 0         Oct  
p 3,133,471 27.6 31,335 31,163 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Special purpose Regional institutions
Maintenance
Regional banks banks and build- of credit cooperatives
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and and credit ing and loan
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks cooperatives Mortgage banks associations beginning in 1 
2009 11,165 7,885 1,461 18,040 9,400 652 1,3682010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,914 556 1,4092011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 10,230 601 1,5312012 
8 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 5,262 248 871
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,479 239 906
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2015          July 6,418 5,237 1,768 10,144 5,987 225 1,181
         Aug .......
         Sep 6,313 5,261 1,962 10,155 6,018 224 1,111
         Oct  p 6,219 5,217 2,102 10,248 6,039 223 1,114
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build-
associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and depo- money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are sits with building and loan associa- of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but tions) with agreed maturities of up Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of suchperiod not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 to 2 years to banks in non-euro-
years requirements area countries to 2 years institution beginning in 
1 
2009 1,473,296 6,814 309,908 572,127 145,7592010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,7282011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,1532012 
8 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015          July 2,024,341 1,908 393,322 596,917 96,849         Aug . . . . .         Sep 2,037,360 2,631 399,234 593,621 88,815         Oct  
p 2,050,940 2,368 395,402 592,510 92,246
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of allowance. 8The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, was 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012 ,i t
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve has stood at 1%. 9Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance,
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years is 1%. including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required reserves of the
4Article
5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2015
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
ginal ginal as per as per Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2015 Oct                  7 70,556 70,556 0.05−−−7
         Oct                14 69,520 69,520 0.05−−−7
         Oct                21 65,908 65,908 0.05−−−7
         Oct                28 68,451 68,451 0.05−−−7
         Nov                  4 61,468 61,468 0.05−−−7
         Nov                11 62,532 62,532 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2015 Aug                27 33,127 33,127 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep                30 15,548 15,548 0.05−−− 1,092
         Oct                  1 11,842 11,848 2 ... − − − 77
         Oct                29 18,125 18,125 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2015          Apr − 0.07 − 0.08 − 0.03 0.00 0.07 0.12 0.18
         May − 0.11 − 0.11 − 0.05 − 0.01 0.06 0.10 0.17         June − 0.12 − 0.12 − 0.06 − 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.16
         July − 0.12 − 0.13 − 0.07 − 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.17
         Aug − 0.12 − 0.14 − 0.09 − 0.03 0.04 0.09 0.16         Sep − 0.14 − 0.15 − 0.11 − 0.04 0.04 0.09 0.15
         Oct − 0.14 − 0.15 − 0.12 − 0.05 0.02 0.06 0.13
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 
1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Sep 
0.75 93,703 1.90 225,992 0.39 83,870 2.69 19,601
         Oct 0.73 92,778 1.89 225,657 0.38 83,587 2.65 19,663
         Nov 0.71 92,016 1.87 225,585 0.38 83,312 2.60 19,554
         Dec 0.67 92,021 1.85 227,138 0.36 80,954 2.59 19,152
2015          Jan 0.66 89,436 1.82 226,464 0.35 79,358 2.52 18,930
         Feb 0.64 89,570 1.81 226,183 0.33 79,398 2.44 18,974
         Mar 0.62 89,298 1.79 225,561 0.32 78,982 2.36 19,063
         Apr 0.59 88,530 1.77 224,767 0.30 79,019 2.29 18,947
         May 0.57 86,761 1.76 224,571 0.30 77,340 2.26 19,282
         June 0.54 84,531 1.75 224,254 0.29 74,338 2.22 19,325
         July 0.52 82,865 1.73 221,848 0.27 76,685 2.19 17,642
         Aug 0.51 81,011 1.71 221,355 0.26 77,081 2.17 17,717
         Sep 0.50 79,461 1.70 221,031 0.26 75,281 2.17 17,611
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Sep 
3.05 5,630 2.82 28,295 3.74 997,116 7.91 58,107 4.84 77,166 4.84 308,303
         Oct 3.00 5,766 2.78 28,278 3.72 1,000,934 7.73 56,716 4.81 77,707 4.84 308,423
         Nov 2.87 5,631 2.74 28,396 3.70 1,004,378 7.62 54,676 4.78 77,140 4.81 308,879
         Dec 2.87 5,179 2.71 28,208 3.67 1,010,175 7.52 56,685 4.79 76,940 4.81 304,322
2015          Jan 2.85 5,263 2.68 28,082 3.64 1,008,817 7.57 55,840 4.76 76,665 4.77 303,620
         Feb 2.79 5,119 2.65 27,981 3.62 1,011,149 7.57 55,246 4.74 76,178 4.75 304,176
         Mar 2.79 5,188 2.62 27,863 3.59 1,012,369 7.62 57,477 4.71 76,470 4.72 303,927
         Apr 2.72 5,144 2.59 27,828 3.56 1,015,337 7.51 56,137 4.66 77,262 4.67 304,710
         May 2.69 5,138 2.56 27,817 3.53 1,019,301 7.47 55,239 4.62 77,540 4.64 306,013
         June 2.68 5,138 2.52 27,830 3.50 1,022,718 7.60 56,765 4.58 77,795 4.62 305,203
         July 2.64 5,301 2.49 27,836 3.46 1,028,020 7.46 54,891 4.54 78,042 4.59 306,587
         Aug 2.63 5,233 2.46 27,881 3.44 1,032,080 7.46 54,768 4.51 78,424 4.56 307,560
         Sep 2.64 5,142 2.44 27,800 3.41 1,036,883 7.55 55,910 4.48 78,672 4.54 306,906
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Sep 
3.17 132,902 2.69 129,887 3.14 584,473
         Oct 3.08 130,017 2.64 131,515 3.10 586,281
         Nov 3.06 132,058 2.61 131,532 3.08 588,938
         Dec 3.01 128,996 2.56 128,825 3.05 574,492
2015          Jan 2.98 129,835 2.54 129,362 3.02 575,205
         Feb 2.97 132,522 2.52 128,329 3.00 577,591
         Mar 3.00 132,002 2.50 127,655 2.96 577,082
         Apr 2.98 129,602 2.46 126,479 2.93 578,295
         May 2.91 130,402 2.45 128,043 2.91 580,567
         June 2.89 134,307 2.43 127,057 2.88 580,448
         July 2.80 130,434 2.43 125,698 2.85 585,342
         Aug 2.82 130,317 2.41 126,738 2.84 587,082
         Sep 2.86 132,444 2.39 126,159 2.82 585,019
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics
/ MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Sep 
0.25 976,579 0.51 8,576 0.88 704 1.19 1,266 0.70 527,990 0.83 78,170
         Oct 0.23 990,310 0.51 8,687 0.96 657 1.09 1,134 0.66 527,680 0.80 77,990
         Nov 0.23 1,013,535 0.51 8,021 0.87 719 1.19 1,173 0.63 527,234 0.77 77,625
         Dec 0.22 1,007,229 0.37 9,654 0.79 749 1.13 1,266 0.61 530,260 0.75 76,202
2015          Jan 0.22 1,017,766 0.53 8,558 0.87 856 1.08 1,305 0.58 528,544 0.73 77,361
         Feb 0.20 1,030,249 0.53 7,278 0.71 886 1.07 1,131 0.54 529,378 0.70 76,071
         Mar 0.17 1,027,392 0.39 8,124 0.81 771 1.01 1,049 0.51 528,471 0.65 74,766
         Apr 0.16 1,043,564 0.34 7,663 0.77 653 0.94 952 0.48 528,261 0.61 72,608
         May 0.16 1,058,904 0.36 5,630 0.74 657 0.94 884 0.47 528,271 0.58 71,013
         June 0.15 1,062,893 0.29 6,524 0.70 703 0.88 880 0.46 527,934 0.56 69,686
         July 0.14 1,073,284 0.33 6,953 0.74 656 0.93 866 0.44 527,609 0.54 68,185
         Aug 0.14 1,079,170 0.32 5,546 0.65 636 0.94 879 0.43 527,949 0.52 66,653
         Sep 0.14 1,079,060 0.34 6,158 0.87 668 1.12 971 0.42 528,705 0.51 65,229
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Sep 
0.11 336,903 0.17 13,164 0.42 312 0.88 401
         Oct 0.10 345,504 0.17 13,179 0.49 972 0.68 435
         Nov 0.09 343,396 0.14 12,414 0.55 1,973 0.51 595
         Dec 0.09 344,692 0.15 16,156 0.48 781 1.36 931
2015          Jan 0.08 337,454 0.15 13,140 0.47 398 0.47 654
         Feb 0.07 333,734 0.17 12,552 0.67 437 0.48 584
         Mar 0.07 337,419 0.15 15,096 0.33 775 0.45 863
         Apr 0.06 343,035 0.11 15,562 0.36 612 0.46 660
         May 0.06 342,155 0.12 10,161 0.33 1,010 0.55 634
         June 0.06 342,151 0.20 10,205 0.43 484 0.41 512
         July 0.06 351,672 0.17 10,002 0.31 565 0.61 1,243
         Aug 0.06 354,182 0.11 8,622 0.30 312 0.73 305
         Sep 0.05 357,426 0.15 8,732 0.22 723 0.54 351
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Sep 
2.30 7,724 . . 1.99 4,484 3.26 830 2.55 2,410 2.08 2,794 3.39 648 2.48 1,610
         Oct 2.18 7,758 . . 1.82 4,560 3.08 963 2.51 2,235 1.93 2,825 3.27 722 2.46 1,538
         Nov 2.27 6,061 . . 2.01 3,202 3.01 796 2.38 2,063 2.02 2,226 3.18 603 2.33 1,358         Dec 2.11 8,817 2.15 2,843 1.80 4,820 2.86 1,162 2.33 2,835 1.95 3,191 3.00 881 2.32 1,810
2015          Jan 2.20 7,282 2.11 3,232 1.91 4,042 2.92 1,027 2.39 2,213 2.05 2,683 3.05 784 2.31 1,457
         Feb 2.04 6,019 2.00 2,014 1.73 3,259 2.85 797 2.23 1,963 1.91 1,916 3.06 570 2.12 1,302         Mar 2.08 8,382 2.03 3,008 1.81 4,242 2.89 1,121 2.17 3,019 1.94 2,718 3.02 869 2.17 1,968
         Apr 2.03 7,162 1.92 2,656 1.77 3,917 2.83 934 2.15 2,311 1.94 2,381 2.97 737 2.07 1,602
         May 1.95 6,519 1.91 2,062 1.69 3,364 2.78 815 2.03 2,340 1.96 1,983 2.92 617 1.95 1,628         June 1.95 8,380 2.02 2,716 1.69 4,215 2.74 998 2.05 3,167 2.01 2,452 2.84 771 2.04 2,119
         July 2.08 8,720 1.92 3,489 1.75 4,272 2.75 1,149 2.27 3,299 1.93 2,649 2.91 868 2.21 2,152
         Aug 2.12 6,485 2.01 2,170 1.88 3,121 2.72 909 2.21 2,455 2.06 1,801 2.83 694 2.16 1,665         Sep 2.19 6,448 1.99 2,333 1.91 3,289 2.96 838 2.30 2,321 1.96 1,949 3.21 618 2.23 1,576
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Sep 6.48 6.38 6,608 . . 4.72 366 5.07 2,833 7.64 3,409
         Oct 6.47 6.38 7,152 . . 4.73 369 5.01 3,055 7.67 3,728
         Nov 6.37 6.28 6,057 . . 4.69 331 4.99 2,581 7.51 3,145
         Dec 6.01 5.94 5,371 7.85 847 4.22 383 4.89 2,448 7.21 2,540
2015          Jan 6.47 6.38 7,032 7.70 1,519 4.82 358 4.99 2,774 7.52 3,900
         Feb 6.50 6.42 7,275 7.69 1,431 4.74 301 5.08 2,808 7.45 4,166
         Mar 6.08 6.01 8,735 6.98 1,593 4.84 370 4.81 3,556 6.99 4,809
         Apr 6.18 6.11 8,169 7.01 1,553 5.00 326 4.94 3,104 6.95 4,739
         May 6.31 6.24 7,346 7.46 1,458 5.08 304 4.94 2,839 7.20 4,203
         June 6.37 6.29 8,006 7.63 1,547 4.83 327 4.98 3,211 7.33 4,468
         July 6.48 6.40 8,959 7.81 1,769 5.09 361 5.01 3,554 7.47 5,044
         Aug 6.34 6.26 7,313 7.71 1,263 5.33 309 4.98 3,020 7.31 3,984
         Sep 6.28 6.21 7,331 7.63 1,200 5.20 338 4.94 3,052 7.28 3,941
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Sep . 3.84 217 . . 2.76 28 4.39 123 3.27 66
         Oct . 3.74 244 . . 2.76 33 4.22 138 3.27 73
         Nov . 3.85 215 . . 3.15 25 4.34 122 3.24 68
         Dec . 3.46 233 . . 3.13 27 3.96 124 2.81 82
2015          Jan . 3.34 236 . . 2.77 36 3.72 120 3.02 80
         Feb . 3.10 258 . . 3.01 25 3.76 117 2.46 116
         Mar . 3.33 276 . . 3.04 29 3.78 149 2.73 98
         Apr . 3.15 280 . . 2.58 28 3.77 138 2.53 114
         May . 3.30 226 . . 2.86 23 3.69 128 2.78 75
         June . 3.11 301 . . 2.86 35 3.59 156 2.50 110
         July . 3.44 281 . . 2.81 28 3.93 156 2.85 97
         Aug . 3.49 240 . . 3.05 18 3.86 144 2.92 78
         Sep . 3.28 238 . . 2.52 38 3.90 116 2.78 84
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Sep 2.34 2.30 16,458 . . 2.39 2,214 2.04 1,945 2.28 6,630 2.39 5,669
         Oct 2.28 2.25 17,938 . . 2.33 2,681 2.03 2,077 2.19 7,208 2.35 5,972
         Nov 2.20 2.17 16,120 . . 2.32 2,253 1.83 1,979 2.11 6,201 2.28 5,687
         Dec 2.17 2.13 18,500 2.23 3,583 2.22 2,762 1.96 2,015 2.09 7,445 2.19 6,278
2015          Jan 2.15 1.96 19,769 1.80 6,334 2.23 2,606 1.95 2,006 2.02 6,927 1.83 8,230
         Feb 2.01 1.96 17,048 2.16 3,701 2.28 2,199 1.87 1,753 1.86 6,492 1.99 6,604
         Mar 1.92 1.88 21,134 2.05 4,817 2.19 2,760 1.88 2,118 1.77 7,693 1.88 8,563
         Apr 1.91 1.87 20,486 1.94 4,301 2.11 2,640 1.83 1,935 1.70 7,330 1.95 8,581
         May 1.81 1.77 19,549 1.95 4,229 2.20 2,315 1.84 1,754 1.61 7,123 1.78 8,357
         June 1.89 1.85 24,015 1.98 5,330 2.11 2,798 1.81 2,197 1.72 9,297 1.92 9,723
         July 2.04 1.99 25,310 2.06 6,017 2.17 2,915 1.91 2,502 1.86 10,095 2.10 9,798
         Aug 2.09 2.06 19,745 2.15 4,445 2.27 2,290 1.95 1,939 1.92 7,566 2.15 7,950
         Sep 2.07 2.03 19,161 2.08 4,209 2.17 2,344 1.98 1,851 1.92 7,276 2.12 7,690
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Sep . 2.23 7,374 . . 2.39 843 1.93 957 2.18 2,960 2.35 2,614
         Oct . 2.18 8,147 . . 2.33 1,027 1.91 1,060 2.11 3,264 2.31 2,796
         Nov . 2.05 7,543 . . 2.22 916 1.58 1,157 2.02 2,858 2.23 2,612
         Dec . 2.06 8,434 . . 2.23 1,060 1.80 1,024 2.01 3,345 2.15 3,005
2015          Jan . 1.79 10,246 . . 2.16 1,063 1.82 1,061 1.93 3,426 1.60 4,696
         Feb . 1.89 8,025 . . 2.31 895 1.69 945 1.77 3,166 1.96 3,019
         Mar . 1.79 9,735 . . 2.12 1,130 1.68 1,050 1.69 3,663 1.82 3,892
         Apr . 1.87 9,786 . . 2.07 1,083 1.59 1,021 1.63 3,549 2.09 4,133
         May . 1.68 9,274 . . 2.16 879 1.56 849 1.54 3,669 1.74 3,877
         June . 1.76 11,120 . . 2.02 1,096 1.59 1,090 1.65 4,502 1.84 4,432
         July . 1.91 11,976 . . 2.15 1,134 1.69 1,314 1.80 4,906 2.03 4,622
         Aug . 1.98 9,203 . . 2.23 794 1.71 1,016 1.86 3,653 2.11 3,740
         Sep . 1.96 8,434 . . 2.13 912 1.74 878 1.87 3,334 2.07 3,310
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Sep 
9.40 44,311 9.51 37,656 15.43 3,783 4.51 66,516 4.52 66,287
         Oct 9.27 42,611 9.34 36,051 15.44 3,770 4.45 62,839 4.46 62,600
         Nov 9.20 40,795 9.22 34,390 15.44 3,788 4.36 64,435 4.38 64,185
         Dec 9.20 42,857 9.27 36,194 15.42 3,815 4.31 63,192 4.33 62,988
2015          Jan 9.22 41,793 9.23 35,380 15.45 3,799 4.31 63,695 4.32 63,497
         Feb 9.22 41,287 9.24 34,873 15.42 3,786 4.24 66,274 4.25 66,045
         Mar 9.21 43,126 9.25 36,566 15.39 3,817 4.21 66,465 4.22 66,233
         Apr 9.10 41,749 9.16 35,136 15.44 3,751 4.15 64,534 4.17 64,316
         May 8.99 41,166 9.03 34,577 15.44 3,755 4.09 65,569 4.10 65,334
         June 9.01 43,164 9.06 36,409 15.28 3,864 4.08 68,150 4.09 67,919
         July 8.90 41,364 8.92 34,649 15.36 3,861 3.97 64,222 3.98 63,998
         Aug 8.91 41,624 8.93 34,639 15.39 3,989 4.01 64,895 4.03 64,693
         Sep 8.95 42,843 9.01 35,907 15.43 3,899 4.08 65,570 4.10 65,322
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Sep 1.91 59,512 . . 2.76 7,508 3.27 1,240 2.38 1,129 1.64 42,008 2.35 1,720 2.25 5,907
         Oct 1.86 64,549 . . 2.66 8,157 3.19 1,363 2.33 1,186 1.57 44,153 2.50 3,154 2.17 6,536
         Nov 1.87 48,253 . . 2.72 6,787 3.18 1,115 2.19 1,073 1.57 32,338 2.54 1,669 2.04 5,271         Dec 1.87 72,853 1.94 21,021 2.75 7,808 3.01 1,630 2.19 1,648 1.63 48,092 2.06 3,080 2.04 10,595
2015          Jan 1.67 66,661 1.60 27,284 2.62 7,524 3.09 1,283 1.42 3,073 1.45 45,278 1.90 2,366 1.88 7,137
         Feb 1.59 53,118 1.43 18,293 2.69 6,474 3.04 1,123 2.02 1,159 1.28 37,674 1.63 1,526 1.97 5,162         Mar 1.73 62,691 1.76 20,557 2.67 8,150 2.94 1,516 1.98 1,510 1.49 41,003 1.63 2,066 1.75 8,446
         Apr 1.68 57,793 1.68 21,847 2.53 7,621 3.00 1,359 1.89 1,344 1.43 40,212 1.75 1,671 1.89 5,586
         May 1.66 50,883 1.63 16,561 2.60 6,817 2.91 1,277 1.87 1,334 1.38 33,591 1.92 1,496 1.75 6,368         June 1.71 68,584 1.86 19,621 2.67 8,097 2.87 1,487 1.99 1,733 1.41 43,785 1.91 2,647 1.95 10,835
         July 1.68 69,195 1.64 24,802 2.64 8,543 2.91 1,586 2.05 1,791 1.37 45,314 1.94 2,211 1.97 9,750
         Aug 1.62 49,640 1.67 14,967 2.64 6,644 2.99 1,260 2.03 1,321 1.28 33,589 1.99 1,497 1.98 5,329         Sep 1.84 60,340 1.82 19,271 2.78 8,061 2.91 1,323 2.08 1,333 1.56 39,892 1.69 1,704 2.11 8,027
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Sep 2.12 9,969 . . 2.70 908 2.39 115 2.25 325 1.97 6,516 3.06 515 2.04 1,590
         Oct 2.02 13,859 . . 2.43 1,148 2.35 136 2.27 347 1.77 9,522 3.44 848 2.35 1,858
         Nov 1.94 7,869 . . 2.68 822 2.30 79 2.03 323 1.72 4,873 2.21 695 2.10 1,077         Dec 1.86 14,470 . . 2.54 1,023 2.36 184 2.02 470 1.72 8,250 1.95 1,274 1.89 3,269
2015          Jan 1.64 16,136 . . 2.36 1,101 2.52 141 1.13 2,270 1.70 8,979 1.76 821 1.49 2,824
         Feb 1.83 7,345 . . 2.66 791 2.44 101 1.79 409 1.70 4,714 2.13 172 1.72 1,158         Mar 1.78 11,957 . . 2.52 935 2.42 128 1.76 502 1.77 6,868 1.72 658 1.55 2,866
         Apr 1.76 10,572 . . 2.35 981 2.62 123 1.61 440 1.66 7,028 2.08 406 1.75 1,594
         May 1.84 7,214 . . 2.61 735 2.51 102 1.68 479 1.71 4,202 2.05 427 1.77 1,269         June 1.73 10,890 . . 2.11 642 2.51 133 1.84 561 1.53 5,897 1.90 677 1.94 2,980
         July 1.70 13,470 . . 1.99 894 2.59 175 1.86 593 1.55 8,144 1.85 592 1.87 3,072
         Aug 1.65 6,913 . . 2.14 546 2.69 128 1.86 445 1.41 4,037 1.91 302 1.93 1,455         Sep 1.93 9,689 . . 2.07 584 2.73 101 1.92 380 1.63 5,151 1.65 395 2.44 3,078
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and
Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.32007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.52008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.82009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.42012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.12013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.52014 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2013          Q3 2,214.8 2,144.9 547.3 302.3 283.7 224.1 660.9 63.3 63.4 69.9
         Q4 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014          Q1 2,294.4 2,221.8 542.3 328.0 288.7 225.5 709.9 65.1 62.3 72.5
         Q2 2,339.8 2,266.5 538.5 345.4 291.6 226.3 736.6 66.1 61.9 73.3         Q3 2,380.2 2,305.6 530.3 366.1 293.9 227.3 758.5 67.2 62.3 74.7         Q4 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2015          Q1 2,531.6 2,454.3 517.8 411.7 305.0 239.5 845.5 70.7 64.2 77.3
         Q2 2,471.6 2,394.1 509.8 393.4 305.3 236.1 813.8 70.7 65.1 77.5
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2013          Q3 1,728.5 1,683.1 392.6 261.9 256.4 211.3 450.1 58.9 51.8 45.4
         Q4 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014          Q1 1,789.2 1,742.2 385.8 285.3 260.9 212.2 486.9 60.6 50.5 47.0
         Q2 1,823.8 1,776.3 381.8 299.8 263.8 212.9 506.6 61.5 50.0 47.5
         Q3 1,855.8 1,807.3 375.2 316.5 266.1 213.5 523.2 62.5 50.3 48.5
         Q4 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2015          Q1 1,976.3 1,926.5 362.6 355.3 276.2 224.9 590.0 65.7 51.8 49.9
         Q2 1,927.0 1,877.1 355.5 339.5 276.4 221.6 565.7 65.8 52.6 49.9
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2013          Q3 486.3 461.8 154.6 40.4 27.3 12.7 210.8 4.3 11.6 24.5
         Q4 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014          Q1 505.2 479.6 156.5 42.8 27.8 13.3 223.0 4.5 11.8 25.5
         Q2 516.0 490.2 156.8 45.6 27.8 13.4 230.0 4.6 11.9 25.8
         Q3 524.4 498.3 155.1 49.6 27.8 13.8 235.2 4.7 12.0 26.1
         Q4 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2015          Q1 555.2 527.8 155.2 56.4 28.8 14.6 255.4 4.9 12.4 27.4
         Q2 544.6 517.0 154.2 53.9 28.9 14.5 248.1 5.0 12.5 27.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2013 on have schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.5
2014 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2013          Q3 2,214.8 16.5 81.8 177.0 1,773.5 1,495.2 278.3 71.0 95.1
         Q4 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.5
2014          Q1 2,294.4 16.3 85.1 191.3 1,825.5 1,536.6 288.9 72.6 103.5
         Q2 2,339.8 16.2 86.7 184.1 1,844.3 1,553.4 290.9 72.6 136.1
         Q3 2,380.2 17.6 86.3 188.0 1,861.3 1,568.1 293.3 72.6 154.4
         Q4 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2015          Q1 2,531.6 17.7 90.8 223.1 1,937.6 1,631.9 305.8 74.8 187.5
         Q2 2,471.6 17.9 91.1 206.2 1,942.6 1,636.5 306.1 75.0 138.8
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2013          Q3 1,728.5 16.5 77.7 169.1 1,328.4 1,050.6 277.8 69.2 67.6
         Q4 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014          Q1 1,789.2 16.3 80.8 182.7 1,366.9 1,078.4 288.4 69.7 72.9
         Q2 1,823.8 16.2 82.3 175.6 1,380.4 1,090.0 290.4 69.6 99.8
         Q3 1,855.8 17.6 81.8 179.3 1,392.5 1,099.7 292.8 69.6 115.1
         Q4 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2015          Q1 1,976.3 17.7 86.1 212.6 1,449.7 1,144.4 305.3 71.6 138.7
         Q2 1,927.0 17.9 86.3 196.5 1,452.9 1,147.3 305.6 71.8 101.7
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2013          Q3 486.3 − 4.1 7.8 445.0 444.6 0.4 1.8 27.5
         Q4 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014          Q1 505.2 − 4.3 8.6 458.7 458.2 0.5 2.9 30.6
         Q2 516.0 − 4.4 8.4 463.9 463.4 0.5 3.0 36.3
         Q3 524.4 − 4.5 8.7 468.9 468.4 0.5 3.1 39.3
         Q4 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2015          Q1 555.2 − 4.8 10.5 487.9 487.4 0.5 3.2 48.8
         Q2 544.6 − 4.8 9.7 489.8 489.3 0.5 3.2 37.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2013 are partially estimated. Figures from 2013 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2015
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales
Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5252012 54,952 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,370 − 1,139 − 42,017 − 3,573 44,450 56,0922013 − 9,340 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 92,275 23,033 − 25,778 − 12,708 61,521 − 32,3742014 68,626 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 100,586 49,633 − 12,124 − 11,951 73,707 18,993
2014          Nov 20,323 2,177 − 4,561 − 305 7,044 18,145 10,445 8,392 − 660 2,713 9,877
         Dec − 23,629 − 23,897 − 7,257 227 − 16,867 268 − 4,942 − 15,485 27 10,516 − 18,687
2015          Jan 23,198 12,020 9,062 2,258 700 11,178 1,533 11,589 − 736 − 9,320 21,665
         Feb 18,624 8,157 4,938 5,576 − 2,357 10,467 25,502 − 4,119 681 28,940 − 6,879         Mar 12,043 − 5,223 − 3,851 2,007 − 3,379 17,266 26,677 2,266 12,589 11,822 − 14,635
         Apr 8,386 4,097 6,508 3,328 − 5,740 4,289 8,469 − 15,908 11,397 12,980 − 83
         May 936 − 506 − 13,628 1,127 11,994 1,442 8,063 − 9,509 13,328 4,244 − 7,127         June − 23,009 − 25,695 − 10,836 − 3,872 − 10,987 2,685 174 − 13,948 11,459 2,663 − 23,183
         July 614 − 2,977 585 1,688 − 5,251 3,591 13,429 11,603 13,155 − 11,329 − 12,815
         Aug 17,897 14,808 1,576 1,949 11,284 3,089 15,159 − 781 9,915 6,025 2,738         Sep 35,543 20,567 3,560 19,563 − 2,555 14,977 43,905 1,546 12,775 29,584 − 8,361
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales
Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 17,426 5,120 12,306 16,126 10,259 5,867 1,3002013 29,243 10,106 19,137 24,322 11,991 12,331 4,9212014 45,491 18,778 26,713 33,307 17,203 16,104 12,184
2014          Nov − 270 245 − 515 2,412 2,047 365 − 2,682
         Dec 11,881 189 11,692 12,527 7,435 5,092 − 646
2015          Jan 735 78 657 6,696 7,111 − 415 − 5,961
         Feb 3,393 117 3,276 − 3,057 − 5,160 2,103 6,450         Mar 388 49 339 − 5,103 8,523 − 13,626 5,491
         Apr 2,706 1,751 955 7,164 6,803 361 − 4,458
         May 11,766 155 11,611 9,720 − 5,586 15,306 2,046         June 4,582 1,277 3,305 − 6,664 − 4,056 − 2,608 11,246
         July 5,247 510 4,737 8,516 1,279 7,237 − 3,269
         Aug 1,001 122 879 1,017 − 6,693 7,710 − 16         Sep − 4,403 966 − 5,369 − 2,558 − 9,059 6,501 − 1,845
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015          Feb 129,489 87,976 3,401 1,493 64,175 18,907 7,601 33,912 −
         Mar 128,867 81,088 3,531 1,598 56,183 19,775 11,000 36,779 −
         Apr 125,845 74,835 2,844 1,159 50,226 20,605 15,536 35,474 −
         May 88,059 53,509 1,616 914 39,135 11,844 4,488 30,062 −
         June 89,201 56,164 3,128 627 38,323 14,085 4,311 28,726 −
         July 114,390 67,339 5,861 965 40,146 20,367 6,331 40,719 −
         Aug 92,367 55,370 1,407 527 34,542 18,895 6,418 30,579 −
         Sep 143,476 84,546 2,315 2,137 59,638 20,456 26,215 32,715 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015          Feb 34,715 15,495 2,581 887 4,767 7,260 3,704 15,516 −
         Mar 31,221 12,771 2,374 1,548 1,548 7,301 6,717 11,733 −
         Apr 49,360 22,094 2,813 663 10,892 7,726 11,404 15,862 −
         May 20,791 6,990 1,285 414 1,219 4,072 2,200 11,601 −         June 30,382 16,718 3,061 524 8,526 4,608 1,715 11,949 −
         July 37,991 18,950 3,099 190 5,835 9,826 3,079 15,962 −
         Aug 27,132 13,254 1,078 527 2,557 9,092 3,004 10,875 −         Sep 51,283 15,197 1,745 2,137 7,234 4,080 22,790 13,296 −
Net sales  6 
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015          Feb 11,007 8,697 − 601 − 708 11,970 − 1,964 4,979 − 2,669 − 1,250
         Mar − 5,487 − 3,480 2,318 298 − 3,224 − 2,871 1,958 − 3,965 −
         Apr 1,355 1,980 1,392 − 1,843 981 1,450 2,540 − 3,164 −
         May − 4,331 − 14,849 − 1,269 − 76 − 7,711 − 5,793 612 9,905 −         June − 28,026 − 14,649 − 1,654 − 4,181 − 1,319 − 7,494 − 2,804 − 10,573 −
         July − 6,422 − 4,763 4,338 − 572 − 6,351 − 2,178 − 187 − 1,472 −
         Aug 12,820 − 1,768 645 151 1,257 − 3,820 2,034 12,554 −         Sep 19,054 2,097 744 − 1,417 3,802 − 1,032 20,743 − 3,786 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2015
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,4222014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015          Mar 3,127,575 1,254,139 124,498 84,741 588,041 456,859 240,796 1,632,640 6,547         Apr 3,128,930 1,256,119 125,890 82,898 589,022 458,310 243,336 1,629,476 6,547
         May 3,124,599 1,241,270 124,620 82,822 581,311 452,517 243,948 1,639,381 6,547         June 3,096,573 1,226,621 122,966 78,641 579,992 445,023 241,144 1,628,808 6,547
         July 3,090,151 1,221,858 127,304 78,068 573,641 442,844 240,956 1,627,336 6,547
         Aug 3,102,971 1,220,091 127,949 78,219 575,058 438,864 242,990 1,639,890 6,547         Sep 3,122,025 1,222,188 128,693 76,802 578,861 437,832 263,733 1,636,105 6,547
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2015 
1,103,499 534,050 42,901 32,230 244,305 214,615 50,718 518,730 2,973    less than 2
646,831 276,918 38,663 21,952 142,529 73,773 40,144 329,770 273 2 to less than 4
471,032 185,303 22,446 9,414 105,743 47,702 42,494 243,234 179 4 to less than 6
298,655 81,273 13,242 5,662 34,087 28,282 23,326 194,056 523 6 to less than 8
218,311 61,317 7,869 4,356 25,183 23,910 12,493 144,502 1,092 8 to less than 10
103,660 28,570 3,271 2,929 10,212 12,159 11,462 63,628 530 10 to less than 15
57,091 12,343 40 123 6,944 5,236 4,668 40,080 10 15 to less than 20
222,945 42,411 263 135 9,859 32,154 78,430 102,103 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015          Mar 177,159 − 41 43 − 78 − − 47 − 16 − 99 1,773,480         Apr 177,577 418 461 10 − − − 36 29 − 47 1,715,289
         May 177,532 − 45 106 − 4 − − 44 − 73 − 38 1,709,211         June 178,051 519 330 251 202 − − 37 − 154 − 73 1,645,417
         July 178,106 55 157 21 109 − − 135 − 40 − 58 1,671,490
         Aug 177,064 − 1,042 119 72 2 − − 1,050 − 77 − 109 1,544,386         Sep 178,058 994 965 13 13 − − 32 93 − 58 1,469,146
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015          May 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.5 1.1 2.2 139.56 114.65 534.29 11,413.82
         June 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.7 1.5 2.4 138.37 111.96 512.30 10,944.97
         July 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 1.4 2.4 139.21 113.45 530.65 11,308.99
         Aug 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.5 2.4 139.19 112.18 486.17 10,259.46         Sep 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 1.6 2.7 139.69 113.41 460.31 9,660.44
         Oct 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.6 2.8 140.17 113.79 512.31 10,850.14
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,258
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,036
2012 111,609 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,667 115,031 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,093 23,229 − 3,422
2013 123,276 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,939 117,189 771 100 116,418 31,838 6,086
2014 136,035 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 38,324 141,680 819 − 1,745 140,861 40,069 − 5,642
2015          Mar 23,298 14,363 1,673 − 43 669 433 12,690 8,934 22,494 1,968 1,450 20,526 7,484 803
         Apr 12,804 10,144 136 − 11 − 799 221 10,008 2,660 16,252 1,496 897 14,756 1,763 − 3,448
         May 11,011 6,520 1,285 129 805 − 50 5,236 4,490 11,155 1,899 619 9,256 3,871 − 145
         June 11,449 10,457 1,132 141 107 769 9,325 991 11,612 350 − 531 11,262 1,522 − 163
         July 7,058 2,216 2,851 − 22 2,652 − 263 − 635 4,841 6,620 1,317 − 60 5,303 4,901 437
         Aug 11,417 9,967 2,248 89 1,686 331 7,719 1,449 10,439 − 636 − 500 11,075 1,949 978
         Sep 8,254 9,839 2,240 593 1,037 342 7,599 − 1,585 5,996 − 1,748 − 1,341 7,744 − 244 2,258
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 1.51 0.61 − 10.68 − 13.00 − 7.22 14.39 − 4.86 − 8.74 6.37
Debt securities − 2.65 0.18 − 1.63 1.52 0.29 0.10 − 3.53 − 1.47 0.49
short-term debt securities − 2.61 1.56 1.62 1.79 − 0.13 − 0.44 0.40 − 1.06 0.93
long-term debt securities − 0.03 − 1.39 − 3.24 − 0.27 0.42 0.54 − 3.93 − 0.42 − 0.43
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.87 − 1.27 − 1.88 − 0.26 1.05 0.06 − 2.74 − 0.07 0.24
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59
Financial corporations . − 2.14 − 1.26 − 0.37 0.05 − 0.43 − 0.52 0.75 − 0.27
General government . 0.07 − 0.57 0.08 0.66 0.80 − 2.12 − 0.28 − 0.08
Debt securities of the rest of the world 2.22 1.44 0.26 1.78 − 0.76 0.04 − 0.80 − 1.40 0.25
Loans 20.32 39.10 38.09 8.39 2.50 15.94 11.26 18.79 0.90
short-term loans 9.78 55.02 33.53 7.11 6.02 16.28 4.11 21.85 1.70
long-term loans 10.54 − 15.92 4.56 1.28 − 3.53 − 0.34 7.15 − 3.06 − 0.79
Memo item
to domestic sectors 19.11 32.01 34.55 5.92 6.00 7.68 14.94 12.33 − 6.46
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 20.30 − 0.17 1.80 5.14 13.53 − 0.19 − 1.27
Financial corporations 9.73 1.92 14.36 6.12 4.23 2.57 1.45 12.52 − 5.19
General government 0.50 0.26 − 0.11 − 0.03 − 0.03 − 0.03 − 0.03 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 1.21 7.08 3.54 2.47 − 3.51 8.26 − 3.69 6.46 7.36
Equity and investment fund shares 43.30 26.82 13.38 10.00 − 1.65 10.49 − 5.47 4.68 12.75
Equity 43.49 19.17 23.76 8.84 0.53 9.37 5.03 − 3.47 9.92
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 8.70 − 1.62 − 0.93 − 0.69 2.77 − 2.76 − 16.68 1.41
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07
Financial corporations . − 0.95 3.78 0.02 0.10 0.47 3.19 − 2.59 0.34
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 1.41 9.16 2.58 7.92 − 1.41 0.06 8.82 − 0.16
Other equity 1 44.93 9.07 16.21 7.18 − 6.71 8.01 7.73 4.39 8.68
Investment fund shares − 0.20 7.65 − 10.38 1.17 − 2.18 1.13 − 10.50 8.15 2.82
Money market fund shares 0.03 − 0.15 0.23 0.48 − 0.16 − 0.01 − 0.08 − 0.25 0.17
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 0.22 7.80 − 10.61 0.68 − 2.02 1.14 − 10.41 8.40 2.65
Insurance technical reserves 1.34 2.82 1.05 0.33 0.32 0.36 0.06 0.33 0.35
Financial derivatives 0.72 6.49 5.82 − 2.83 − 0.41 − 0.28 9.35 3.48 − 2.00Other accounts receivable 86.39 165.90 − 76.99 7.73 − 25.34 − 19.04 − 40.34 − 31.94 64.32
Total 147.90 241.91 − 30.96 12.15 − 31.53 21.96 − 33.54 − 14.87 83.19
External financing
Debt securities 18.72 12.78 1.26 1.18 − 6.30 2.05 4.32 3.58 4.91
short-term securities − 1.58 − 1.12 − 11.63 − 2.75 − 6.35 − 1.65 − 0.88 1.26 − 0.04
long-term securities 20.30 13.90 12.89 3.93 0.05 3.70 5.20 2.32 4.95
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 5.10 4.23 2.46 1.76 − 0.15 0.15 0.95 2.73
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59
Financial corporations . 2.85 4.08 2.33 1.10 0.24 0.42 1.26 1.86
General government . − 0.05 0.00 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 − 0.00
Households . 1.50 0.20 0.11 0.32 − 0.07 − 0.16 0.22 0.29
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 7.67 − 2.97 − 1.28 − 8.06 2.20 4.17 2.63 2.18
Loans 3.16 48.82 17.81 15.80 27.71 − 17.71 − 7.99 40.24 19.57
short-term loans 7.84 43.15 − 5.53 13.23 13.80 − 12.51 − 20.04 21.95 18.29
long-term loans − 4.68 5.67 23.34 2.57 13.92 − 5.20 12.05 18.29 1.28
Memo item
from domestic sectors − 18.60 17.03 37.42 19.32 20.95 − 7.54 4.69 29.14 7.20
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 20.30 − 0.17 1.80 5.14 13.53 − 0.19 − 1.27
Financial corporations − 8.62 8.99 18.39 18.99 8.94 − 4.01 − 5.54 22.28 9.26
General government − 18.85 − 21.80 − 1.27 0.49 10.21 − 8.67 − 3.30 7.05 − 0.79
from the rest of the world 21.77 31.74 − 19.61 − 3.52 6.76 − 10.17 − 12.68 11.10 12.37
Equity 12.74 15.94 23.88 2.31 2.57 5.05 13.95 − 0.70 5.15
Listed shares of domestic sectors . − 4.47 − 0.97 3.32 − 0.32 0.72 − 4.69 − 15.75 − 4.67
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07
Financial corporations . − 5.02 1.59 4.41 − 0.01 − 2.49 − 0.31 3.78 − 6.34
General government . − 0.88 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00
Households . − 8.21 2.80 − 0.15 0.47 0.90 1.57 − 5.43 0.61
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 7.80 9.72 − 2.71 2.19 3.59 6.65 16.02 6.38
Other equity 1 9.44 12.60 15.13 1.69 0.70 0.75 11.99 − 0.97 3.44
Insurance technical reserves 7.74 6.34 6.05 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 8.09 3.72 16.75 2.28 2.46 2.47 9.55 9.92 − 17.30
Other accounts payable 18.80 29.82 − 2.09 − 3.66 − 2.78 15.85 − 11.50 30.86 21.88
Total 69.25 117.42 63.66 19.42 25.18 9.22 9.84 85.42 35.72
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 413.7 411.8 406.4 372.5 359.0 389.9 406.4 385.1 395.4
Debt securities 51.9 48.6 47.5 50.4 50.9 51.1 47.5 46.5 46.2
short-term debt securities 3.6 5.1 6.8 6.9 6.8 6.4 6.8 5.7 6.7
long-term debt securities 48.3 43.5 40.8 43.4 44.1 44.7 40.8 40.8 39.5
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 24.6 22.9 24.4 25.5 25.6 22.9 23.0 23.0
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.5
Financial corporations . 13.8 12.7 13.5 13.6 13.2 12.7 13.5 13.2
General government . 6.1 5.7 6.2 6.9 7.7 5.7 5.4 5.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 24.0 24.6 26.0 25.4 25.5 24.6 23.5 23.2
Loans 411.5 456.6 499.1 463.5 470.1 488.1 499.1 518.7 518.5
short-term loans 291.4 351.7 386.1 357.4 364.8 382.1 386.1 407.0 408.0
long-term loans 120.1 104.9 113.0 106.0 105.3 106.0 113.0 111.7 110.5
Memo item
to domestic sectors 284.8 316.8 351.3 322.7 328.7 336.4 351.3 361.4 354.9
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.7 227.2 229.0 234.2 247.7 247.5 246.2
Financial corporations 80.9 82.9 97.2 89.0 93.2 95.8 97.2 107.4 102.3
General government 6.3 6.5 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.4
to the rest of the world 126.7 139.8 147.8 140.8 141.4 151.7 147.8 157.3 163.6
Equity and investment fund shares 1,638.4 1,806.0 1,901.8 1,807.7 1,831.4 1,870.6 1,901.8 2,126.5 2,049.6
Equity 1,509.5 1,667.9 1,766.3 1,666.8 1,689.5 1,725.4 1,766.3 1,975.5 1,899.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 275.4 262.2 266.3 266.0 254.6 262.2 290.6 274.6
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1 267.4
Financial corporations . 5.7 10.0 5.7 5.5 5.7 10.0 7.4 7.2
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 52.2 62.1 55.5 63.5 62.1 62.1 72.6 70.4
Other equity 1 1,240.4 1,340.3 1,442.0 1,345.1 1,359.9 1,408.6 1,442.0 1,612.3 1,554.6
Investment fund shares 129.0 138.1 135.5 140.9 141.9 145.2 135.5 151.0 150.0
Money market fund shares − 1.1 1.2 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.2 0.9 1.1
Non-MMF investment fund shares 129.0 137.0 134.4 139.3 140.4 143.9 134.4 150.1 149.0
Insurance technical reserves 43.3 46.1 47.3 46.5 46.8 47.2 47.3 47.6 48.0
Financial derivatives 18.0 16.8 22.6 13.9 13.5 13.2 22.6 26.0 24.0Other accounts receivable 824.3 893.3 868.6 874.2 859.8 866.4 868.6 911.4 937.8
Total 3,400.9 3,679.3 3,793.2 3,628.6 3,631.6 3,726.6 3,793.2 4,061.8 4,019.6
Liabilities
Debt securities 130.9 138.9 150.9 142.5 138.0 143.1 150.9 159.5 157.2
short-term securities 14.6 13.4 1.8 10.7 4.4 2.7 1.8 2.3 2.3
long-term securities 116.3 125.4 149.1 131.8 133.6 140.4 149.1 157.1 154.9
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 51.1 60.0 54.7 57.4 58.5 60.0 63.3 63.7
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.5
Financial corporations . 30.8 39.6 34.3 36.1 37.7 39.6 42.7 43.8
General government . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . 15.6 15.8 15.7 16.2 16.0 15.8 16.4 15.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 87.8 90.9 87.8 80.6 84.6 90.9 96.2 93.5
Loans 1,326.1 1,415.4 1,410.1 1,423.4 1,452.6 1,436.2 1,410.1 1,454.4 1,473.4
short-term loans 429.1 486.7 480.5 499.3 511.9 501.5 480.5 507.0 521.5
long-term loans 897.0 928.7 929.6 924.2 940.7 934.7 929.6 947.4 951.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,049.5 1,101.1 1,112.2 1,117.2 1,135.1 1,126.1 1,112.2 1,139.5 1,147.2
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.7 227.2 229.0 234.2 247.7 247.5 246.2
Financial corporations 805.7 811.8 810.1 828.5 838.0 832.6 810.1 831.8 841.4
General government 46.3 61.9 54.5 61.5 68.0 59.4 54.5 60.2 59.6
from the rest of the world 276.7 314.3 297.9 306.2 317.5 310.1 297.9 314.9 326.3
Equity 2,127.9 2,433.5 2,535.1 2,443.3 2,464.9 2,425.1 2,535.1 2,852.3 2,707.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 571.9 557.7 568.7 572.9 542.1 557.7 651.4 597.2
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1 267.4
Financial corporations . 120.3 121.6 124.4 125.6 116.7 121.6 152.0 131.5
General government . 35.2 35.2 34.2 35.6 34.1 35.2 42.9 39.5
Households . 146.6 148.7 149.6 151.2 142.4 148.7 173.4 158.8
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 670.8 732.2 680.4 693.0 674.9 732.2 869.7 817.5
Other equity 1 1,132.8 1,190.9 1,245.2 1,194.2 1,198.9 1,208.1 1,245.2 1,331.2 1,292.9
Insurance technical reserves 237.6 243.9 249.9 245.4 246.9 248.4 249.9 251.5 253.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 40.2 37.3 54.0 39.5 42.0 44.4 54.0 63.9 46.6
Other accounts payable 952.2 972.1 1,002.1 951.0 950.0 978.0 1,002.1 1,047.3 1,037.9
Total 4,814.9 5,241.0 5,402.1 5,245.3 5,294.3 5,275.2 5,402.1 5,828.8 5,675.6
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 75.38 63.95 85.72 8.70 20.35 16.44 40.23 14.68 27.71
Currency 0.91 8.16 15.52 0.79 4.54 3.28 6.91 4.19 3.75
Deposits 74.47 55.79 70.20 7.92 15.81 13.15 33.32 10.49 23.96
Transferable deposits 90.08 89.41 73.84 8.42 19.91 11.88 33.62 19.30 34.43
Time deposits − 5.21 − 9.78 8.76 2.37 1.31 0.94 4.14 − 2.32 − 3.12
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 10.39 − 23.85 − 12.41 − 2.88 − 5.42 0.33 − 4.44 − 6.49 − 7.35
Debt securities − 17.39 − 17.81 − 18.00 − 2.12 − 2.52 − 7.47 − 5.89 − 7.38 − 5.09
short-term debt securities − 0.26 − 0.36 − 0.67 0.11 − 0.08 − 0.39 − 0.32 0.29 0.31
long-term debt securities − 17.13 − 17.45 − 17.33 − 2.24 − 2.44 − 7.09 − 5.57 − 7.66 − 5.40
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . − 14.86 − 15.08 − 2.27 − 2.64 − 5.92 − 4.25 − 4.76 − 2.98
Non-financial corporations . 1.24 0.02 0.09 0.27 − 0.11 − 0.23 0.21 0.23
Financial corporations . − 12.46 − 12.52 − 1.77 − 2.25 − 4.92 − 3.58 − 4.05 − 2.40
General government . − 3.64 − 2.58 − 0.60 − 0.65 − 0.89 − 0.44 − 0.91 − 0.81
Debt securities of the rest of the world . − 2.94 − 2.93 0.15 0.12 − 1.56 − 1.64 − 2.62 − 2.11
Equity and investment fund shares − 3.51 9.63 36.87 8.19 10.69 7.55 10.43 4.53 8.00
Equity − 0.08 − 0.41 12.17 3.44 3.79 1.00 3.94 − 6.26 2.87
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . − 5.63 4.61 0.51 2.07 0.25 1.79 − 6.53 1.13
Non-financial corporations . − 5.29 2.69 − 0.15 0.44 0.85 1.55 − 5.50 0.49
Financial corporations . − 0.35 1.93 0.66 1.63 − 0.60 0.23 − 1.03 0.64
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 2.99 3.70 1.91 0.65 0.08 1.06 0.66 0.80
Other equity 1 2.58 2.24 3.86 1.02 1.06 0.68 1.10 − 0.39 0.95
Investment fund shares − 3.42 10.04 24.70 4.75 6.91 6.55 6.49 10.79 5.13
Money market fund shares 0.46 − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.20 − 0.16 − 0.10 0.12 − 0.16 − 0.02
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 3.88 10.34 25.04 4.95 7.07 6.65 6.37 10.95 5.14
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.62 26.02 22.96 6.63 5.64 5.20 5.48 4.20 4.20
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 26.68 29.45 29.55 10.52 6.27 4.96 7.80 13.03 8.15
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.39 19.39 19.90 7.96 4.23 2.73 4.97 9.66 4.95
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 15.54 11.93 − 23.57 5.21 − 9.05 3.55 − 23.27 13.18 − 6.63
Total 146.72 142.56 153.41 45.09 35.62 32.95 39.76 51.91 41.28
  External financing
Loans 15.65 11.96 19.33 0.02 5.93 9.18 4.20 3.59 11.78
short-term loans − 1.16 − 3.31 − 1.98 0.83 0.50 − 1.26 − 2.04 1.00 − 1.26
long-term loans 16.81 15.27 21.31 − 0.81 5.43 10.44 6.24 2.59 13.04
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.59 18.89 23.60 0.41 5.75 9.10 8.35 2.30 10.24
Consumer loans − 0.99 − 0.30 1.21 1.46 0.13 1.33 − 1.71 1.57 2.15
Entrepreneurial loans − 1.95 − 6.64 − 5.49 − 1.84 0.04 − 1.25 − 2.44 − 0.29 − 0.61
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 15.17 12.60 18.87 − 0.99 6.10 9.60 4.17 3.27 11.60
Loans from other financial institutions 0.48 − 0.60 0.45 1.01 − 0.17 − 0.42 0.03 0.32 0.18
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.36 − 0.01 − 0.12 0.19 − 0.02 0.30 − 0.59 0.34 0.05
Total 17.01 11.94 19.20 0.21 5.91 9.48 3.61 3.93 11.82
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,848.7 1,912.4 1,997.9 1,920.8 1,941.1 1,957.6 1,997.9 2,014.2 2,041.9
Currency 105.5 113.6 129.1 114.4 119.0 122.2 129.1 133.3 137.1
Deposits 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,868.7 1,806.4 1,822.2 1,835.4 1,868.7 1,880.9 1,904.8
Transferable deposits 818.3 907.8 981.4 916.0 935.9 947.8 981.4 1,000.6 1,035.1
Time deposits 255.9 245.9 254.7 248.2 249.5 250.5 254.7 254.0 250.9
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 669.0 645.1 632.7 642.2 636.8 637.1 632.7 626.2 618.9
Debt securities 200.1 179.0 162.2 177.7 176.4 168.9 162.2 156.8 149.2
short-term debt securities 3.1 2.7 2.1 2.8 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.4 2.7
long-term debt securities 197.0 176.3 160.1 174.9 173.6 166.5 160.1 154.3 146.5
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 116.9 102.4 115.1 112.9 107.1 102.4 98.6 94.3
Non-financial corporations . 14.2 14.1 14.2 14.7 14.5 14.1 14.8 13.7
Financial corporations . 90.7 78.7 89.4 87.4 82.6 78.7 75.1 72.9
General government . 12.0 9.6 11.5 10.9 10.0 9.6 8.7 7.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 62.0 59.8 62.7 63.4 61.8 59.8 58.2 54.9
Equity and investment fund shares 820.2 885.9 951.4 901.6 923.4 928.9 951.4 1,051.1 1,018.4
Equity 446.8 487.6 508.9 496.3 502.8 497.2 508.9 563.4 537.0
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . 167.4 169.7 170.5 171.5 163.0 169.7 197.9 179.6
Non-financial corporations . 140.4 142.1 143.3 144.9 136.2 142.1 165.4 151.1
Financial corporations . 26.9 27.6 27.1 26.6 26.9 27.6 32.5 28.5
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 55.8 64.0 57.9 60.6 63.2 64.0 74.6 71.7
Other equity 1 255.7 264.4 275.3 267.9 270.7 271.0 275.3 290.9 285.7
Investment fund shares 373.4 398.3 442.5 405.3 420.6 431.7 442.5 487.7 481.3
Money market fund shares 23.7 4.4 4.0 4.2 4.1 4.0 4.0 3.8 3.8Non-MMF investment fund shares 349.7 393.8 438.5 401.0 416.5 427.7 438.5 483.8 477.5
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 273.3 291.3 307.3 295.4 299.5 303.6 307.3 311.5 315.7
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 809.1 847.3 885.6 861.2 869.7 876.0 885.6 899.7 908.5
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 677.1 708.3 740.0 715.8 723.0 728.8 740.0 749.6 754.6
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 37.1 36.7 35.8 36.6 36.4 36.0 35.8 35.6 35.5
Total 4,665.5 4,860.9 5,080.2 4,909.2 4,969.5 4,999.8 5,080.2 5,218.5 5,223.7
  Liabilities
Loans 1,538.5 1,549.6 1,569.2 1,549.6 1,555.5 1,564.7 1,569.2 1,571.6 1,583.2
short-term loans 71.5 66.4 64.6 67.2 67.7 66.5 64.6 65.6 64.1
long-term loans 1,467.0 1,483.2 1,504.7 1,482.4 1,487.8 1,498.3 1,504.7 1,506.0 1,519.1
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,072.7 1,092.9 1,116.8 1,093.3 1,099.1 1,108.9 1,116.8 1,119.1 1,129.5
Consumer loans 194.3 188.7 188.9 190.1 189.9 190.6 188.9 189.2 191.2
Entrepreneurial loans 271.4 268.0 263.6 266.2 266.5 265.2 263.6 263.3 262.5
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,457.4 1,463.5 1,473.1 1,477.6 1,479.6 1,491.0
Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 91.2 91.7 92.2 92.1 91.7 91.7 92.0 92.2
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 14.9 15.0 14.9 16.0 15.9 16.7 14.9 16.3 16.0
Total 1,553.4 1,564.6 1,584.2 1,565.7 1,571.4 1,581.4 1,584.2 1,587.9 1,599.1
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2009 − 79.6 − 40.5 − 19.5 − 5.1 − 14.4 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6
2010 2 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 p − 2.4 − 16.3 − 7.3 + 2.9 + 18.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 3.1 − 7.7 − 3.1 + 2.3 + 5.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.9 + 8.6 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2013          H1  p + 2.9 − 5.1 − 0.2 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 6.0 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2014          H1  p + 11.1 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         H2  p − 2.2 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2
2015          H1  3,pe + 21.1 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 4.2 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
Debt level4 End of year or quarter
2009 1,783.7 1,079.7 585.3 133.3 1.3 72.5 43.9 23.8 5.4 0.1
2010 2,090.0 1,332.2 631.5 142.8 1.3 81.0 51.6 24.5 5.5 0.1
2011 2,118.5 1,341.5 646.6 146.7 1.3 78.4 49.6 23.9 5.4 0.0
2012 p 2,195.8 1,386.2 675.2 150.8 1.2 79.7 50.3 24.5 5.5 0.0
2013 p 2,181.9 1,389.5 656.4 153.4 1.3 77.4 49.3 23.3 5.4 0.0
2014 p 2,184.3 1,396.4 649.6 154.7 1.4 74.9 47.9 22.3 5.3 0.0
2013          Q1 p 2,185.0 1,386.2 667.7 152.6 1.2 79.2 50.3 24.2 5.5 0.0
         Q2 p 2,185.6 1,393.8 657.4 152.3 1.1 78.7 50.2 23.7 5.5 0.0
         Q3 p 2,167.0 1,379.2 650.2 153.0 1.1 77.4 49.3 23.2 5.5 0.0
         Q4 p 2,181.9 1,389.5 656.4 153.4 1.3 77.4 49.3 23.3 5.4 0.0
2014          Q1 p 2,171.0 1,386.7 648.6 153.2 1.2 76.1 48.6 22.7 5.4 0.0
         Q2 p 2,179.0 1,395.3 647.6 154.1 1.1 75.9 48.6 22.6 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,180.2 1,391.4 650.2 154.5 1.1 75.4 48.1 22.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 p 2,184.3 1,396.4 649.6 154.7 1.4 74.9 47.9 22.3 5.3 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,183.8 1,397.8 650.9 156.1 1.4 74.3 47.6 22.1 5.3 0.0
         Q2 p 2,150.0 1,380.7 631.5 155.7 1.4 72.5 46.6 21.3 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus €5.1 billion proceeds received from the 2015 frequency auction. 4Quarterly GDP
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Including ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
the€4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Including the
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2009 1,090.9 554.7 415.6 120.6 1,170.5 624.8 197.8 65.0 58.3 224.6 − 79.6 974.3
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 2 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 63.9 59.4 2 258.0 2 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 67.5 61.4 237.2 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 p 1,222.1 623.9 454.2 144.0 1,224.5 644.4 212.9 63.1 62.2 241.9 − 2.4 1,082.6
2013 p 1,252.5 642.0 464.9 145.5 1,255.6 665.7 218.6 56.0 63.5 251.7 − 3.1 1,111.3
2014 p 1,299.6 665.1 481.9 152.6 1,290.7 691.1 224.6 51.5 63.2 260.3 + 8.9 1,151.5
as a percentage of GDP
2009 44.3 22.5 16.9 4.9 47.6 25.4 8.0 2.6 2.4 9.1 − 3.2 39.6
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 2 47.3 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 2 10.0 2 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.8 − 1.0 38.72012 
p 44.4 22.6 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.4 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.8 − 0.1 39.3
2013 p 44.4 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.5 23.6 7.8 2.0 2.3 8.9 − 0.1 39.4
2014 p 44.6 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.3 23.7 7.7 1.8 2.2 8.9 + 0.3 39.5
Percentage growth rates
2009 − 1.9 − 5.3 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.9 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.1 + 10.7 + 5.1 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.9 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 3.3 − 8.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 6.5 + 1.4 + 2.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.5 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 − 11.2 + 2.1 + 4.0 . + 2.6
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.7 − 8.1 − 0.5 + 3.4 . + 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and ceived from the 2010 frequency auction, which are deducted from other expenditure
social contributions plus customs duties. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds re- in the national accounts. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.7
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 235.9 293.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.0 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,236.6 + 8.6
2013          Q1 p 178.0 148.6 2.6 187.8 53.7 74.9 22.5 6.0 2.9 − 9.8 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.3 294.9 − 13.6
         Q2 p 193.8 155.3 4.8 185.0 54.7 68.7 14.2 8.5 8.0 + 8.8 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 302.0 292.7 + 9.4
         Q3 p 183.8 151.8 2.4 192.3 55.2 70.9 20.1 11.6 3.2 − 8.5 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.4 299.9 − 9.5
         Q4 p 204.7 164.2 4.6 207.5 60.8 71.0 10.0 15.4 8.3 − 2.8 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.9 316.2 + 5.7
2014          Q1 p 188.1 153.6 2.0 193.8 56.7 77.8 20.1 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 295.9 304.9 − 8.9
         Q2 p 193.2 157.4 2.2 188.3 56.9 71.9 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 4.9 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.6 299.1 + 5.5
         Q3 p 186.8 157.5 3.4 188.0 57.0 70.8 12.2 11.3 4.0 − 1.3 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 297.6 300.0 − 2.4
         Q4 p 224.5 174.9 3.5 217.5 65.4 74.0 14.9 16.5 3.1 + 7.0 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 347.1 333.3 + 13.8
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.4
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.2 − 0.3 337.9 335.8 + 2.0 218.8 219.0 − 0.2
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.5 − 0.6
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.2 61.2 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 57.5 53.2 + 4.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 p 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 ... 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 ... ... 7,558
2014          Sep . 53,444 30,194 21,981 1,269 . . 2,2592015          Sep . 55,204 31,038 23,030 1,136 . . 2,253
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,5172012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453
2014          Sep 57,335 29,057 12,485 10,902 4,357 1,313 17,312 13,313 4,000 5 9,017 1,512 433 3,891
2015          Sep 59,367 30,947 13,244 11,683 5,034 985 17,255 13,119 4,136 5 8,974 1,711 476 4,163
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2014: 53.5:44.5:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2014: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 
p 9,512 3,683 4,278 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 . 2,561 1,617 660 16,368 12,383 3,636
         Q3 10,159 3,981 3,714 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 . 3,021 1,335 672 ... ... ...
2014          Sep 3,560 1,251 1,690 559 838 562 170 385 . 838 459 215 . . .2015          Sep 3,592 1,201 1,813 552 701 505 171 439 . 996 494 221 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue
Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,666,170 4,440 519,017 176,872 155,935 809,906
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,783,669 4,440 556,202 188,858 136,672 897,497
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,090,037 4,440 688,938 208,244 135,917 1,052,498
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,118,535 4,440 629,678 208,005 123,941 1,152,4712012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,195,819 4,440 633,355 200,406 144,201 1,213,4162013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,181,924 4,440 623,685 190,921 150,408 1,212,4702014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 
p 2,184,302 4,440 611,873 190,343 138,775 1,238,870
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 2,184,951 4,440 625,566 194,817 148,862 1,211,266         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 2,185,626 4,440 618,479 201,034 141,784 1,219,889         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 2,166,992 4,440 619,743 191,759 148,376 1,202,674         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 2,181,924 4,440 623,685 190,921 150,408 1,212,470
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 
p 2,170,966 4,440 620,478 190,621 134,911 1,220,517
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 2,178,961 4,440 618,658 189,862 135,874 1,230,127
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 2,180,165 4,440 620,462 189,118 132,977 1,233,168
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 2,184,302 4,440 611,873 190,343 138,775 1,238,870
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 p 2,183,814 4,440 619,519 189,242 149,296 1,221,317
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 p 2,150,021 4,440 606,064 187,345 172,349 1,179,824
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks
Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,605 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,307 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,241 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,802,340 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,587 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 1,806,613 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,700 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 1,794,764 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 280,055 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,809,802 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,899 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 1,822,342 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 286,242 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 1,818,961 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 281,400 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 1,822,784 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 282,492 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 p 1,821,960 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,579 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,806,898 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,289 42 110,944 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
State government
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,571 1,975 283,601 .... 154,545 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 540,650 261 309,346 .... 132,537 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 543,169 1,098 314,024 .... 129,130 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 547,267 856 322,362 .... 125,767 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 550,200 0 326,188 .... 125,310 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 p 547,688 1,821 323,055 .... 124,144 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 p 538,485 2,040 320,492 .... 117,826 5 98,121 . 1
Local government11
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 138,370 . − . . 423 . 134,898 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 137,102 . − . . 523 . 133,530 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 137,625 . − . . 523 . 134,053 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 140,198 . − . . 1,046 . 135,811 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 140,719 . − . . 1,046 . 136,332 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 141,274 . − . . 1,046 . 136,888 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 142,456 . − . . 1,297 . 136,674 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 p 147,230 . − . . 1,597 . 141,146 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 p 146,776 . − . . 1,847 . 140,442 37 4,450 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2013   2014   2015
  2012   2013   2014   2012   2013   2014   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 105.9 106.3 108.1 0.5 0.4 1.6 2.9 3.5 0.4 1.6 1.1 1.2 2.4Construction 102.6 101.3 104.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.6 1.9 11.6 1.7 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.1Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 106.4 103.9 105.2 2.4 − 2.4 1.3 − 1.5 2.5 0.6 0.7 1.5 2.0 2.1Information and communication 115.6 122.6 125.5 4.1 6.0 2.4 5.6 2.4 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.1 2.8Financial and insuranceactivities 98.7 99.1 99.8 − 1.7 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.6 1.9 − 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.0Real estate activities 101.1 102.6 103.6 − 2.3 1.4 1.0 1.7 1.3 0.9 1.0 0.9 0.8 1.0Business services 
1 103.4 104.0 106.6 1.0 0.6 2.4 1.7 3.0 1.7 2.6 2.2 2.0 2.4
Public services, education and
health 102.0 102.6 103.7 0.4 0.6 1.0 0.7 1.6 0.6 0.7 1.2 0.8 1.2Other services 99.3 98.4 98.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 0.1 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.1
Gross value added 104.1 104.4 106.0 0.5 0.3 1.5 1.4 2.6 0.9 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.6Gross domestic product 
2 104.1 104.4 106.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 1.2 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.6
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 102.3 103.0 103.9 1.0 0.6 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.6 0.5 1.6 2.3 1.8
Government consumption 102.2 103.0 104.8 1.3 0.8 1.7 0.6 1.1 1.9 1.8 2.0 2.3 1.9
Machinery and equipment 104.0 101.6 106.3 − 2.6 − 2.3 4.5 2.6 8.4 4.5 3.8 2.3 3.9 3.0Premises 108.7 107.5 110.7 0.5 − 1.1 2.9 0.3 12.3 0.5 − 0.0 1.1 − 1.7 0.8Other investment 
4 106.7 106.3 109.7 1.3 − 0.3 3.1 0.7 1.9 3.2 3.7 3.7 2.7 2.7
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 1.6 0.6 − 0.3 0.2 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.0
Domestic demand 101.9 102.7 104.1 − 1.0 0.8 1.3 1.2 2.6 1.1 0.0 1.5 1.5 0.8Net exports 
6 . . . 1.4 − 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.2 − 0.1 1.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.9
Exports 111.3 113.0 117.6 2.8 1.6 4.0 4.3 4.4 2.7 4.7 4.4 4.5 6.6Imports 106.7 109.9 114.0 − 0.3 3.1 3.7 4.7 4.7 3.3 2.4 4.6 5.6 5.6
Gross domestic product 
2 104.1 104.4 106.1 0.4 0.3 1.6 1.2 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.6
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,533.8 1,562.7 1,592.2 2.6 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.1 1.7 1.5 2.3 2.7 2.7
Government consumption 522.7 541.9 564.0 3.4 3.7 4.1 3.3 3.8 4.5 4.1 4.0 3.8 3.7Machinery and equipment 184.9 181.3 189.8 − 1.8 − 2.0 4.7 3.0 8.5 4.4 4.0 2.6 4.2 3.2Premises 272.9 277.2 291.8 3.3 1.6 5.2 3.7 15.6 3.3 1.8 2.7 0.2 2.5Other investment 
4 98.0 98.8 103.5 2.8 0.9 4.8 2.4 3.2 4.9 5.6 5.4 4.8 4.8
Changes in inventories 5 − 25.3 − 10.5 − 22.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,587.1 2,651.4 2,719.3 0.6 2.5 2.6 2.6 4.1 2.6 1.3 2.4 2.3 2.0Net exports 167.7 169.4 196.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,266.9 1,283.1 1,333.2 4.6 1.3 3.9 3.6 3.8 2.2 4.8 4.7 5.2 8.4Imports 1,099.2 1,113.7 1,136.8 1.8 1.3 2.1 2.3 2.6 1.5 1.1 3.1 3.2 5.2
Gross domestic product 
2 2,754.9 2,820.8 2,915.7 1.9 2.4 3.4 3.2 4.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.7
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 103.7 104.9 105.9 1.6 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.0 1.0 0.7 0.4 0.9Gross domestic product 102.6 104.7 106.6 1.5 2.1 1.7 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.6 2.0 2.1Terms of trade 96.9 98.3 99.7 − 0.4 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.7 3.1 2.1
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,391.5 1,430.8 1,485.3 3.9 2.8 3.8 2.9 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.8Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 660.2 665.8 690.9 − 4.1 0.9 3.8 5.4 8.5 0.3 4.2 1.5 3.9 3.3
National income 2,051.7 2,096.6 2,176.2 1.2 2.2 3.8 3.6 5.5 2.7 3.9 3.1 3.6 3.7
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,820.4 2,882.0 2,982.4 1.8 2.2 3.5 3.2 4.8 2.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 3.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2015. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2011 106.7 107.0 95.6 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.82013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.8 114.82014 107.9 108.4 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
 
2014          Q3 107.9 116.4 86.6 109.4 107.2 114.8 97.0 102.8 111.1 110.6 115.1 114.6
         Q4 111.6 118.9 99.6 112.1 103.6 122.8 104.7 106.1 110.7 111.2 125.3 118.9
2015          Q1 2 105.4 2 85.0 103.7 108.5 106.2 114.3 104.0 99.3 110.4 107.5 105.5 126.4
         Q2 r 2 108.6 2 109.4 91.9 110.7 107.6 117.7 101.5 100.7 113.4 108.0 114.5 122.2
         Q3 x 2 109.2 2 116.9 93.4 110.1 107.0 116.5 100.1 102.6 111.4 110.1 111.7 119.5
 
2014          Sep 113.1 118.2 89.9 115.3 109.3 124.9 110.5 105.2 114.8 115.2 124.3 130.2
         Oct 113.7 120.0 98.4 114.8 111.0 120.6 108.2 109.8 116.8 114.5 116.3 125.9
         Nov 115.7 120.7 98.4 117.3 109.5 128.1 111.9 108.5 119.0 116.3 123.4 134.3
         Dec 105.3 115.9 101.9 104.3 90.3 119.7 93.9 100.0 96.3 102.7 136.1 96.6
2015          Jan 98.3 71.6 105.5 101.2 102.0 102.2 95.7 97.5 105.1 100.6 94.1 111.5
         Feb 102.6 79.4 100.3 106.2 103.2 113.2 103.2 94.7 107.6 105.9 102.2 128.9
         Mar 2 115.3 2 104.1 105.3 118.2 113.3 127.5 113.2 105.6 118.5 116.0 120.1 138.7
         Apr r 2 107.6 2 106.8 96.5 109.2 106.7 115.9 102.2 98.6 112.9 104.8 110.9 122.7
         May r 2 107.6 2 108.8 89.5 109.7 106.9 116.1 100.5 100.6 112.6 106.5 111.7 122.3
         June r 2 110.7 2 112.7 89.7 113.1 109.3 121.1 101.9 102.9 114.7 112.7 120.8 121.7
         July 3,x 2 111.9 2 118.6 94.4 113.1 109.4 120.9 97.8 104.0 113.9 111.0 114.7 128.4
         Aug 3,x 2 102.4 2 113.0 91.0 102.4 102.5 104.0 91.1 100.2 105.4 104.8 104.3 98.7
         Sep x,p 2 113.3 2 119.1 94.7 114.9 109.1 124.6 111.5 103.6 114.9 114.6 116.2 131.3
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.7 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.8
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 4.1
 
2014          Q3 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 4.2 + 2.6 + 0.5
         Q4 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.8
2015          Q1 2 + 0.2 2 − 3.3 + 4.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 3.1
         Q2 r 2 + 1.4 2 − 1.0 + 7.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
         Q3 x 2 + 1.2 2 + 0.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.5 + 3.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 4.2
 
2014          Sep + 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.8 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.0 + 1.6
         Oct + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 4.6
         Nov 
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1
         Dec 
+ 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 0.5
2015          Jan + 0.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 2.4 + 3.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 7.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.6
         Mar 2 + 0.1 2 − 1.0 + 6.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.9 + 1.5
         Apr r 2 + 0.8 2 − 1.7 + 9.0 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 2.2 + 4.1 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.2
         May r 2 + 2.5 2 + 1.1 + 4.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 1.7
         June r 2 + 1.0 2 − 2.3 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 1.0
         July 3,x 2 + 0.8 2 − 0.6 + 11.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1
         Aug 3,x 2 + 2.7 2 + 1.1 + 7.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 4.9 + 9.1 − 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 17.8
         Sep x,p 2 + 0.2 2 + 0.8 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 6.5 + 0.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, construction sector by the Federal Statistical Office (on average + 4%). 3Influenced
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Preliminary; the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
preadjusted on the basis of estimations to the results of the total annual survey in the

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2014          Sep 111.9 − 0.4 101.8 − 0.2 118.9 − 0.6 112.4 + 0.4 109.0 − 2.2 113.6 + 1.2
         Oct 115.0 + 3.4 107.1 − 0.5 120.5 + 6.1 114.6 + 2.3 108.4 − 1.5 116.7 + 3.5
         Nov 114.7 + 0.1 104.2 − 1.7 122.4 + 1.2 113.4 + 0.5 104.9 − 2.4 116.3 + 1.4
         Dec 112.7 + 4.5 92.6 + 2.7 128.9 + 5.7 97.7 + 3.1 92.9 + 5.1 99.4 + 2.4
2015          Jan 112.8 + 0.5 107.3 − 1.4 116.8 + 2.4 111.6 − 2.9 104.8 + 3.6 114.0 − 4.8
         Feb 111.9 − 0.4 101.7 − 2.4 118.0 + 0.7 119.8 + 2.0 101.4 + 4.8 126.2 + 1.3
         Mar 125.0 + 3.7 113.0 − 0.1 134.3 + 5.9 118.6 + 5.3 113.0 + 0.3 120.5 + 6.9
         Apr 116.2 + 3.4 104.4 − 1.1 125.1 + 5.9 111.2 + 3.9 104.2 − 3.6 113.6 + 6.6
         May 114.1 + 6.4 105.0 + 2.7 120.8 + 8.8 111.8 + 5.8 102.3 + 4.3 115.1 + 6.1
         June 123.0 + 8.8 106.6 + 0.9 135.9 + 14.3 113.8 + 4.9 106.9 + 1.9 116.2 + 5.9
         July 116.5 − 0.1 105.1 − 1.2 124.3 + 0.2 118.7 + 3.5 108.0 + 10.3 122.4 + 1.6
         Aug 103.1 + 2.8 94.0 − 0.5 108.5 + 5.4 110.8 + 0.2 100.2 + 6.4 114.5 − 1.5
         Sep p 111.6 − 0.3 100.1 − 1.7 119.4 + 0.4 113.3 + 0.8 113.2 + 3.9 113.4 − 0.2
From the domestic market
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.4 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2014          Sep 
102.2 − 3.6 96.8 − 4.1 107.1 − 3.7 105.3 + 0.2 112.3 − 1.1 102.8 + 0.7
         Oct 109.0 + 3.4 102.0 − 1.5 116.3 + 8.6 106.7 + 1.1 110.7 − 5.6 105.3 + 3.8
         Nov 105.9 − 3.4 100.2 − 4.9 112.1 − 2.3 102.6 − 1.8 106.3 − 2.1 101.3 − 1.7
         Dec 97.2 + 3.4 87.8 − 0.1 108.0 + 6.2 88.4 + 4.6 84.8 + 4.2 89.7 + 4.8
2015          Jan 105.6 − 1.1 103.0 − 3.6 108.5 + 1.0 104.2 + 0.9 103.2 + 0.8 104.5 + 0.9
         Feb 104.9 − 1.2 96.7 − 5.8 112.2 + 2.7 110.5 + 1.7 100.6 + 0.4 114.0 + 2.1
         Mar 121.2 + 3.8 108.2 + 0.0 136.1 + 7.3 110.5 + 2.4 108.5 − 4.0 111.2 + 4.8
         Apr 
108.5 + 0.7 100.9 − 3.1 117.5 + 4.2 99.8 + 0.8 102.8 − 4.5 98.8 + 2.9
         May 106.2 + 2.2 101.6 + 0.3 111.7 + 3.5 101.0 + 5.9 94.4 + 1.5 103.3 + 7.3
         June 106.7 + 1.4 100.6 − 1.3 113.8 + 4.1 101.3 + 1.4 100.9 − 5.3 101.4 + 3.9
         July 111.9 + 3.1 101.4 − 2.5 122.8 + 8.6 109.5 + 1.1 106.1 + 4.4 110.7 + 0.0
         Aug 
99.9 + 2.0 93.9 − 0.1 104.9 + 4.0 106.4 + 3.3 99.7 + 4.1 108.8 + 3.1
         Sep p 105.2 + 2.9 96.1 − 0.7 113.8 + 6.3 107.7 + 2.3 111.2 − 1.0 106.4 + 3.5
From abroad
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.6 + 25.3 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.7 − 0.5 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.6 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2014          Sep 119.7 + 1.9 107.7 + 4.2 126.1 + 1.0 118.5 + 0.6 106.2 − 3.1 122.7 + 1.7
         Oct 119.8 + 3.4 113.1 + 0.6 123.1 + 4.7 121.3 + 3.1 106.4 + 2.7 126.4 + 3.3
         Nov 121.9 + 2.8 108.9 + 2.0 128.7 + 3.2 122.6 + 2.3 103.6 − 2.7 129.1 + 3.7
         Dec 125.3 + 5.3 98.3 + 5.7 141.8 + 5.4 105.7 + 1.9 100.0 + 5.8 107.6 + 0.7
2015          Jan 118.7 + 1.9 112.3 + 1.1 122.0 + 3.1 118.0 − 5.5 106.2 + 6.1 122.0 − 8.5
         Feb 117.6 + 0.3 107.6 + 1.6 121.5 − 0.6 127.8 + 2.3 102.1 + 8.7 136.6 + 0.7
         Mar 128.0 + 3.6 118.7 − 0.2 133.2 + 5.0 125.5 + 7.5 117.0 + 4.1 128.4 + 8.5
         Apr 122.4 + 5.2 108.5 + 1.1 129.8 + 7.0 120.9 + 6.2 105.5 − 2.9 126.1 + 9.1
         May 120.5 + 9.6 109.0 + 5.6 126.4 + 12.0 121.1 + 5.7 109.2 + 6.5 125.2 + 5.4
         June 136.3 + 14.1 113.7 + 3.3 149.5 + 19.7 124.5 + 7.5 112.2 + 8.4 128.7 + 7.3
         July 120.3 − 2.3 109.4 + 0.1 125.3 − 4.2 126.5 + 5.3 109.6 + 15.7 132.4 + 2.7
         Aug 105.7 + 3.4 94.2 − 0.9 110.7 + 6.3 114.5 − 2.2 100.6 + 8.4 119.3 − 4.9
         Sep p 116.8 − 2.4 104.8 − 2.7 122.9 − 2.5 118.1 − 0.3 114.9 + 8.2 119.3 − 2.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 99.6 + 1.3 99.7 + 6.0 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.6 + 2.8 99.5 − 2.8 99.6 + 5.7 99.6 − 5.5
2011 107.0 + 7.4 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.5 − 8.1 102.0 + 2.5 112.7 + 13.2 95.9 − 3.7
2012 114.7 + 7.2 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.8 + 0.3 108.0 + 5.9 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.7 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.6 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.6 − 0.5 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.2 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.1 − 3.3
 
2014          Aug 121.5 − 1.9 122.6 − 1.2 127.0 − 12.3 130.7 + 7.9 89.8 − 2.8 120.4 − 2.5 124.8 + 4.6 115.9 − 3.3
         Sep 121.8 − 3.3 130.0 − 4.3 149.0 − 2.5 128.9 − 2.9 96.1 − 13.4 113.6 − 2.2 123.3 − 5.4 109.3 − 1.1
         Oct 113.7 − 3.2 129.3 + 0.5 152.0 + 7.5 129.4 − 3.9 84.5 − 1.2 98.0 − 7.9 119.1 − 4.9 92.7 − 7.2
         Nov 99.4 − 6.8 113.0 − 5.5 130.2 + 5.9 116.7 − 11.9 68.3 − 9.1 85.7 − 8.5 109.0 − 11.5 77.2 − 7.3         Dec 102.0 − 5.1 122.1 + 1.5 154.4 + 12.8 115.2 − 5.0 79.3 − 6.6 81.8 − 13.6 109.8 − 4.6 72.9 − 17.2
2015          Jan 95.4 + 2.5 101.9 − 4.3 122.3 + 8.3 100.6 − 11.2 65.8 − 10.6 88.8 + 11.4 104.3 − 5.8 75.4 + 12.4
         Feb 104.9 + 2.6 113.5 + 0.6 136.7 + 2.0 105.7 − 7.5 90.9 + 35.9 96.3 + 5.0 103.6 − 2.6 93.4 + 9.5         Mar 142.6 + 2.7 149.9 + 2.3 189.6 + 14.8 133.5 − 9.7 120.5 + 14.2 135.3 + 3.1 136.8 − 3.0 129.6 + 2.9
         Apr 126.9 − 5.3 133.1 − 0.2 171.4 + 0.8 118.5 − 2.5 100.9 + 5.3 120.8 − 10.3 118.1 − 5.8 118.2 − 7.9
         May 132.9 + 4.1 138.3 + 5.7 167.9 + 6.9 131.1 + 6.7 101.4 − 1.5 127.5 + 2.4 130.8 + 8.7 121.0 − 2.0         June 137.7 + 4.2 145.5 + 3.9 175.0 + 7.4 139.1 + 4.5 106.6 − 7.5 129.9 + 4.6 134.0 + 1.7 126.5 + 5.2
         July 131.9 − 3.4 139.3 − 0.4 184.5 + 28.1 120.3 − 18.3 107.1 − 1.9 124.5 − 6.5 120.7 − 13.5 122.3 − 6.2
         Aug 123.9 + 2.0 130.2 + 6.2 157.6 + 24.1 123.2 − 5.7 96.9 + 7.9 117.7 − 2.2 119.5 − 4.2 115.0 − 0.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail tradeclothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 
2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices inprices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.0 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.1 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.3 + 1.7 101.3 + 0.4 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.7 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 3 108.3 + 1.9 102.8 + 1.5 111.6 + 2.4 105.0 + 1.9 94.5 − 0.9 102.1 − 0.2 110.9 + 7.6 107.1 + 2.5
 
2014          Sep  3 104.7 + 0.1 99.0 − 0.5 106.2 + 2.6 107.5 − 6.2 91.5 − 2.3 98.8 − 2.9 108.1 + 6.5 107.2 + 1.9
         Oct 111.8 + 2.3 106.0 + 2.1 113.6 + 2.5 113.6 − 3.2 98.4 + 2.1 108.7 − 0.1 114.9 + 8.3 116.2 + 0.4
         Nov 112.8 + 0.7 107.5 + 0.9 113.1 + 0.9 107.7 − 2.4 109.4 + 3.2 110.8 + 0.5 115.9 + 9.1 112.7 + 0.4         Dec 127.2 + 3.8 121.9 + 4.2 129.1 + 3.9 123.6 + 3.4 146.4 + 3.8 107.5 + 4.0 128.1 + 10.1 101.8 + 4.1
2015          Jan 101.9 + 2.4 98.3 + 3.5 104.9 + 3.3 89.6 − 1.3 102.0 + 2.2 91.5 + 3.7 112.0 + 6.6 95.9 + 4.7
         Feb 98.1 + 2.3 93.9 + 3.0 102.2 + 1.5 81.8 − 0.7 85.9 + 5.9 91.3 + 1.4 109.0 + 6.2 101.6 + 6.2         Mar 113.1 + 1.7 107.1 + 2.0 115.9 + 0.1 106.1 − 3.5 89.9 + 4.9 113.5 + 1.1 119.0 + 8.5 128.3 + 8.3
         Apr 112.2 + 3.5 105.5 + 3.1 117.1 + 3.0 109.7 + 5.2 82.3 + 1.0 110.1 + 2.7 117.4 + 7.5 123.2 + 9.3
         May 111.9 + 4.0 105.4 + 3.6 117.5 + 5.3 108.4 + 1.6 81.7 − 3.1 109.1 + 6.0 113.8 + 6.7 120.4 + 10.0         June 108.3 + 1.2 102.4 + 1.1 114.2 + 0.4 105.6 + 2.9 82.0 − 0.1 102.8 + 3.4 113.1 + 3.6 121.5 + 9.6
         July 111.9 + 4.2 106.6 + 4.3 115.6 + 3.2 108.7 + 5.2 89.8 − 0.1 103.5 + 4.1 119.8 + 4.7 118.3 + 8.9
         Aug 108.1 + 2.2 102.9 + 2.2 115.3 + 6.3 96.8 − 9.7 85.8 + 2.6 99.9 + 0.5 112.5 + 5.7 106.6 + 7.1         Sep 108.0 + 3.2 102.4 + 3.4 110.2 + 3.8 112.5 + 4.7 93.6 + 2.3 102.3 + 3.5 112.4 + 4.0 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2014 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2010 41,020 + 0.3 28,008 + 1.0 8,421 18,693 675 5,025 503 429 3,239 1,076 7.7 359
2011 41,577 + 1.4 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 4662012 42,060 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013 42,328 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 4572014 42,703 + 0.9 30,197 + 1.6 8,859 20,328 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2012          Q3 42,262 + 1.1 29,416 + 2.1 8,776 19,604 798 5,006 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493
         Q4 42,418 + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,880 + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 42,249 + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459         Q3 42,515 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471         Q4 42,666 + 0.6 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 42,226 + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,667 + 1.0 30,080 + 1.7 8,828 20,251 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487         Q3 42,903 + 0.9 30,284 + 1.7 8,895 20,341 799 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512         Q4 43,016 + 0.8 30,614 + 1.6 8,955 20,622 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1
r 42,504 r + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,831 20,547 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 r 42,943 r + 0.6 8 30,674 8 + 2.0 8 8,894 8 20,739 8 792 8 4,861 ... 8 48 2,772 822 9 6.3 560
         Q3 10 43,246 10 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,759 827 6.3 595
2012          June 42,120 + 1.1 29,280 + 2.2 8,733 19,519 790 5,032 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499
         July 42,149 + 1.3 29,255 + 2.3 8,737 19,478 804 5,038 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 42,246 + 1.1 29,477 + 2.0 8,793 19,645 801 4,986 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 42,391 + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,494 + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,494 + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 42,265 + 0.9 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,862 + 0.8 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb 41,853 + 0.8 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448         Mar 41,926 + 0.7 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463         Apr 42,083 + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460         May 42,288 + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457         June 42,376 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459         July 42,419 + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,484 + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,641 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,746 + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,730 + 0.6 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,523 + 0.6 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 42,170 + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,195 + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,312 + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,522 + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,684 + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,835 20,289 750 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481         June 42,795 + 1.0 30,175 + 1.9 8,853 20,292 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,833 + 1.0 30,121 + 1.8 8,859 20,217 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,857 + 0.9 30,312 + 1.6 8,903 20,358 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 43,020 + 0.9 30,663 + 1.7 8,991 20,603 812 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,118 + 0.9 30,676 + 1.6 8,979 20,641 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,067 + 0.8 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,642 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,862 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,863 20,563 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan 
r 42,445 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,813 20,493 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb r 42,456 + 0.6 30,342 + 1.9 8,818 20,542 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
         Mar r 42,612 r + 0.7 30,528 + 2.0 8,864 20,649 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr r 42,792 r + 0.6 30,645 + 1.9 8,893 20,720 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
         May r 42,959 r + 0.6 8 30,723 8 + 2.0 8 8,901 8 20,777 8 794 8 4,868 ... 8 44 2,762 815 9 6.3 557
         June r 43,078 r + 0.7 8 30,777 8 + 2.0 8 8,915 8 20,791 8 820 8 4,902 ... 8 46 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July r 43,135 r + 0.7 8 30,753 8 + 2.1 8 8,934 8 20,730 8 841 8 4,909 ... 8 35 2,773 830 6.3 589
         Aug r 43,203 r + 0.8 8 31,003 8 + 2.3 8 8,995 8 20,911 8 848 8 4,851 ... 8 27 2,796 851 6.4 597
         Sep 10 43,401 10 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,708 799 6.2 600
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,649 764 6.0 612
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2013
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- and 2014, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 1.4 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal 6.0 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 21.3 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From May 2015 calculated
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Fed-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located eral Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 
1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 111.8 104.0 103.6 120.8 96.8
 
2013          Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 122.4 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 119.5 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 119.4 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 120.4 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 121.1 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 118.8 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 117.7 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 113.9 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 111.5 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3
         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 108.6 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 104.4 104.2 103.5 111.9 95.5
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 104.3 104.2 102.7 103.1 97.5
         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 103.4 103.9 101.0 84.3 96.0
2015          Jan 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.3 106.1 104.2 8 103.1 104.4 100.2 71.4 97.7
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 105.5 104.7 101.6 86.2 97.2         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.8 105.3 102.6 86.9 98.9
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 104.5 106.7 105.6 103.2 94.0 98.3
         May 107.1 113.2 105.1 110.9 106.2 106.5 111.1 104.5 105.5 105.4 103.0 96.9 96.4
         June 107.0 112.6 104.9 110.4 106.3 106.6 104.4 106.0 105.3 102.5 93.3 94.9
         July 107.2 111.8 104.4 109.8 107.8 106.7 104.4 105.2 105.4 101.8 85.5 94.8
         Aug 107.2 111.5 104.9 107.5 108.1 106.8 111.5 103.9 102.7 104.9 100.3 72.3 89.0
         Sep 107.0 112.1 105.9 105.7 107.0 106.9 103.5 ... 104.6 99.6 71.8 87.0
         Oct 107.0 112.7 106.1 104.9 106.9 107.0 ... ... ... ... 72.6 86.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 7.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 9.2 − 4.2
 
2013          Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July
+ 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 10.1 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 13.9 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 14.7 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.9 + 1.2
         Dec 
+ 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 15.5 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 35.9 − 0.6
2015          Jan − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 8 − 13.7 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 44.8 + 1.8
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 11.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 33.3 + 0.0
         Mar 
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.1 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 31.0 + 2.1
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.5 − 11.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 25.5 − 1.0
         May + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.2 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 25.0 − 2.5
         June + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 1.4 − 9.9 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 29.8 − 2.6
         July + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 6.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 7.6 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 33.0 − 0.8
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 7.9 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 41.5 − 7.6
         Sep + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.1 ... + 0.3 − 4.0 − 41.2 − 8.4
         Oct 
+ 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 8.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 35.1 − 9.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From January 2015 onwards,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2007
969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,543.0 1.8 158.1 3.5 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.2 0.5 1,029.1 2.4 1,582.6 2.6 165.9 4.9 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.2 7.0 1,055.7 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 387.7 1.2 1,089.9 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 383.0 − 1.2 1,112.4 2.1 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.5 4.1 757.8 3.9 389.3 1.6 1,147.1 3.1 1,690.4 2.2 156.5 − 1.0 9.3
2013 1,168.3 3.1 779.7 2.9 398.5 2.4 1,178.2 2.7 1,719.8 1.7 157.1 0.4 9.1
2014 1,213.7 3.9 808.1 3.6 409.8 2.8 1,217.8 3.4 1,759.7 2.3 167.6 6.7 9.5
2014          Q1 282.7 4.0 188.6 3.6 104.1 2.5 292.8 3.2 436.1 2.4 55.7 4.6 12.8
         Q2 296.5 3.9 193.5 3.8 100.5 1.5 294.0 3.0 435.5 2.0 39.8 6.0 9.1
         Q3 299.7 3.8 203.9 3.6 102.5 2.7 306.5 3.3 440.6 1.7 35.4 4.4 8.0
         Q4 334.8 3.8 222.0 3.5 102.6 4.7 324.6 3.9 447.5 3.1 36.7 13.0 8.2
2015          Q1 292.5 3.5 194.0 2.8 107.3 3.1 301.3 2.9 448.9 2.9 58.4 4.7 13.0
         Q2 308.2 4.0 199.9 3.3 105.8 5.3 305.6 4.0 448.0 2.9 41.6 4.7 9.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2015. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2007 93.9 1.3 93.7 1.5 93.4 1.5 92.9 1.4 95.3 1.4
2008 96.5 2.7 96.4 2.8 96.2 3.0 95.9 3.2 97.6 2.42009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.3 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.82013 107.1 2.4 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.4 107.3 2.4 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.3 2.8 110.3 2.9 111.4 2.7
2014          Q2 103.5 3.2 103.4 3.1 103.6 3.1 110.2 3.3 109.0 2.6
         Q3 112.3 2.8 112.2 2.8 112.5 2.8 110.9 2.8 109.7 2.6         Q4 123.1 2.9 123.0 2.9 123.4 2.8 111.2 2.9 121.7 2.7
2015          Q1 104.4 2.2 104.3 2.1 104.2 2.3 111.6 2.3 107.7 2.6
         Q2 105.9 2.3 105.7 2.2 106.0 2.3 112.8 2.3 112.5 3.2         Q3 115.1 2.5 114.9 2.4 115.2 2.4 113.6 2.5 . .
2015          Mar 105.2 3.1 105.1 3.1 104.6 2.3 112.1 2.4 . .
         Apr 106.1 2.6 105.9 2.5 106.2 2.6 112.6 2.6 . .
         May 106.1 2.0 105.9 2.0 106.2 2.1 112.7 2.1 . .
         June 105.4 2.2 105.2 2.2 105.6 2.2 113.1 2.2 . .
         July 133.3 2.4 133.1 2.4 133.4 2.3 113.5 2.4 . .
         Aug 106.0 2.5 105.8 2.5 106.1 2.5 113.7 2.5 . .
         Sep 106.1 2.5 105.9 2.5 106.2 2.5 113.8 2.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2015. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.1 176.8 160.9
2012 1,904.5 1,178.2 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.4 189.8 179.1 125.9 561.4 1,343.1 719.6 380.8 623.6 179.5 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.3 635.9 191.3 166.8
2014 2,117.2 1,310.4 432.7 534.4 260.4 806.8 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.3 1,528.9 834.9 434.2 694.0 216.2 179.8
2014          Q2 1,982.5 1,224.8 394.0 505.9 253.8 757.6 200.9 189.9 123.3 568.7 1,413.8 763.3 395.0 650.5 199.7 162.6
         Q3 2,043.4 1,263.4 403.1 522.2 259.4 780.0 206.8 190.0 136.0 586.1 1,457.3 793.2 407.0 664.0 200.6 172.0         Q4 2,117.2 1,310.4 432.7 534.4 260.4 806.8 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.3 1,528.9 834.9 434.2 694.0 216.2 179.8
2015          Q1
p 2,257.4 1,399.4 456.7 558.9 284.4 858.0 220.3 212.3 139.0 607.7 1,649.8 910.0 454.1 739.7 224.7 184.3
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.7 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014 100.0 61.9 20.4 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.4 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2014          Q2 100.0 61.8 19.9 25.5 12.8 38.2 10.1 9.6 6.2 28.7 71.3 38.5 19.9 32.8 10.1 8.2
         Q3 100.0 61.8 19.7 25.6 12.7 38.2 10.1 9.3 6.7 28.7 71.3 38.8 19.9 32.5 9.8 8.4
         Q4 100.0 61.9 20.4 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.4 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2015          Q1 p 100.0 62.0 20.2 24.8 12.6 38.0 9.8 9.4 6.2 26.9 73.1 40.3 20.1 32.8 10.0 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.7 921.3 258.9 388.0 222.1 619.4 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.7 1,097.0 581.8 286.6 515.2 161.0 116.5
2013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 286.2 521.4 170.4 118.6
2014 1,695.5 1,016.5 278.4 425.9 246.5 679.0 187.3 143.8 103.2 457.3 1,238.1 667.5 325.9 570.7 194.4 126.9
2014          Q2 1,604.2 956.5 260.9 403.7 237.0 647.7 184.7 147.7 97.0 451.5 1,152.7 617.5 301.8 535.2 177.9 118.2
         Q3 1,647.8 986.3 265.4 418.1 241.3 661.5 190.7 146.2 102.1 461.3 1,186.5 640.3 310.4 546.2 176.4 125.4         Q4 1,695.5 1,016.5 278.4 425.9 246.5 679.0 187.3 143.8 103.2 457.3 1,238.1 667.5 325.9 570.7 194.4 126.9
2015          Q1
p 1,812.8 1,085.7 292.1 445.6 269.4 727.1 202.8 163.1 109.6 471.7 1,341.1 730.4 341.8 610.6 201.8 135.1
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.4 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.5 40.1 11.1 8.5 6.1 27.0 73.0 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2014          Q2 100.0 59.6 16.3 25.2 14.8 40.4 11.5 9.2 6.1 28.1 71.9 38.5 18.8 33.4 11.1 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.9 16.1 25.4 14.7 40.1 11.6 8.9 6.2 28.0 72.0 38.9 18.8 33.2 10.7 7.6
         Q4 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.5 40.1 11.1 8.5 6.1 27.0 73.0 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2015          Q1 p 100.0 59.9 16.1 24.6 14.9 40.1 11.2 9.0 6.0 26.0 74.0 40.3 18.9 33.7 11.1 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.1
2012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.2
2013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.8 48.2
2014 421.7 294.0 154.4 108.5 13.9 127.7 17.1 46.9 32.6 131.0 290.7 167.4 108.3 123.3 21.8 52.9
2014          Q2 378.3 268.4 133.1 102.2 16.9 109.9 16.2 42.1 26.2 117.2 261.1 145.8 93.2 115.3 21.8 44.4
         Q3 395.6 277.1 137.7 104.2 18.1 118.5 16.1 43.8 33.9 124.8 270.8 152.9 96.6 117.9 24.2 46.5
         Q4 421.7 294.0 154.4 108.5 13.9 127.7 17.1 46.9 32.6 131.0 290.7 167.4 108.3 123.3 21.8 52.9
2015          Q1 p 444.7 313.7 164.6 113.3 14.9 130.9 17.5 49.2 29.4 135.9 308.7 179.6 112.4 129.1 23.0 49.1
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.1
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.7 36.6 25.7 3.3 30.3 4.1 11.1 7.7 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.7 29.2 5.2 12.6
2014          Q2 100.0 70.9 35.2 27.0 4.5 29.1 4.3 11.1 6.9 31.0 69.0 38.5 24.7 30.5 5.8 11.7
         Q3 100.0 70.0 34.8 26.3 4.6 30.0 4.1 11.1 8.6 31.6 68.4 38.7 24.4 29.8 6.1 11.8
         Q4 100.0 69.7 36.6 25.7 3.3 30.3 4.1 11.1 7.7 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.7 29.2 5.2 12.6
2015          Q1 p 100.0 70.6 37.0 25.5 3.4 29.4 3.9 11.1 6.6 30.6 69.4 40.4 25.3 29.0 5.2 11.1
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2006 1,209.4 10.6 154.8 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.4 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.0 4.4 173.5 15.0 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.3 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 177.9 − 0.3 12.4 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.5 6.6 190.8 3.3 12.3 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 96.9 − 7.1 6.2 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 188.5 − 2.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.0 9.9 18.2 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2014 1,585.8 0.9 200.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.6 10.2 17.2 109.2 7.4 6.9 0.4 1.8 6.2 11.1
2012          Q3 384.3 7.1 47.8 4.3 12.4 − 0.3 4.7 10.3 17.2 16.6 − 49.8 4.3 − 3.9 1.7 6.2 11.9
         Q4 406.9 3.4 48.2 0.6 11.9 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 23.8 5.8 0.9 0.1 6.4 12.3
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.2 − 1.0 12.3 0.1 5.1 10.3 16.1 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.4 47.6 − 1.5 11.7 − 0.1 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.2 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 − 0.1 50.2 8.9 13.2 1.1 3.7 8.7 16.2 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.1 10.2
         Q2 386.7 − 2.0 47.9 − 0.2 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 2.3 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1
         Q3 394.7 2.8 49.9 3.9 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.2 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7
         Q4 423.4 2.9 52.7 7.2 12.5 0.5 4.0 11.6 19.3 23.5 8.6 5.6 0.3 0.5 6.7 12.0
2015          Q1 p 409.8 7.2 51.2 1.9 12.5 − 0.7 4.5 9.7 17.2 28.8 − 5.9 7.0 − 1.0 − 0.8 5.9 11.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2006 898.7 9.8 114.8 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.4 12.1 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.4
2007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.8 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.1 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.1 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.3 7.6 143.1 5.5 12.0 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.8 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.7 140.2 − 2.2 11.7 − 0.2 4.3 9.9 15.4 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.82014 1,218.3 0.9 150.0 5.7 12.3 0.6 5.1 9.5 15.1 81.9 7.8 6.7 0.4 1.0 5.9 9.9
2012          Q3 292.4 8.3 34.1 4.7 11.7 − 0.4 5.0 10.3 15.0 19.2 − 11.0 6.6 − 1.2 1.7 5.7 10.7
         Q4 311.7 3.8 34.3 5.2 11.0 0.2 3.4 10.5 15.7 15.9 14.1 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 10.7
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 33.4 − 0.4 11.5 0.2 4.5 10.1 15.0 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.5 34.6 2.0 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.3 4.6 − 0.4 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.1 39.1 6.4 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.7 14.5 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.3 5.3 9.0
         Q2 297.2 − 2.3 36.1 0.3 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 − 0.2 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3 300.0 3.3 36.4 6.3 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 12.6 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3         Q4 323.6 2.7 38.4 10.1 11.9 0.8 3.3 10.5 15.6 15.5 9.1 4.8 0.3 − 0.6 6.2 10.3
2015          Q1
p 319.7 7.3 41.2 5.5 12.9 − 0.2 5.3 9.7 14.9 25.3 1.6 7.9 − 0.5 1.0 6.0 9.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.2
2007 333.5 6.4 43.9 9.3 13.2 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.2 8.7 13.3 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.2 3.0 47.6 − 3.3 13.3 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.22014 367.5 1.0 50.7 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.1 12.7 23.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.7 6.9 14.4
2012          Q3 91.9 3.1 13.7 3.3 14.9 0.0 4.4 11.1 20.6 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5
         Q4 95.2 1.9 13.9 − 10.1 14.6 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.7 55.8 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.6 11.1 20.1 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 49.8 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.5 11.9 − 1.8 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 10.0 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8         Q4 99.8 3.7 14.3 − 1.6 14.3 − 0.7 5.2 16.5 25.4 8.0 7.5 8.0 0.2 2.1 8.3 19.8
2015          Q1
p 90.2 7.1 10.0 − 12.7 11.1 − 2.5 3.8 9.6 21.3 3.5 − 45.6 3.9 − 3.1 − 2.6 5.6 14.3
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2014
2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug p
Current account + 124,314 + 193,936 + 241,045 + 96,115 + 53,839 + 67,125 + 35,079 + 37,881 + 13,655 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,889,125 1,921,961 1,974,263 515,635 498,353 530,017 186,055 187,721 148,199
Imports 1,764,373 1,710,845 1,722,540 434,699 432,640 443,657 152,707 151,713 132,989
Balance + 124,750 + 211,116 + 251,723 + 80,936 + 65,711 + 86,361 + 33,349 + 36,007 + 15,210
2 Services
Receipts 615,336 645,414 699,846 182,405 168,633 188,224 67,213 68,083 63,493
Expenditure 556,310 576,931 628,334 167,906 160,691 168,785 59,573 62,400 59,700
Balance + 59,029 + 68,484 + 71,512 + 14,500 + 7,942 + 19,440 + 7,640 + 5,683 + 3,793
3 Primary income
Receipts 610,498 606,642 638,728 159,503 150,647 156,095 55,097 48,652 45,353
Expenditure 535,461 550,199 580,750 127,004 120,709 165,362 52,314 43,891 41,444
Balance + 75,035 + 56,441 + 57,976 + 32,497 + 29,938 − 9,266 + 2,783 + 4,761 + 3,909
4 Secondary income
Receipts 86,711 92,221 93,943 24,290 24,196 29,474 9,893 8,081 8,123
Expenditure 221,213 234,325 234,107 56,107 73,948 58,882 18,585 16,651 17,380
Balance − 134,500 − 142,106 − 140,163 − 31,818 − 49,752 − 29,408 − 8,692 − 8,571 − 9,258
Capital account + 11,011 + 21,594 + 20,051 + 6,776 + 1,181 − 27,587 − 31,149 + 1,593 + 2,083 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 130,276 + 320,540 + 303,096 + 59,973 + 37,552 + 24,301 + 59,363 + 45,808 + 3,945 C
1 Direct investment + 21,282 − 69,643 + 44,333 − 10,935 + 107,514 − 40,447 − 19,771 + 30,149 + 2,866
By resident units abroad + 511,890 + 584,150 + 146,132 + 67,763 + 195,702 + 84,530 + 27,884 + 22,960 − 344
By non-resident units in the euro area + 490,609 + 653,792 + 101,799 + 78,698 + 88,187 + 124,978 + 47,655 − 7,189 − 3,210
2 Portfolio investment − 148,060 − 9,649 + 72,760 + 91,230 − 113,619 + 126,224 + 56,702 + 62,899 + 29,747
By resident units abroad + 187,017 + 251,832 + 440,775 + 103,538 + 137,125 + 122,932 + 32,303 − 3,194 + 9,196
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 48,839 + 165,187 + 126,455 + 19,295 − 12,742 + 32,273 − 397 − 691 − 11,185
Long-term debt securities + 141,918 + 79,145 + 224,870 + 64,784 + 136,763 + 96,115 + 27,244 + 6,235 + 18,057
Short-term debt securities − 3,739 + 7,501 + 89,456 + 19,462 + 13,104 − 5,455 + 5,457 − 8,737 + 2,324
By non-resident units in the euro area + 335,077 + 261,481 + 368,016 + 12,308 + 250,743 − 3,293 − 24,399 − 66,093 − 20,552
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 164,812 + 194,155 + 291,633 + 49,545 + 144,498 + 20,248 + 3,132 − 16,295 + 8,627
Long-term debt securities + 186,924 + 58,916 + 99,049 + 20,103 + 83,735 − 208 − 1,410 − 41,018 − 23,984
Short-term debt securities − 16,659 + 8,412 − 22,667 − 57,340 + 22,511 − 23,333 − 26,121 − 8,781 − 5,194
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 31,970 + 14,372 + 41,925 + 9,957 + 22,620 + 3,792 − 4,279 + 10,535 − 7,161
4 Other investment + 210,335 + 380,752 + 139,707 − 33,143 + 15,297 − 62,763 + 23,488 − 50,776 − 22,901
Eurosystem − 12,878 + 57,789 + 55,747 − 479 − 1,523 + 2,972 − 5,746 − 8,083 + 5,307
General government + 996 − 10,141 + 10,643 + 19,217 + 18,071 − 7,298 − 2,936 − 2,441 + 6,749
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 95,018 + 262,952 + 107,263 − 6,690 + 11,730 − 67,976 + 15,659 − 35,391 − 19,302
Enterprises and households + 127,196 + 70,149 − 33,947 − 45,191 − 12,982 + 9,538 + 16,511 − 4,861 − 15,655
5 Reserve assets + 14,753 + 4,707 + 4,369 + 2,864 + 5,739 − 2,504 + 3,223 − 6,999 + 1,394
Net errors and omissions − 5,048 + 105,010 + 41,998 − 42,919 − 17,470 − 15,237 + 55,433 + 6,333 − 11,793 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2000 − 36,962 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,370 − 12,722 − 29,931 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,660
2001 − 7,912 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,156 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1172002 + 41,701 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,367 − 4,010 + 8,029 − 2,065 − 29,6612003 + 31,215 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,694 − 18,933 − 31,179 + 5,920 + 47,555 − 445 + 10,4202004 + 100,835 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 16,895 − 30,479 − 119 + 112,832 − 1,470 + 12,116
2005 + 106,140 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 20,965 − 31,175 − 2,334 + 96,432 − 2,182 − 7,374
2006 + 135,939 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 41,571 − 32,320 − 1,328 + 157,134 − 2,934 + 22,5232007 + 169,595 + 201,989 − 922 − 35,032 + 36,483 − 33,845 − 1,597 + 183,158 + 953 + 15,1602008 + 143,317 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,608 + 24,865 − 34,462 − 893 + 121,326 + 2,008 − 21,0972009 + 141,117 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,909 + 55,018 − 35,159 − 1,858 + 117,837 − 3,200 − 21,423
2010 + 145,101 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,477 + 51,101 − 39,669 + 1,219 + 92,759 + 1,613 − 53,560
2011 + 164,552 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,471 + 69,102 − 35,505 + 1,642 + 120,849 + 2,836 − 45,3452012 
r + 190,727 + 199,960 − 10,694 − 35,905 + 66,811 − 40,139 + 1,427 + 157,461 + 1,297 − 34,693
2013 r + 182,425 + 210,280 − 5,236 − 44,755 + 59,941 − 43,041 + 1,142 + 207,920 + 838 + 24,353
2014 r + 212,117 + 225,997 − 6,351 − 39,967 + 66,744 − 40,658 + 2,826 + 243,320 − 2,564 + 28,378
2012          Q4 r + 55,639 + 46,210 − 3,422 − 4,435 + 24,962 − 11,099 − 120 + 62,900 − 494 + 7,382
2013          Q1 r + 41,321 + 52,232 − 1,335 − 10,480 + 14,761 − 15,192 + 420 + 36,822 + 86 − 4,919
         Q2 r + 43,329 + 54,990 + 1,595 − 10,657 + 6,370 − 7,373 + 760 + 58,926 + 72 + 14,836
         Q3 r + 37,832 + 49,827 − 4,067 − 16,907 + 14,375 − 9,463 + 438 + 48,587 − 785 + 10,317
         Q4 r + 59,943 + 53,231 − 1,429 − 6,712 + 24,436 − 11,013 − 476 + 63,585 + 1,464 + 4,118
2014          Q1 r + 48,048 + 52,914 + 1,177 − 7,378 + 17,521 − 15,009 + 2,182 + 60,123 − 565 + 9,893
         Q2 r + 45,303 + 54,602 − 1,105 − 8,201 + 5,735 − 6,833 + 542 + 57,183 − 610 + 11,338
         Q3 r + 53,779 + 59,922 − 2,693 − 17,089 + 18,747 − 7,802 + 783 + 68,150 + 332 + 13,589
         Q4 r + 64,987 + 58,559 − 3,729 − 7,299 + 24,740 − 11,013 − 681 + 57,863 − 1,722 − 6,442
2015          Q1 + 56,787 + 60,383 − 1,619 − 6,553 + 18,947 − 15,990 + 249 + 56,475 − 21 − 561         Q2 + 56,940 + 69,143 − 2,079 − 8,508 + 3,647 − 7,342 + 1,135 + 76,275 − 465 + 18,200         Q3 
p + 63,154 + 67,500 − 288 − 16,212 + 18,642 − 6,777 + 689 + 58,842 − 1,455 − 5,000
2013          Apr  r + 15,663 + 20,242 + 498 − 2,425 + 180 − 2,333 + 188 + 20,636 + 56 + 4,786
         May r + 12,214 + 16,834 + 1,917 − 4,221 + 1,817 − 2,215 + 268 + 9,952 − 22 − 2,530
         June r + 15,452 + 17,914 − 820 − 4,010 + 4,373 − 2,824 + 304 + 28,338 + 38 + 12,581
         July r + 11,774 + 16,448 − 1,005 − 6,491 + 5,048 − 3,230 + 126 + 4,633 − 654 − 7,267
         Aug  r + 7,501 + 12,882 − 1,776 − 6,786 + 5,027 − 3,621 + 184 + 24,787 + 425 + 17,102
         Sep  r + 18,557 + 20,498 − 1,285 − 3,629 + 4,300 − 2,612 + 128 + 19,168 − 556 + 483
         Oct  r + 15,980 + 19,100 − 362 − 5,875 + 5,544 − 2,789 + 514 + 16,097 − 212 − 397
         Nov  r + 21,605 + 19,975 + 192 − 2,141 + 5,997 − 2,226 + 176 + 21,190 + 407 − 592
         Dec  r + 22,357 + 14,156 − 1,258 + 1,305 + 12,895 − 5,998 − 1,166 + 26,299 + 1,269 + 5,107
2014          Jan  r + 13,841 + 15,951 − 748 − 2,882 + 5,238 − 4,466 + 1,500 + 1,320 − 375 − 14,022
         Feb  r + 12,859 + 17,070 − 9 − 2,817 + 5,842 − 7,236 + 433 + 23,601 − 898 + 10,309
         Mar  r + 21,348 + 19,893 + 1,933 − 1,680 + 6,442 − 3,307 + 249 + 35,203 + 708 + 13,606
         Apr  r + 16,667 + 18,670 − 329 − 1,857 + 3,231 − 3,378 + 194 + 29,421 + 151 + 12,560
         May r + 11,858 + 17,834 − 1,532 − 2,392 − 2,350 − 1,233 − 54 + 12,151 − 631 + 346
         June r + 16,778 + 18,097 + 756 − 3,951 + 4,854 − 2,222 + 402 + 15,611 − 130 − 1,568
         July r + 20,181 + 22,461 − 1,837 − 5,393 + 6,036 − 2,923 − 8 + 18,353 + 431 − 1,821
         Aug  r + 10,717 + 14,220 − 675 − 6,974 + 5,875 − 2,403 + 439 + 14,135 + 166 + 2,979
         Sep  r + 22,880 + 23,241 − 182 − 4,721 + 6,837 − 2,477 + 352 + 35,662 − 265 + 12,431
         Oct  r + 21,627 + 22,907 − 1,539 − 5,488 + 6,600 − 2,392 − 109 + 12,134 + 203 − 9,384
         Nov  r + 18,490 + 17,861 − 480 − 2,418 + 6,603 − 3,555 + 134 + 21,558 + 30 + 2,934
         Dec  r + 24,870 + 17,792 − 1,710 + 607 + 11,537 − 5,066 − 706 + 24,171 − 1,955 + 7
2015          Jan + 14,512 + 15,591 − 1,190 − 2,372 + 5,551 − 4,258 + 27 − 3,047 + 372 − 17,586         Feb + 15,511 + 19,584 − 872 − 2,372 + 5,873 − 7,575 + 37 + 35,137 + 266 + 19,589         Mar + 26,765 + 25,207 + 444 − 1,809 + 7,523 − 4,156 + 185 + 24,386 − 660 − 2,564
         Apr + 21,162 + 22,536 − 1,197 − 2,098 + 3,671 − 2,947 + 370 + 34,680 − 69 + 13,148
         May + 11,633 + 21,354 − 477 − 2,572 − 5,019 − 2,130 + 565 + 16,319 − 78 + 4,121         June + 24,145 + 25,253 − 404 − 3,838 + 4,995 − 2,265 + 200 + 25,276 − 318 + 931
         July + 24,692 + 25,684 − 973 − 5,683 + 7,053 − 2,362 + 469 + 22,466 − 1,170 − 2,695
         Aug + 13,316 + 16,854 + 421 − 6,432 + 5,697 − 2,803 + 43 + 18,365 − 180 + 5,006         Sep  
p + 25,146 + 24,962 + 263 − 4,097 + 5,892 − 1,611 + 176 + 18,011 − 105 − 7,311
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2015
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2015
Ländergruppe/Land
 2012  2013  2014 May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p Jan. / Aug. 
All countries 1 Exports 1,092,627 1,088,025 1,123,746 789,979 95,661 105,607 107,200 88,043 105,910
Imports 899,405 890,393 910,145 626,186 76,254 81,717 82,173 72,667 82,970Balance + 193,222 + 197,632 + 213,601 + 163,792 + 19,407 + 23,890 + 25,027 + 15,376 + 22,940
I Exports 747,932 743,067 761,914 530,877 65,081 71,560 70,496 57,864 ...European countries
Imports 622,784 625,934 642,738 432,799 53,692 56,882 56,940 48,958 ...Balance + 125,148 + 117,133 + 119,176 + 98,078 + 11,389 + 14,678 + 13,556 + 8,907 ...
Exports 619,535 618,383 648,446 456,804 56,375 61,273 60,488 49,341 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 502,579 509,738 527,117 358,692 44,760 46,964 47,373 40,333 ...
Balance + 116,956 + 108,645 + 121,329 + 98,111 + 11,616 + 14,309 + 13,116 + 9,008 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 409,356 405,220 413,753 287,270 35,549 38,877 37,846 30,119 ...countries Imports 340,314 343,487 350,550 236,315 29,459 31,045 31,236 26,289 ...
Balance + 69,041 + 61,732 + 63,203 + 50,955 + 6,090 + 7,833 + 6,610 + 3,830 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,551 56,217 55,807 37,880 4,607 5,045 5,054 4,440 ...
Imports 36,393 36,734 36,218 24,644 3,018 3,181 3,339 2,789 ...Balance + 20,158 + 19,483 + 19,590 + 13,237 + 1,589 + 1,863 + 1,714 + 1,651 ...
Belgium and Exports 49,377 47,954 47,345 31,140 3,831 4,179 3,809 3,459 ...Luxembourg Imports 40,407 41,965 42,548 26,764 3,324 3,381 3,350 3,182 ...
Balance + 8,970 + 5,989 + 4,797 + 4,376 + 507 + 798 + 458 + 277 ...
France Exports 102,439 99,250 100,580 68,166 8,543 9,080 8,611 6,287 ...
Imports 63,637 63,489 66,714 44,039 5,251 5,911 5,546 4,668 ...Balance + 38,803 + 35,761 + 33,866 + 24,127 + 3,292 + 3,169 + 3,065 + 1,619 ...
Italy Exports 55,504 53,212 54,240 38,228 4,885 5,394 5,271 3,403 ...
Imports 47,946 46,911 48,522 32,581 4,077 4,415 4,690 3,373 ...Balance + 7,558 + 6,301 + 5,718 + 5,647 + 807 + 979 + 581 + 30 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,280 70,975 72,736 52,543 6,173 7,238 7,129 6,337 ...
Imports 85,765 88,698 87,796 58,570 7,514 7,554 7,488 7,048 ...Balance − 15,484 − 17,723 − 15,060 − 6,027 − 1,341 − 316 − 359 − 712 ...
Spain Exports 31,047 31,349 34,820 25,494 3,272 3,473 3,552 2,498 ...
Imports 23,206 23,639 24,804 17,362 2,300 2,316 2,397 1,589 ...Balance + 7,841 + 7,709 + 10,016 + 8,132 + 972 + 1,157 + 1,154 + 909 ...
Other EU member Exports 210,179 213,163 234,693 169,534 20,826 22,395 22,642 19,221 ...states Imports 162,264 166,251 176,567 122,377 15,300 15,919 16,136 14,044 ...
Balance + 47,915 + 46,912 + 58,126 + 47,157 + 5,526 + 6,476 + 6,506 + 5,178 ...
of which
United Exports 70,847 71,280 79,163 59,452 6,970 7,779 8,277 6,553 ...Kingdom Imports 41,469 39,466 38,545 25,776 3,159 3,204 3,306 2,981 ...
Balance + 29,379 + 31,815 + 40,618 + 33,675 + 3,811 + 4,575 + 4,971 + 3,572 ...
Exports 128,398 124,684 113,468 74,074 8,705 10,287 10,008 8,524 ... 2 Other European
Imports 120,206 116,196 115,621 74,107 8,932 9,918 9,567 8,625 ... countries
Balance + 8,192 + 8,488 − 2,153 − 33 − 227 + 369 + 441 − 101 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 48,933 46,924 46,202 32,661 3,751 4,412 4,277 3,653 ...
Imports 37,775 38,321 39,392 28,115 3,410 3,803 3,732 3,228 ...
Balance + 11,158 + 8,603 + 6,810 + 4,546 + 341 + 610 + 544 + 425 ...
II Exports 340,980 341,213 358,337 257,479 30,331 33,953 36,453 29,948 ...Non-European
Imports 276,620 264,459 267,407 193,310 22,562 24,758 25,233 23,710 ... countries
Balance + 64,360 + 76,754 + 90,930 + 64,168 + 7,770 + 9,195 + 11,219 + 6,238 ...
Exports 21,920 21,803 22,505 16,298 1,925 2,208 2,221 1,817 ... 1 Africa
Imports 24,145 23,108 20,242 12,464 1,624 1,688 1,580 1,348 ...
Balance − 2,224 − 1,305 + 2,263 + 3,834 + 300 + 520 + 641 + 469 ...
Exports 128,703 130,427 135,293 103,793 12,317 14,066 14,480 11,996 ... 2 America
Imports 80,549 75,023 74,191 55,698 6,638 7,322 7,140 6,552 ...
Balance + 48,154 + 55,404 + 61,103 + 48,096 + 5,678 + 6,744 + 7,340 + 5,444 ...
of which
Exports 86,971 89,348 95,928 74,818 8,632 10,005 10,543 8,560 ... United States
Imports 51,070 48,582 49,207 38,810 4,485 5,110 4,937 4,473 ...Balance + 35,901 + 40,766 + 46,721 + 36,009 + 4,148 + 4,894 + 5,607 + 4,087 ...
Exports 179,630 179,038 190,973 130,619 15,291 16,823 18,725 15,242 ... 3 Asia
Imports 167,873 162,960 170,050 123,179 14,053 15,458 16,221 15,583 ...
Balance + 11,757 + 16,077 + 20,923 + 7,439 + 1,237 + 1,365 + 2,504 − 340 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,503 32,754 35,462 25,723 3,158 3,181 3,920 3,171 ...
Imports 8,134 8,921 7,865 4,983 666 701 625 591 ...Balance + 24,369 + 23,833 + 27,598 + 20,740 + 2,492 + 2,480 + 3,295 + 2,580 ...
Japan Exports 17,138 17,076 16,910 11,204 1,168 1,484 1,666 1,291 ...
Imports 21,910 19,492 19,007 13,327 1,662 1,702 1,695 1,589 ...Balance − 4,772 − 2,416 − 2,097 − 2,122 − 494 − 218 − 28 − 298 ...
Exports 66,746 66,912 74,369 47,826 5,537 6,186 6,524 5,392 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 78,529 74,544 79,828 58,962 6,549 7,263 7,950 7,561 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 11,783 − 7,633 − 5,459 − 11,137 − 1,012 − 1,078 − 1,426 − 2,169 ...Exports 45,651 45,894 48,476 34,520 4,174 4,534 4,939 4,018 ...
New industrial countries
Imports 37,428 36,672 38,782 27,826 3,213 3,539 3,562 3,512 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 8,223 + 9,222 + 9,695 + 6,695 + 960 + 995 + 1,377 + 506 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,727 9,946 9,566 6,768 799 857 1,028 892 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,054 3,368 2,924 1,969 246 290 293 227 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,672 + 6,578 + 6,641 + 4,799 + 554 + 567 + 735 + 665 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2010 − 27,477 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 8,762 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 +47,948 + 1,5962011 − 32,471 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,823 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,314 +64,707 + 1,0812012 − 35,905 − 10,199 − 35,422 + 8,784 + 3,020 + 1,404 − 9,547 + 3,103 + 3,616 +62,193 + 1,0022013 − 44,755 − 12,063 − 37,713 + 8,181 + 3,522 − 858 − 6,358 + 3,076 + 1,069 +57,677 + 1,1952014 − 39,967 − 13,079 − 37,649 + 6,333 + 4,284 + 2,472 − 2,859 + 2,930 + 1,036 +64,859 + 850
2014          Q1 − 7,378 − 3,566 − 5,883 + 1,294 + 1,114 + 124 − 388 + 753 + 873 +17,648 − 999
         Q2 − 8,201 − 3,080 − 8,568 + 1,721 + 1,063 + 619 − 351 + 782 + 50 + 6,526 − 841         Q3 − 17,089 − 3,216 − 15,909 + 1,757 + 807 + 171 − 882 + 719 − 275 +20,018 − 996         Q4 − 7,299 − 3,217 − 7,288 + 1,561 + 1,300 + 1,557 − 1,238 + 677 + 388 +20,667 + 3,686
2015          Q1 − 6,553 − 3,052 − 5,798 + 1,742 + 1,158 + 234 − 767 + 867 + 801 +19,225 − 1,078
         Q2 − 8,508 − 2,254 − 8,660 + 1,317 + 1,223 + 1,302 − 1,562 + 808 + 9 + 4,866 − 1,228         Q3 − 16,212 − 3,120 − 16,757 + 2,795 + 988 + 515 − 926 + 748 − 358 +20,204 − 1,204
2014          Nov − 2,418 − 1,082 − 1,795 + 503 + 381 + 159 − 502 + 238 + 126 + 6,890 − 412
         Dec + 607 − 860 − 988 + 644 + 584 + 1,255 − 106 + 180 + 103 + 6,924 + 4,510
2015          Jan − 2,372 − 1,151 − 1,404 + 907 + 172 − 75 − 682 + 283 + 274 + 5,653 − 376
         Feb − 2,372 − 816 − 1,825 + 221 + 381 − 88 − 385 + 280 + 283 + 5,873 − 283         Mar − 1,809 − 1,085 − 2,569 + 614 + 605 + 397 + 300 + 304 + 244 + 7,698 − 420
         Apr − 2,098 − 740 − 1,785 + 504 + 342 + 84 − 627 + 303 − 36 + 4,127 − 420
         May − 2,572 − 770 − 2,688 + 429 + 561 + 245 − 677 + 309 + 39 − 4,629 − 430         June − 3,838 − 744 − 4,186 + 384 + 320 + 974 − 258 + 196 + 6 + 5,368 − 379
         July − 5,683 − 1,145 − 4,895 + 1,090 + 216 − 116 − 766 + 262 − 173 + 7,583 − 357
         Aug − 6,432 − 886 − 6,858 + 784 + 575 + 133 − 402 + 261 − 87 + 6,177 − 393         Sep − 4,097 − 1,089 − 5,004 + 921 + 197 + 498 + 243 + 225 − 98 + 6,444 − 454
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2010 − 39,669 − 24,953 − 4,720 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,085
2011 − 35,505 − 21,001 − 4,475 + 6,718 − 14,504 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 4942012 − 40,139 − 25,752 − 5,451 + 5,206 − 14,387 − 2,952 − 2,952 + 1,427 + 1,743 − 3162013 − 43,041 − 28,147 − 4,051 + 6,173 − 14,893 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 1,142 + 1,111 + 312014 − 40,658 − 27,541 − 5,242 + 7,953 − 13,116 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,826 + 2,736 + 90
2014          Q1 − 15,009 − 11,988 − 1,780 + 1,285 − 3,021 − 870 − 863 + 2,182 + 934 + 1,248
         Q2 − 6,833 − 2,662 − 763 + 4,998 − 4,172 − 869 − 863 + 542 + 811 − 269         Q3 − 7,802 − 4,501 − 1,048 + 930 − 3,301 − 870 − 863 + 783 + 725 + 58         Q4 − 11,013 − 8,390 − 1,651 + 740 − 2,623 − 866 − 863 − 681 + 266 − 947
2015          Q1 − 15,990 − 13,065 − 2,614 + 1,256 − 2,925 − 885 − 881 + 249 − 6 + 255
         Q2 − 7,342 − 1,999 − 1,162 + 6,118 − 5,343 − 884 − 881 + 1,135 + 1,159 − 24         Q3 − 6,777 − 3,904 − 1,192 + 1,200 − 2,872 − 885 − 881 + 689 + 844 − 155
2014          Nov − 3,555 − 2,738 − 491 + 15 − 817 − 289 − 288 + 134 + 388 − 255
         Dec − 5,066 − 3,985 − 790 + 600 − 1,081 − 288 − 288 − 706 − 252 − 454
2015          Jan − 4,258 − 3,337 − 1,462 + 752 − 922 − 295 − 294 + 27 − 20 + 47
         Feb − 7,575 − 6,680 − 470 + 234 − 895 − 296 − 294 + 37 + 91 − 54         Mar − 4,156 − 3,048 − 683 + 270 − 1,108 − 295 − 294 + 185 − 77 + 262
         Apr − 2,947 − 2,010 − 511 + 1,045 − 936 − 295 − 294 + 370 + 427 − 57
         May − 2,130 + 975 − 179 + 3,673 − 3,105 − 295 − 294 + 565 + 448 + 116         June − 2,265 − 964 − 472 + 1,400 − 1,301 − 295 − 294 + 200 + 283 − 83
         July − 2,362 − 1,355 − 463 + 274 − 1,008 − 295 − 294 + 469 + 539 − 69
         Aug − 2,803 − 1,981 − 441 + 272 − 822 − 295 − 294 + 43 + 296 − 253         Sep − 1,611 − 568 − 288 + 655 − 1,042 − 295 − 294 + 176 + 10 + 167
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2014
2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 376,169 + 36,997 + 297,524 + 13,185 + 245,416 − 4,354 + 77,312 + 29,413 + 23,024 + 24,875
1 Direct investment + 77,735 + 53,360 + 88,717 + 16,458 + 39,394 + 22,813 + 17,051 + 5,414 + 1,131 + 10,506
Equity + 61,084 + 34,189 + 70,251 + 17,373 + 24,440 + 13,347 + 12,702 + 3,385 + 5,287 + 4,029
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 21,052 + 14,523 + 22,241 + 1,579 + 10,758 + 2,745 + 3,995 − 458 + 3,551 + 902
Debt instruments + 16,651 + 19,171 + 18,465 − 915 + 14,954 + 9,466 + 4,349 + 2,028 − 4,156 + 6,477
2 Portfolio investment + 109,712 + 143,233 + 149,521 + 35,510 + 56,618 + 27,266 + 27,735 + 11,882 + 5,218 + 10,635
Shares 2 + 11,675 + 19,019 + 10,610 + 3,328 + 260 + 10,708 + 1,372 + 3,450 + 680 − 2,757
Investment fund shares 3 + 21,667 + 31,939 + 38,324 + 6,105 + 17,448 + 8,142 + 4,706 + 4,841 + 1,449 − 1,585
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 75,913 + 87,772 + 99,162 + 28,763 + 32,761 + 11,149 + 28,504 + 4,705 + 4,331 + 19,469
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 456 + 4,503 + 1,425 − 2,686 + 6,149 − 2,733 − 6,847 − 1,114 − 1,241 − 4,492
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 24,386 + 24,286 + 31,783 + 6,996 + 11,702 + 5,855 + 2,588 + 4,789 − 1,513 − 688
4. Other investment 7 + 163,040 − 184,720 + 30,068 − 44,057 + 137,724 − 59,823 + 31,393 + 8,497 + 18,368 + 4,528
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 66,080 − 56,647 + 76,332 − 2,366 + 39,134 − 35,503 + 17,430 + 469 + 9,455 + 7,505
Long-term − 47,912 − 50,495 + 21,176 + 12,562 + 7,417 + 2,812 + 2,470 − 3,686 + 3,993 + 2,162
Short-term − 18,169 − 6,152 + 55,156 − 14,928 + 31,718 − 38,315 + 14,960 + 4,155 + 5,462 + 5,343
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 13,394 + 10,049 − 10,409 − 27,394 + 28,012 − 10,894 − 13,073 − 6,760 − 10,259 + 3,946
Long-term + 337 + 910 + 852 + 1,738 + 1,129 + 3,085 + 4,948 + 2,592 + 962 + 1,394
Short-term − 13,731 + 9,139 − 11,261 − 29,132 + 26,883 − 13,979 − 18,021 − 9,352 − 11,221 + 2,552
General government + 49,836 + 7,397 + 14,024 + 4,777 − 279 − 12,798 + 2,937 + 3,277 + 474 − 814
Long-term + 49,846 + 15,078 − 2,372 − 1,305 − 3,690 − 1,615 − 791 − 589 − 308 + 106
Short-term − 10 − 7,681 + 16,396 + 6,082 + 3,411 − 11,183 + 3,728 + 3,866 + 782 − 920
Bundesbank + 192,679 − 145,519 − 49,880 − 19,074 + 70,856 − 628 + 24,100 + 11,511 + 18,698 − 6,109
5. Reserve assets + 1,297 + 838 − 2,564 − 1,722 − 21 − 465 − 1,455 − 1,170 − 180 − 105
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 218,708 − 170,923 + 54,204 − 44,678 + 188,940 − 80,629 + 18,470 + 6,947 + 4,659 + 6,864
1 Direct investment + 42,110 + 44,384 + 5,508 − 5,968 + 14,681 + 18,894 + 10,822 − 5,332 + 2,300 + 13,855
Equity + 9,959 + 7,499 + 22,527 + 10,841 + 5,872 + 6,991 + 2,894 − 621 + 2,931 + 585
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 2,552 + 585 + 5,427 + 968 + 4,025 + 2,288 + 2,745 + 685 + 1,297 + 763
Debt instruments + 32,150 + 36,885 − 17,020 − 16,809 + 8,809 + 11,903 + 7,928 − 4,711 − 631 + 13,270
2 Portfolio investment + 54,951 − 21,263 + 21,679 − 10,735 + 6,466 − 25,410 − 19,900 − 15,650 + 3,698 − 7,948
Shares 2) + 2,281 + 5,024 + 8,328 + 2,946 + 1,615 + 8,739 − 5,135 − 3,272 − 18 − 1,845
Investment fund shares 3 − 3,422 + 6,086 − 5,642 − 3,457 + 4,699 − 3,756 + 3,673 + 437 + 978 + 2,258
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 56,198 − 9,467 + 21,410 + 6,441 − 13,842 − 28,495 − 23,333 − 15,909 + 447 − 7,871
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 107 − 22,907 − 2,417 − 16,665 + 13,994 − 1,899 + 4,895 + 3,094 + 2,291 − 490
3. Other investment 7 + 121,648 − 194,044 + 27,017 − 27,975 + 167,793 − 74,113 + 27,547 + 27,929 − 1,339 + 958
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 51,508 − 158,237 + 32,495 − 33,557 + 105,678 − 45,222 − 684 + 21,274 + 6,123 − 28,081
Long-term − 10,250 − 16,733 − 14,555 − 675 − 9,793 − 7,942 + 895 − 2,528 + 3,939 − 516
Short-term + 61,758 − 141,504 + 47,050 − 32,882 + 115,470 − 37,279 − 1,578 + 23,803 + 2,184 − 27,565
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 8,668 − 8,583 + 4,141 − 6,789 + 20,844 − 17,300 + 1,408 − 780 − 7,876 + 10,064
Long-term − 56 − 13,790 − 5,331 − 936 + 522 + 8,537 + 5,304 + 2,820 + 101 + 2,383
Short-term + 8,724 + 5,207 + 9,473 − 5,853 + 20,322 − 25,837 − 3,896 − 3,600 − 7,977 + 7,681
General government − 31,011 − 1,577 − 5,594 − 3,916 + 6,146 − 17,550 − 476 + 1,294 + 2,364 − 4,133
Long-term + 35,994 + 9,302 − 914 − 892 − 4,085 − 68 + 7 − 300 + 347 − 41
Short-term − 67,005 − 10,878 − 4,680 − 3,023 + 10,231 − 17,483 − 482 + 1,593 + 2,017 − 4,092
Bundesbank + 92,482 − 25,647 − 4,025 + 16,287 + 35,125 + 5,959 + 27,299 + 6,141 − 1,950 + 23,107
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 157,461 + 207,920 + 243,320 + 57,863 + 56,475 + 76,275 + 58,842 + 22,466 + 18,365 + 18,011
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,222 37,7262003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,309 12,085
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,029 − 1,919
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,396 14,8722006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,724 − 30,3352007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,607 2,8852008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,941 − 7,166
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,701 75,585
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,295 251,4002011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,793 380,8692012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,9762013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2013          Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 13,375 8,637 29,079 625,570 612,572 62,715 414,303 457,205
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 13,526 8,877 29,590 601,719 588,722 62,445 399,626 452,985
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 13,336 8,760 29,040 620,862 607,866 62,590 414,310 443,123
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 13,272 8,712 28,893 602,185 589,189 61,455 405,918 426,828         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 13,236 8,690 28,618 588,473 575,477 59,589 393,961 404,927
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 12,960 8,690 27,623 589,421 576,469 59,133 398,251 408,914
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 13,018 8,416 28,330 586,580 573,628 57,590 398,868 409,781         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 12,920 8,375 27,337 583,320 570,368 56,873 398,035 398,611
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 12,941 7,981 27,086 574,449 561,497 56,514 421,360 364,089
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 12,962 7,945 27,473 557,441 544,488 56,278 409,079 352,651         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 13,030 8,080 28,388 512,785 500,357 54,153 402,189 314,679
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 389,297 329,020         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 376,533 311,024
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 397,660 295,296
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 400,885 280,003         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 394,597 283,539
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 372,693 287,828
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 374,337 306,987         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 380,316 316,486
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 392,583 289,207
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 399,026 283,943         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 451,674 299,388
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 442,744 301,808         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 433,272 334,584
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,347 326,090
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 438,633 319,867         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 443,611 312,651
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 449,950 313,297
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 447,730 333,556         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 470,839 303,589
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 478,529 308,165
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents
Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,8922013 779,109 280,526 498,583 319,761 178,822 163,734 15,088 920,620 142,676 777,944 616,341 161,603 94,646 66,9572014 812,778 276,370 536,408 351,186 185,222 170,423 14,799 922,628 148,746 773,882 609,827 164,055 97,641 66,413
2015          Apr 869,591 299,733 569,858 376,549 193,309 178,392 14,918 956,906 159,624 797,281 631,613 165,668 97,019 68,649
         May 875,930 306,468 569,462 379,450 190,012 175,225 14,787 971,466 160,895 810,571 644,661 165,911 96,643 69,268         June 870,905 294,788 576,117 380,870 195,247 180,643 14,604 972,187 149,054 823,133 645,740 177,392 104,329 73,064
         July 867,186 290,223 576,963 383,310 193,653 179,047 14,605 966,186 150,551 815,635 640,727 174,908 100,759 74,149
         Aug  
r 848,110 282,913 565,196 379,026 186,171 171,628 14,543 945,220 144,209 801,011 632,056 168,955 96,008 72,946
         Sep 857,427 282,109 575,319 382,888 192,431 177,728 14,703 967,745 144,903 822,842 644,425 178,418 104,196 74,222
Industrial countries 1
 
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,7602012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,1812013 689,637 277,223 412,414 291,000 121,414 108,082 13,332 833,922 141,307 692,615 579,018 113,597 78,921 34,6762014 713,600 271,498 442,103 317,132 124,971 111,871 13,100 835,644 147,572 688,072 572,267 115,805 80,626 35,178
2015          Apr 761,717 295,713 466,004 335,137 130,867 117,560 13,307 861,866 151,156 710,710 594,619 116,091 80,518 35,573
         May 767,959 302,222 465,738 337,515 128,222 115,094 13,128 877,838 153,148 724,691 609,304 115,386 79,464 35,922         June 764,620 290,757 473,863 339,794 134,069 121,150 12,919 878,998 143,794 735,204 611,318 123,886 86,839 37,047
         July 760,327 286,149 474,178 342,125 132,053 119,046 13,007 875,676 147,213 728,463 606,775 121,687 84,014 37,673
         Aug  
r 741,309 277,985 463,324 338,478 124,845 111,921 12,924 853,938 141,169 712,769 598,043 114,726 78,257 36,468
         Sep 751,304 277,023 474,281 343,886 130,395 117,272 13,123 874,454 142,208 732,246 608,921 123,325 85,773 37,551
EU member states 1
 
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,6232012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,5072013 582,038 262,788 319,249 232,788 86,461 75,934 10,527 699,765 127,084 572,681 493,383 79,298 52,975 26,3232014 600,437 256,437 344,001 255,518 88,483 77,872 10,611 700,737 133,331 567,406 486,649 80,757 53,878 26,879
2015          Apr 639,968 278,614 361,354 267,817 93,537 82,727 10,810 722,493 142,080 580,413 498,770 81,643 54,755 26,888
         May 645,392 285,057 360,335 268,646 91,689 81,051 10,638 728,229 143,509 584,720 503,588 81,132 54,012 27,120         June 639,682 275,069 364,613 268,609 96,004 85,591 10,413 727,292 134,772 592,520 506,198 86,322 59,100 27,222
         July 634,521 268,933 365,588 270,185 95,402 84,905 10,497 723,351 136,504 586,847 501,421 85,426 57,779 27,647
         Aug  
r 619,378 262,245 357,133 267,851 89,282 78,834 10,448 707,425 130,473 576,952 497,289 79,663 52,682 26,981
         Sep 624,497 261,131 363,366 270,467 92,898 82,304 10,594 727,020 132,284 594,736 509,562 85,174 57,884 27,290
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,3312012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,1962013 422,440 196,101 226,339 170,696 55,643 49,469 6,175 593,680 100,922 492,758 439,537 53,221 36,389 16,8322014 444,124 201,453 242,671 186,318 56,353 50,132 6,220 591,186 105,388 485,798 433,325 52,472 35,555 16,918
2015          Apr 467,235 211,821 255,414 195,923 59,491 53,091 6,399 606,337 108,240 498,097 444,765 53,331 36,538 16,793
         May 479,567 225,078 254,488 195,997 58,491 52,122 6,369 605,974 106,987 498,987 446,062 52,924 36,027 16,898         June 471,476 213,883 257,593 196,674 60,919 54,568 6,351 603,428 99,690 503,738 447,849 55,889 39,127 16,762
         July 474,133 212,322 261,810 200,746 61,064 54,597 6,467 604,864 103,576 501,288 445,406 55,882 38,934 16,948
         Aug  
r 462,921 207,471 255,449 198,289 57,160 50,596 6,564 594,319 98,768 495,551 444,007 51,544 35,333 16,211
         Sep 465,363 208,602 256,761 198,750 58,011 51,436 6,574 600,801 100,418 500,383 446,073 54,310 38,277 16,032
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,9662012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,6832013 89,466 3,303 86,163 28,759 57,403 55,647 1,756 86,694 1,368 85,325 37,323 48,002 15,723 32,2802014 99,174 4,872 94,302 34,051 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,982 1,174 85,808 37,560 48,248 17,014 31,234
2015          Apr 107,035 3,349 103,686 41,412 62,274 60,663 1,611 87,531 1,160 86,371 36,794 49,577 16,501 33,076
         May 107,117 3,575 103,543 41,934 61,608 59,949 1,659 86,994 1,314 85,681 35,156 50,525 17,179 33,346         June 105,435 3,367 102,068 41,076 60,992 59,307 1,685 89,026 1,298 87,728 34,223 53,506 17,489 36,017
         July 106,038 3,449 102,589 41,185 61,404 59,806 1,598 88,299 1,327 86,972 33,752 53,220 16,745 36,476
         Aug  
r 105,872 4,198 101,674 40,547 61,127 59,509 1,618 89,382 1,383 87,999 33,813 54,186 17,708 36,478
         Sep 105,165 4,344 100,821 39,001 61,820 60,240 1,580 91,518 1,124 90,395 35,303 55,091 18,421 36,671
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2014          Oct 1.4436 1.4214 7.7635 7.4448 136.85 8.3136 9.1797 1.2078 0.78861 1.2673
         Nov 1.4432 1.4136 7.6411 7.4415 145.03 8.4912 9.2384 1.2027 0.79054 1.2472         Dec 1.4928 1.4216 7.6330 7.4402 147.06 8.9802 9.4043 1.2026 0.78830 1.2331
2015          Jan 1.4390 1.4039 7.2269 7.4406 137.47 8.9320 9.4167
3 1.0940 0.76680 1.1621
         Feb 1.4568 1.4199 7.0960 7.4501 134.69 8.6188 9.4901 1.0618 0.74051 1.1350
         Mar 1.4008 1.3661 6.7623 7.4593 130.41 8.6434 9.2449 1.0608 0.72358 1.0838
         Apr 1.3939 1.3313 6.6863 7.4655 128.94 8.5057 9.3254 1.0379 0.72116 1.0779
         May 1.4123 1.3568 6.9165 7.4612 134.75 8.4103 9.3037 1.0391 0.72124 1.1150         June 1.4530 1.3854 6.9587 7.4603 138.74 8.7550 9.2722 1.0455 0.72078 1.1213
         July 1.4844 1.4124 6.8269 7.4616 135.68 8.9357 9.3860 1.0492 0.70685 1.0996
         Aug 1.5269 1.4637 7.0626 7.4627 137.12 9.1815 9.5155 1.0777 0.71423 1.1139         Sep 1.5900 1.4882 7.1462 7.4610 134.85 9.3075 9.3924 1.0913 0.73129 1.1221
         Oct 1.5586 1.4685 7.1346 7.4601 134.84 9.2892 9.3485 1.0882 0.73287 1.1235
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange indicative rates. 2Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 3Discontinuation
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference of the minimum exchange rate of EUR 1 = CHF 1.20 on 15 January 2015. 
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2015
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.0 95.9 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.8 84.9 87.9 85.7 91.7 97.3 85.0 90.7 92.9 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.3 85.9 90.5 86.9 91.5 96.3 85.8 90.0 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.3 89.2 95.0 90.5 92.1 95.3 88.3 90.6 93.6 92.0 91.82003 100.7 101.3 100.2 100.6 106.9 101.4 95.5 94.4 97.4 94.8 97.1 96.6 96.82004 104.5 105.0 103.1 104.2 111.5 105.1 95.7 93.2 99.7 95.1 98.5 98.0 98.4
2005 102.9 103.6 100.9 102.2 109.5 102.6 94.5 91.9 98.7 92.9 98.5 97.0 96.7
2006 102.8 103.5 100.2 101.2 109.4 101.9 93.4 90.3 98.2 91.2 98.7 96.5 96.02007 106.3 106.3 102.1 103.5 112.9 103.9 94.3 89.4 102.1 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.22008 109.4 108.4 103.5 106.7 117.1 105.9 94.4 88.0 105.2 90.5 102.3 97.9 97.32009 110.8 109.1 104.3 111.5 120.0 106.9 94.6 88.8 104.3 91.0 101.9 98.1 97.6
2010 103.6 101.3 95.8 103.6 111.5 97.9 92.0 88.4 97.6 87.0 98.8 93.7 92.1
2011 103.3 100.3 93.7 102.2 112.2 97.3 91.6 88.2 97.0 86.2 98.2 92.8 91.42012 97.6 95.0 88.2 95.8 107.0 92.5 89.8 88.2 92.1 83.6 96.0 89.8 88.42013 101.2 98.2 91.4 98.9 111.9 95.6 92.2 88.7 97.8 85.7 98.4 91.7 90.42014 101.8 97.9
p 91.6 p 100.4 114.7 96.1 92.9 89.5 98.4 86.5 98.6 91.9 91.1
2012          July 95.2 92.7 104.3 90.3 94.8 88.6 87.1
         Aug 95.0 92.6 86.5 93.5 104.4 90.3 89.0 88.2 90.1 82.8 94.9 88.5 87.0
         Sep 97.0 94.5 106.6 92.2 95.7 89.5 88.2
         Oct 97.6 95.1 107.3 92.6 95.8 89.6 88.2
         Nov 97.0 94.4 88.4 94.8 106.7 91.9 90.1 88.3 92.8 83.9 95.9 89.4 88.0
         Dec 98.4 95.8 108.2 93.2 96.5 90.0 88.6
2013          Jan 100.1 97.4 109.8 94.4 97.5 91.1 89.6
         Feb 101.3 98.3 90.7 98.6 111.0 95.1 91.5 88.4 96.4 85.2 98.0 91.5 89.9
         Mar 99.8 97.1 109.2 93.8 97.6 90.9 89.2
         Apr 100.0 97.1 109.5 93.7 98.0 91.1 89.4
         May 100.1 97.3 90.8 98.0 109.7 94.0 92.0 88.6 97.4 85.3 98.1 91.1 89.4
         June 101.1 98.2 111.8 95.6 98.4 91.7 90.5
         July 101.0 98.1 111.8 95.6 98.6 91.7 90.5
         Aug 101.7 98.7 91.5 99.1 113.3 96.7 92.2 88.6 98.0 85.7 98.6 91.9 91.0
         Sep 101.6 98.4 113.2 96.5 98.6 91.8 90.9
         Oct 102.5 99.1 114.1 96.9 98.9 92.2 91.2
         Nov 102.2 98.8 92.4 99.8 114.1 96.7 93.1 89.0 99.6 86.6 98.9 92.1 91.2
         Dec 103.4 100.0 115.7 98.1 99.3 92.8 92.0
2014          Jan 103.0 99.5 115.8 98.1 99.2 92.6 92.0
         Feb 103.2 99.6 93.2 102.4 116.3 98.3 93.4 89.2 100.1 87.1 99.1 92.6 92.1
         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.1 99.4 93.2 92.6
         Apr 104.2 100.4 117.0 98.5 99.2 93.1 92.3
         May 103.6 99.5 93.0 101.8 116.1 97.4 93.3 89.5 99.4 87.2 98.8 92.6 91.6
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.6 98.7 92.3 91.3
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 96.0 98.6 92.2 91.1
         Aug 101.5 97.5 91.0 p 99.9 114.0 95.4 92.5 89.4 97.5 86.1 98.4 91.8 90.8
         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.1 91.1 90.0
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.3 97.7 90.5 89.6
         Nov 99.0 94.9 p 89.2 p 97.7 111.9 93.3 92.4 89.8 96.5 85.5 97.8 90.4 89.6
         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.6 90.3 89.9
2015          Jan 95.2 91.1 108.9 p 90.2 95.7 88.2 p 87.6
         Feb 93.3 89.5 p 84.0 p 92.2 107.0 p 88.7 90.5 90.4 90.4 83.1 95.2 87.5 p 86.9
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 p 86.0 94.3 86.1 p 85.3
         Apr 89.7 86.1 102.4 p 84.8 94.1 85.7 p 84.7
         May 91.6 87.9 p 82.4 p 90.1 104.7 p 86.6 90.1 90.6 89.1 82.5 94.6 86.6 p 85.7
         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 p 87.6 94.7 p 86.9 p 86.2
         July 91.3 p 87.5 105.1 p 86.7 94.3 p 86.4 p 85.7
         Aug 93.0 p 89.0 ... ... 108.1 p 89.1 ... ... ... ... 94.9 p 87.2 p 87.1
         Sep 93.8 p 89.6 109.6 p 90.2 p 95.1 p 87.6 p 87.8
         Oct 93.6 p 89.3 109.0 p 89.5 p 95.1 p 87.5 p 87.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 6Euro-area
Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, countries and countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and wage

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2014 see the index attached 
to the January 2015 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2013
January 2015
– The role of trade in goods in the develop -
ment of global imbalances
– The Common Credit Assessment System for 
assessing the eligibility of enterprisesFebruary 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2015
– Approaches to strengthening the regulatory framework of European monetary union
– The importance of macroprudential policy 
for monetary policy
– German balance of payments in 2014
– Securities holdings statistics for analysing 
holdings of securities in   Germany and Eur -
ope: methodology and results
April 2015
– The evolution of labour market-  r elated gov -
ernment expenditure in Germany
– Structural developments in the German 
banking sector
– Euro coins held for transaction purposes in 
Germany
May 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
83•

June 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016 
and an outlook for 2017
– Marketable financial instruments of banks 
and their role as collateral in the Eurosystem
– Inflation expectations: newer instruments, 
current developments and key determinants
July 2015
– Slowdown in growth in the emerging  market 
economies
– Adjustment patterns of enterprises in the 
German labour market during the Great Re -
cession – selected results of a special survey
August 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2015
– Recent developments in loans to euro-  ar ea 
non- financial corporations
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2014
October 2015
– German households’ saving and investment 
behaviour in light of the low-interest-rate 
environment
– Government personnel expenditure: devel -
opment and outlook
November 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20152, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 009 to 
2014, May 20152
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2011 bis 2012 , 
May 20152, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20151, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
29/2015  
German labor market and fiscal reforms 1999 
to 2008: can they be blamed for intra-euro 
area imbalances?  
30/2015  
A macroeconomic reverse stress test
31/2015  
Out of sight, out of mind? On the risk of sub-
custodian structures
32/2015  
The winner’s curse – evidence on the danger of 
aggressive credit growth in banking
33/2015  
The organization of knowledge in multinational 
firms
34/2015  
On the exposure of insurance companies to 
sovereign risk – portfolio investments and mar -
ket forces
35/2015  
Identifying income and wealth-poor house -
holds in the euro area
36/2015  
Asymmetric credit growth and current account 
imbalances in the euro area
37/2015  
Bracket creep revisited – with and without r>g: 
evidence from Germany
38/2015  
The credit quality channel: modelling conta-
gion in the interbank market
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2015  
86•

