Monthly Report
May 2015
Vol 67  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 15 May 2015.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The effect of one- off factors on real GDP growth in the USA in the first quarter of 2015  .... 15
Euro- area productivity growth  ............................................................................................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Portfolio reallocations into higher-yielding assets in Germany  ............................................  39
Why are interest rates for small loans to enterprises in Germany higher than for large 
loans?  .................................................................................................................................  44
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  47
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  56
Impact of the introduction of the minimum wage on consumer prices – initial findings  ..... 64
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  68
Fiscal developments in the euro area  ..................................................................................  70Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
5

Overview
The global economy seems to have got off to a 
relatively weak start this year, after global activ -
ity had already lost momentum in the final 
quarter of 2014. In the first quarter, macroeco -
nomic growth tailed off in a number of key 
emerging market economies, in particular. In 
China, growth in real gross domestic product 
(GDP) slowed distinctly, while GDP in Russia 
and Brazil probably even shrank on the previ -
ous quarter. Furthermore, growth in the US 
economy virtually came to a standstill. How -
ever, the slowdown there is likely to have been 
exaggerated by the intermittently harsh winter 
weather. The upturn in the UK economy also 
slowed down. The euro area’s performance 
was favourable by comparison. Despite the 
weakness in the global economy, the pace of 
the euro area’s economic recovery increased 
slightly.
In the past, too, the growth rates for global 
economic output had fluctuated heavily at 
times from quarter to quarter, without the 
underlying cyclical trend ultimately changing. 
The deceleration in the past few quarters is 
noteworthy in that many additional cyclical 
stimuli had been expected, primarily owing to 
the drop in the price of oil. Ultimately, how -
ever, it is unclear how much, if at all, this price 
slump is stimulating the global economy as a 
whole. In the meantime, retarding influences 
are emerging, and not just in oil- exporting 
countries such as Russia. In the United States, 
too, which is still importing crude oil on bal -
ance, the domestic oil industry has substantially 
reined in its investment and thus dampened 
price- adjusted GDP growth. US households 
have not made full use of their greater real in -
come, which means that the saving ratio has 
risen significantly. Overall, there are few indica -
tions at present that the global economy is on 
the verge of changing its pace of growth, the 
underlying tendency of which is moderate.Developments in the financial markets in the 
year to date were strongly influenced by mon -
etary policy as well as major portfolio shifts. In 
the euro area, a majority in the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided in mid-  January to 
significantly expand the asset purchase pro -
gramme. Even beforehand, yields in the euro-  
area sovereign bond markets declined sharply 
as a result of expectations of quantitative eas -
ing and initially again sank perceptibly as soon 
as the purchases had begun. At times, Federal 
bonds with a maturity of ten years yielded just 
0.04%. The low bond yields also strengthened 
the equity markets. In the euro area, steep 
price rises continued into April; at its peak, 
 EuroStoxx added around 23% since the start of 
the year. Other contributing factors here were 
that the economic outlook brightened in the 
euro area and that the euro recorded distinct 
losses in the foreign exchange markets during 
this period against the US dollar, pound sterling 
and yen. Yields on US Treasuries also declined 
at times. A role could have been played in this 
drop in yields by the fact that the pace of 
growth in the USA was weaker than previously 
estimated and that, following the March meet -
ing of the US Federal Open Market Committee, 
market players expected the monetary policy 
stance to be tightened later than previously 
thought.
Since the end of April, however, there has been 
a massive countermovement in the financial 
markets, as some investors apparently came to 
believe that yields on benchmark bonds have 
dropped to an unsustainable level. This led to 
international investments being realigned. As a 
result, bond yields rose significantly around the 
world, and the equity markets in many econo -
mies trended more weakly from their high lev -
els. The euro regained some of its lost ground. 
The uncertainty amongst investors concerning 
further price developments recently increased 
clearly in the financial markets.Global economy Financial 
 marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
6

In the period under review, the ECB Governing 
Council left the key interest rates in the euro 
area at the levels reached following the interest 
rate cut of 4 September 2014. Therefore, the 
main refinancing rate remains at 0.05%, the 
marginal lending rate at 0.30% and the deposit 
rate at -0.20%. On 9 March 2015, the Eurosys -
tem began purchasing additional bonds issued 
by euro- area central governments, agencies 
and European institutions under the expanded 
asset purchase programme (EAPP). These add -
itional purchases form the new public sector 
purchase programme (PSPP), the third and 
most significant component of the EAPP , com -
plementing the already existing purchase pro -
grammes for asset- backed securities (ABSPP) 
and covered bonds (CBPP3). For the months of 
March and April, the volume of securities pur -
chased under the EAPP corresponds to the 
monthly volume of around €60 billion previ -
ously announced. On 19 March 2015, the third 
of eight targeted longer- term refinancing oper -
ations (TLTROs) was carried out. In this oper -
ation, an overall volume of €97.8 billion was 
borrowed from the Eurosystem.
Increasingly supported by loans to the private 
sector, the recovery in the broad monetary ag -
gregate M3 seen in previous quarters gained 
further momentum over the winter months. 
The pick- up in euro- area lending also included 
loans to non- financial corporations, which 
once again experienced noticeable gains in the 
quarter under review, having recorded a net in -
crease in the previous quarter for the first time 
since summer 2011. Demand for credit is bene -
fiting from exceptionally favourable financing 
conditions and the positive underlying trend in 
real economic activity in the euro area. In add -
ition, banks taking part in the Bank Lending 
Survey reported having somewhat relaxed their 
credit standards again for loans to enterprises. 
However, despite signs of recovery, underlying 
monetary dynamics in the euro area remain 
very modest.
In Germany, banks once again issued more 
loans to the domestic non- bank sector during the quarter under review. As in previous quar -
ters, growth in private sector lending was pri -
marily supported by loans to households. A de -
cisive factor here was the persistently brisk de -
mand for private housing loans, which was 
probably driven by another slight decline in 
borrowing costs as well as by the positive 
household income situation and the relative 
unattractiveness of alternative investment op -
portunities. In addition to loans to households, 
banks also increased their lending to non-  
financial corporations in the reporting period – 
loans with longer maturities experienced par -
ticularly strong growth. Apart from a further 
drop in interest rates on long- term loans, this 
was most likely due to the underlying trend of 
positive economic and business expectations.
The upturn in German economic activity, which 
got underway at the end of 2014, continued 
into the early months of 2015. According to 
the flash estimate of the Federal Statistical Of -
fice, real GDP in the first quarter of 2015 was 
0.3% up on the previous three- month period 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. Thus, 
despite buoyant domestic demand, the strong 
growth of 0.7% seen in the previous quarter 
could not be maintained. While exports were 
hampered by the dip in global economic activ -
ity, imports grew strongly. Utilisation of aggre -
gate capacity has remained at more or less nor -
mal levels.
Domestic demand continued to expand consid -
erably and private consumption, in particular, 
upheld the strong momentum seen in the 
second half of 2014 almost without any inter -
ruption. In addition to the boost from the fa -
vourable labour conditions, which include ris -
ing employment, lower unemployment and 
perceptibly higher wages which have prevailed 
for some time now, the economy was further 
strengthened by an increase in purchasing 
power due to the dramatic fall in crude oil 
prices at the end of 2014 and its lingering im -
pact going into 2015. Added to this, a range of 
economic policy measures served to support 
growth in the short term. Housing construction Monetary policy
Monetary 
 developments in the euro area
Credit dynamics 
in GermanyGerman  economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
7

likewise continued to expand, presumably  
helped by the exceptionally mild winter weather 
at the beginning of the year and the fact that 
order books, though slightly less full, remained 
healthy. Enterprises also boosted their invest -
ment for the first time in almost a year.
By contrast, in the first quarter of 2015, Ger -
man firms’ foreign business failed to maintain 
the momentum experienced in the second half 
of 2014. The impact of the relatively subdued 
pace of global economic activity at the start of 
the year was greater than that of the stimulat -
ing effects of the sharp depreciation in the 
euro which, as might be expected, only nor -
mally become apparent after some time has 
elapsed. In price and seasonally adjusted terms, 
exports of goods just about held up at the 
same high level of the previous quarter. This 
contrasted with the figures for goods imports, 
which saw marked real growth during the 
 reporting period, after trailing behind final 
 demand in the second half of 2014.
The upward trend in the labour market con -
tinued at the beginning of 2015. Although the 
number of persons in work expanded only 
moderately in the first quarter of the year, there 
was a pronounced drop in unemployment. Ac -
cording to initial estimates issued by the Fed -
eral Employment Agency, this was mainly at -
tributable to the combined effect of a sharp fall 
in the number of persons employed in low- paid 
part- time work and the ongoing creation of 
new jobs subject to employment contributions. 
Signs suggest that enterprises will continue to 
recruit a growing body of workers in the next 
few months, one of these indicators being the 
large number of vacancies.
The 2015 pay round settlements that have 
been concluded thus far envisage rather mod -
erate wage increases. In this context, it should 
be noted that in a number of cases the social 
partners agreed on additional measures which, 
though not manifested in the negotiated 
wages, are of benefit to employees and entail 
costs for employers. The pace of growth in ne -gotiated rates of pay is likely to accelerate 
slightly in the spring months compared with its 
depressed first- quarter level (which had been 
due to special factors) but not quite match the 
2014 growth figures. Conversely, unlike in pre -
ceding reporting periods, actual earnings in the 
first quarter may have risen at a somewhat 
higher rate than negotiated wages. Presum-
ably, this reversal in the wage drift was in large 
part triggered by the introduction of the gen -
eral statutory minimum wage on 1  January 
2015 which probably led to a large pay increase 
for individuals in the lower wage segments in a 
number of sectors.
Throughout the first quarter of 2015, price de -
velopments remained strongly influenced by 
plummeting crude oil prices, which continued 
to have an impact right into January. With re -
spect to imports, average first-  quarter energy 
prices in 2015 were almost one- sixth below 
their level in the autumn months of 2014. 
Moreover, the seasonally adjusted composite 
index for import prices was well down. How -
ever, if energy is excluded, there was a notice -
able upturn in the figures, chiefly owing to the 
depreciation of the euro, with imported con -
sumer goods recording a particularly large price 
increase. After seasonal adjustment, domestic 
industrial producer sales prices contracted once 
more, both in aggregate terms and excluding 
energy. In the first quarter of 2015, seasonally 
adjusted consumer prices were again down on 
the quarter, having already fallen in the previ -
ous quarter. The decline was primarily due to 
the considerably lower energy prices that per -
sisted until the end of January. The year- on- 
year figures as measured by the national con -
sumer price index (CPI) showed a further de -
cline to 0.0% which in fact turned slightly 
negative at -0.2% as defined by the Harmo -
nised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). How -
ever, this development is likely to have been 
short- lived. Indeed, in the course of the same 
quarter, the price trend flipped on the back of 
the partial pick- up in crude oil prices and the 
depreciation of the single currency. In April, 
prices continued their ascent, with the year- on- Labour market
WagesPricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
8

year CPI and HICP going up by 0.5% and 0.3% 
respectively.
The German economy will probably continue 
to expand over the coming months. House -
holds are increasingly using the growing scope 
for expenditure for consumption purposes. 
Consumer spending is therefore set to continue 
to bolster macroeconomic growth, even 
though the main impact of the purchasing 
power effect arising from the substantial drop 
in the price of oil has probably already been 
felt. The broad- based surge in orders in the 
construction sector at the beginning of this 
year gives reason to believe that construction 
activity could gain greater momentum. Invest -
ment in machinery and equipment is likely to 
increase at a rather subdued pace. Although 
production capacity utilisation is now at a high 
level, enterprises are currently still rather hesi -
tant about investing extensively in expansions 
owing to mixed external signals. In the indus -
trial sector, in particular, the economic upswing 
is intact, but it is likely to initially remain slug -
gish given the overall disappointing growth in 
orders at the start of the year. Nevertheless, the 
improving global economy and the compara -
tively low external value of the euro should 
soon open up new opportunities to export 
goods to markets outside the euro area.
German public finances have benefited for 
some time now from very favourable under -
lying conditions. From today’s perspective, 
these are set to continue, although there are 
uncertainties at the international level, in par -
ticular. If the economy develops smoothly on 
the whole, there is likely to be little change in 
the financial balance, with a surplus of around 
½% of GDP on the cards for 2015. In this con -
text, favourable cyclical factors and declining 
interest expenditure mask a rather expansion -
ary fiscal policy stance. Thus, there is likely to 
be a further significant drop in the debt ratio, 
with this development currently expected to 
continue in 2016.In its updated stability programme for Ger -
many, the Federal Government essentially 
presents a similar picture. It also sets out an 
expansionary path for public finances for 2015 
and 2016, with a deterioration in the balance 
after adjustment for cyclical factors and interest 
expenditure. A structural surplus of around ½% 
of GDP is envisaged, which complies with the 
European requirement. Moderate structural 
surpluses seem wholly appropriate in view of 
both the structural and economic conditions 
for Germany. The debt ratio remains at a high 
level and ought to be reduced as quickly as 
possible in light of the foreseeable demo -
graphic adjustment burdens. It also makes 
sense to plan in a safety margin below the 
upper limits of the budgetary rules, particularly 
in the case of the central government debt 
brake, in order to be prepared for unpleasant 
surprises if the situation takes a turn for the 
worse. This also means that a certain level of 
surpluses would be advisable. Furthermore, ex -
perience shows that pleasant surprises should 
not be completely used up in the budget plans, 
and this applies, not least, in view of the risks 
with regard to international developments. Up 
until now, unexpectedly favourable develop -
ments have been used, in particular, to increase 
expenditure. If further scope is envisaged in fu -
ture, tax relief – like that recently announced to 
curtail cold progression – would now seem 
more worthy of consideration.
The German debt brake, which was agreed 
during the crisis year of 2009, has formed a 
sound basis for budgetary consolidation since 
2011. It continues to be the case that the debt 
brake does not stand in the way of important 
reforms or investment, but rather creates an es -
sential basis by ensuring sustainable public fi -
nances. In terms of economic development, it 
is at the same time important to provide high- 
quality infrastructure and cover specific govern -
ment investment needs. However, this can be 
achieved without worsening the financial pos -
ition. Moreover, trying to circumvent the debt 
brake by means of shadow budgets, for ex -
ample, would be a major step backwards. This Outlook
Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
9

is all the more the case as most of it would 
probably be replacement investment anyway. 
In addition, there are likely to still be substantial 
efficiency reserves in the area of government 
investment. Proposals aimed at improving effi -
ciency, for example through centralised provi -
sion of expertise on the planning, implementa -
tion and cost management of investment pro -jects, should therefore be given serious consid -
eration. In addition, greater involvement of the 
private sector could also be considered in indi -
vidual cases, if this has clear advantages. In 
particular, it needs to be ensured that risks are 
actually transferred to the private sector, rather 
than creating preferential forms of capital in -
vestment at the government’s expense.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economy appears to have got off to 
a relatively sluggish start this year. On the basis 
of the data available as this report went to 
press, global economic activity had already lost 
steam in the final quarter of 2014, and this 
slowdown continued into the beginning of 
2015. Aggregate economic growth tailed off in 
a number of key emerging economies, in par -
ticular; a prominent example was China. In 
Russia and Brazil, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) is likely to have even contracted com -
pared with the previous quarter. Furthermore, 
growth in the US economy virtually came to a 
standstill. It could have been impaired by the, 
at times, severe winter weather, amongst other 
factors. The upturn in the UK economy also 
slowed down. In the absence of initial national 
accounts data, it is very difficult to calculate 
Japanese economic growth, especially since 
the standard monthly indicators were extremely 
volatile in the winter. The euro area’s perfor -
mance was favourable by comparison. Despite 
the weakness in the global economy, the pace 
of the euro area’s economic recovery was even 
accelerated slightly.
In the past, too, the growth rates for global 
economic output had fluctuated heavily at 
times from quarter to quarter, without the un -
derlying cyclical trend ultimately changing. 
However, amidst widespread expectations of a 
gradual acceleration in growth, the slowdown 
over the past few quarters is striking. Such 
hopes had been fuelled by the sharp decline in 
oil prices, in particular. However, the stimulat -
ing effect of this price drop on the global econ -
omy as a whole is uncertain.1 In the meantime, 
retarding influences are emerging, and not just 
in oil- exporting countries such as Russia. In the 
United States, too, still a net importer of crude 
oil, the domestic oil industry has substantially 
reined in its investment and thus dampened 
real GDP growth. US households have not made full use of their greater real income, 
which means that the saving ratio has risen sig -
nificantly and stimulus effects have not materi -
alised to the extent often expected.
The cyclical slump observed in many areas is 
also being reflected in global industrial output. 
According to data provided by the Dutch Cen -
traal Planbureau (CPB), average output for Jan -
uary and February was up only sluggishly from 
the final quarter of 2014. Over the same pe -
riod, the volume of global trade even dropped 
significantly. An extended strike affecting US 
west coast ports may have played a certain 
role. Although the global Purchasing Manag -
ers’ Index (PMI) for services reflects considera -
bly brighter sentiment up to and into April, its 
manufacturing counterpart is showing no 
 improvement. Overall, there are few signs at 
present that the global economy is about to 
accelerate its pace of growth, the underlying 
tendency of which is moderate.
Nonetheless, the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), in the April issue of its World Economic 
Outlook, continues to expect a gradual im -
provement in economic activity. As already pro -
jected in January, the IMF expects global eco -
nomic activity, aggregated using purchasing 
power parities (PPPs), to grow by 3.5% this 
year. The 2016 projection was even raised 
slightly (+3.8%), against a background of, in 
some cases, significant yet countervailing cor -
rections to projections for individual econo -
mies. Most notably, the previously very optimis -
tic forecast for US economic growth was scaled 
back considerably. Compared with the preced -
ing years, however, the pace of growth is still 
expected to accelerate significantly in 2015 and 
2016. On the other hand, the IMF has percep -
tibly revised upwards its projections for Japan 2015 probably 
off to sluggish start
Lower oil prices 
have provided no visible  stimulus to dateGlobal industrial 
sector listless
IMF growth 
forecast  unchanged
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Potential impacts of the fall in 
oil prices on the real economy, Monthly Report, February 
2015, pp 12-14.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
11

and the euro area for this period. Among the 
emerging economies, the outlook for Brazil, 
Russia and other commodity- exporting econo -
mies, in particular, has once again been down -
graded. Although, on the other hand, the pro -
jected growth rate for India has been revised 
upwards sharply, it does not mean that the 
outlook for India’s economy has suddenly 
brightened, but is instead the outcome of an 
extensive change in the official statistics which 
lifted the growth rates of previous years ac -
cordingly. This forced the IMF to revise real 
GDP growth figures for 2014 for the emerging 
market economies up to 4.6%, which means 
the Fund now expects a further perceptible 
 deceleration for this group of countries in 2015 
despite leaving its projection of +4.3% un -
changed. The advanced economies as a group 
are therefore the sole driver of the slight 
strengthening of global activity in the current 
year diagnosed by the IMF.
The sluggishness of global manufacturing activ -
ity is probably a major reason why industrial 
commodity prices continued to fall in the past 
few months. According to the relevant HWWI 
index, commodities were quoting 6% lower in 
April on a US dollar basis than three months 
earlier, with the decline in the aggregate attrib -
utable in key measure to plunging iron ore and 
scrap metal prices. However, food and bever -
ages prices also fell considerably. Towards the 
end of the reporting period, industrial com -
modities prices strengthened, tracking crude oil 
prices, which had already regained their foot -
ing in January. Since February, the spot price of 
Brent crude has fluctuated around the 
US$60 per barrel mark, amidst perceptible 
swings. In addition to evidence of sharp adjust -
ments in the North American oil industry, a 
 recent resurgence of military conflict in the 
Middle East may have tended to strengthen the 
price; as this report went to press, the spot 
price for a barrel of Brent crude was US$67. 
Although premiums were still being demanded 
for futures, they were no longer as high as 
three months earlier.Prices for 
 non-energy commodities down further; crude oil price has recoveredGlobal industrial output and world trade
Source: Centraal Planbureau. 1 OECD excluding Chile, Czech 
Republic,  Hungary,  Israel,  Mexico,  Poland,  South  Korea  and 
Turkey, but including Cyprus.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015951001051101151201252010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
95100105110115120Global industrial output
Industrial countries 1
World trade volumeEmerging economies
Total
Jan/
FebJan/
Feb
World market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 8 May 2015, or 1 to 14 May 2015 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 1560708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commodities
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
12

Along with the oil price, headline consumer 
price inflation in the industrial countries has 
halted its slide. After dropping from +1.7% in 
June 2014 to zero in January 2015, headline in -
flation in this group of countries rebounded to 
+0.2% by March. Over the same period, annual 
energy price inflation dropped from +3.1% to 
-12.8% before recovering recently to -11.1%. By 
contrast, core inflation, which refers to the bas -
ket of consumer goods excluding energy and 
food, remained relatively stable; in March, it 
remained perceptibly positive at +1.2%.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In the quarter ended, real GDP growth in China 
slowed down somewhat on the year, dipping 
from 7¼% to 7%. However, it must be noted 
that the latest figure is positively affected by 
the depressed level of the prior- year period. On 
the quarter, however, seasonally adjusted GDP 
rose all of 1¼%. One of the causes of this, by 
China’s standards, relatively slow growth is 
likely to be the cooling- off in the housing mar -
ket, which carries considerable heft in the 
economy as a whole owing to the preceding 
boom. In addition, private consumption ap -
pears to have lost steam. Another sign of a 
 domestically- induced weakening of economic 
activity is goods imports, which – even after 
factoring out falling commodity prices – 
dropped sharply in the first quarter, with ex -
ports proving more robust. Annual consumer 
price inflation was 1.2% in winter, representing 
a renewed decline. This even led to isolated 
fears of deflationary tendencies. However, the 
main reason for lower inflation is a dampening 
of food and energy price inflation, as well as 
sluggish housing cost growth owing to a 
slumping real estate market.
There is currently considerable uncertainty re -
garding the strength of India’s GDP growth and 
its position in the business cycle. The Indian 
Ministry of Statistics recently revised its method 
of GDP calculation and, in this connection, upped real growth rates at the current end 
considerably. For example, owing to the new 
methodology, GDP growth for the fiscal year 
ended is now reported at 7½%. These results 
have been called into question by India’s cen -
tral bank, amongst others.2 Indeed, there are 
many indicators pointing to slower GDP 
growth. One is that, for instance, real imports 
of goods and services last year fell for the sec -
ond consecutive year. In the first quarter of 
2015, Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation 
stood at 5.2%, thus remaining, by India’s 
standards, quite low. The government and the 
central bank recently reached an agreement to 
accord primacy to price stability as the objec -
tive of Indian monetary policy. From the com -
ing fiscal year, the target inflation rate will be 
4%.
Economic activity in Brazil seems to have sub -
sided significantly in the new year. According 
to the available monthly indicators, including 
industrial output, seasonally adjusted real GDP 
is likely to have even contracted perceptibly. As 
long ago as spring 2014, Brazil’s economic out -
put fell markedly, recovering only slightly since 
then. At last report, GDP was 1% below its 
early-2014 peak. Structural problems are at the 
heart of the slumping Brazilian economy, along 
with a tight monetary policy stance with which 
the central bank is attempting to rein in the 
strong inflation. Consumer price inflation in the 
first quarter climbed to 7.7%, its highest rate 
since 2005.
The international sanctions and plummeting oil 
prices have put the Russian economy to a 
s evere test. Following slight year- on- year 
growth in the final quarter of 2014, real GDP , 
according to a government estimate, con -
tracted by 2¼% after the turn of the year. 
 According to the indicators, it is particularly 
 private consumption which seems to have col -
lapsed, mainly as a result of skyrocketing infla -Industrial coun-
tries’ consumer price inflation stabilised
Economic 
 activity in China 
quite sluggish at start of year
Unclear 
 statistical picture of aggregate growth in IndiaBrazilian real GDP probably contracted at year’s beginning
Russian GDP 
 distinctly  contractionary in first quarter
2 See Reserve Bank of India, Monetary Policy Report April 
2015, especially Box III.1, New Series of National Accounts, 
p 22.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
13

tion, which caused a considerable erosion of 
households’ purchasing power. Consumer price 
inflation in the first quarter of the year stood at 
16%, double its 2014 level. The primary reason 
for the very strong upward pressure on prices is 
the rouble’s depreciation. Another factor was 
the ban on imports of food from Western 
countries imposed by the government in retali -
ation for economic sanctions. Owing to weaker 
domestic demand in conjunction with the 
 rouble’s depreciation, Russian imports declined 
considerably.
United States
After only moderate expansion in autumn 2014, 
seasonally adjusted real GDP growth, according 
to an initial official estimate, ground to a virtual 
halt in the winter. The anaemic performance is 
attributed by many to one- off factors, particu -
larly the adverse impact of the extremely harsh 
winter weather in February (see the box on 
pages 15 to 18). Although the weather might 
well have caused a perceptible slowdown in 
GDP growth, even in the absence of this effect, 
real GDP growth in the first quarter would have 
probably been modest at best. The slowdown 
in household consumption growth in the first 
quarter, which in a month- on- month view had 
already begun in December 2014, was a par -
ticularly disappointing development. Since 
households made only limited use of the in -
crease in their real disposable income, caused 
above all by the drop in oil prices, to step up 
their expenditure, their saving ratio rose consid -
erably. Cheaper fuel prices have thus far had no 
major stimulating impacts; instead, oil compa -
nies have constrained GDP growth by cutting 
back their investment. The effects of the con -
tinuing adjustments in this sector on GDP might 
well be felt into the spring as well. Nonetheless, 
the robust employment growth in April indi -
cates that the US economy is on a sound up -
ward trajectory. The standardised unemploy -
ment rate in that month stood at 5.4%, 0.3 per -
centage point lower than at the beginning of 
the year. Given the progress made in the labour market, the US Federal Reserve adjusted its out -
look for the fed funds rate during the reporting 
period. Whereas annual headline CPI inflation 
intermittently dipped slightly into negative terri -
tory, core inflation (excluding energy and food) 
remained moderate, at +1.8% in March.
Japan
Even though official GDP figures were not yet 
available as this report went to press, the Japa -
nese economy is likely to have remained on its 
underlying recovery path at the start of the 
year. It is questionable, however, whether the 
quite distinct growth rate of the final quarter of 
2014 was successfully maintained. This uncer -
tainty is being fuelled by extremely volatile key 
monthly economic indicators, probably in con -
nection with the date of this year’s Chinese 
New Year, which is of great significance to 
some of Japan’s major East Asian trading part -
ners. For instance, Japan’s industrial output 
skyrocketed in January before subsiding in the 
following months; for the first quarter as a 
whole, it was nonetheless still up considerably 
on the period. Exports of goods followed a 
similar trajectory in terms of volume. However, 
since corresponding real imports accelerated at 
a similarly considerable pace in winter, the cal -
culated contribution to GDP growth made by 
net exports is likely, on balance, not to have 
been quite as noticeable as a quarter earlier. In 
addition, various indicators are showing that 
household consumption growth has tended to 
be muted. The average unemployment rate 
over the winter months remained at a low level 
(3.5%). The impact of the consumption tax 
hike still boosted domestic inflation. Excluding 
energy and food (but including alcoholic bever -
ages), annual CPI inflation in March 2015 stood 
at 2.1%, as in December 2014 already.3Economic upturn 
sputteringEconomic  recovery  probably  continuing
3 The Bank of Japan estimates that the consumption tax 
hike in April 2014 pushed up this rate by 1.7 percentage 
points. This impact is expected to have diminished to a 
mere 0.2 percentage point in April 2015. See Bank of 
 Japan, Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial 
Developments, April 2015, p 18.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
14

The effect of one- off factors on real GDP growth in the USA 
in the fi  rst quarter of 2015
If quarter- on- quarter real gross domestic 
product (GDP) growth in the USA in the fi  rst 
quarter of 2015 is annualised, the fi  rst offi   -cial estimate gives a rate of just +¼%. Eco-nomic observers have attributed this virtual stagnation in the US economy to a number of one- off factors. Specifi  cally, the unusually 
harsh winter weather, the extended strike in west coast ports, the appreciating US 
dollar and the slump in investment in the oil industry have all been mentioned. The plau-
sibility and extent of these impacts will be 
analysed below.
Negative effects on economic activity ow-
ing to adverse weather conditions are re-
fl  ected in the offi   cial fi  gures for real GDP in the USA if they break with the normal sea-
sonal pattern. Such effects were already discussed and quantifi  ed in connection with the severe fl  uctuations in macroeco-nomic growth in the fi  rst half of 2014.
1 
Those estimates revealed effects which were indeed statistically signifi  cant and 
economically important. If the relationship 
identifi  ed at that time to the deviation in the population- weighted indices for the number of heating and cooling degree 
days from their long- term average is taken 
as a basis, annualised (quarterly) real GDP 
growth in the fi  rst quarter of 2015 is likely to have been dampened by just over 1 per-
centage point. Based on the average 
growth rate in the current upturn (+2¼%), weather effects would certainly have been 
noteworthy, but on the whole, would not 
have suffi   ciently explained the observed 
slowdown. With regard to aggregate 
growth in the current quarter, the estimate 
only implies a positive effect of just under 
½ percentage point (annualised), assuming 
that the weather normalises again. One reason is that the lagged positive weather 
effects are generally lower than the pre-
ceding negative effects.2 Another is that 
the estimated dampening  effect of the 
weather in the fi  rst quarter of 2015 is itself 
partly the result of a countermovement fol-
lowing a positive effect from the fi  nal quar-
ter of 2014 which, however, no longer af-fects the spring fi  gures.
The estimate does not imply a correlation between unusual weather conditions and 
the contributions to growth made by inven-
tory changes or foreign trade. However, some observers ascribe the renewed dis-
tinctly dampening effect of net exports on 
real GDP growth in the fi  rst quarter to an 
additional one- off factor, namely the strike 
in ports on the US west coast, which lasted for months and was only called off in Feb-
ruary. This kind of labour dispute certainly 
may have restricted infl  ows and outfl  ows of goods. A possible impact on foreign trade’s contribution to GDP growth is not immedi-ately apparent, however, since only the bal-
ance of imports and exports is ultimately relevant here.
3 Monthly data on fl  ows in 
the goods trade, adjusted for price and sea-sonal variations, show a surge in imports in 
March, but only a comparably small in-
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Weather effects on real 
GDP growth in the USA in the fi  rst six months of 2014, 
Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 22-24.2 Probably a particularly signifi  cant factor in this is that 
the dampening effect of adverse weather conditions on the growth rate in private services consumption (excluding energy) in the subsequent quarter is not 
 reversed; instead, it appears to simply peter out.
3 In the event of a reduction in real imports and 
 exports of the same percentage, price- adjusted GDP in 
the USA rises on account of the level difference be-
tween these amounts (trade defi  cit). Indirect effects on other components via the interruption in supply chains 
are not considered here; relevant data are not availa-
ble.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
15

crease in exports. In mathematical terms, 
this accounts for the more favourable quar-
terly performance of imports and the cor-
responding macroeconomic dampening ef-
fect.4 In particular, imports from China rose 
steeply in March. Consequently, the devel-
opment in the USA could also be the re-
verse of erratic movements in Chinese for-
eign trade observed in connection with the new year celebrations there.
5
These rather technical considerations al-
ready make clear that the rise in imports in the fi  rst quarter probably is not signifi  cantly 
attributable to the substantial effective ap-
preciation in the US dollar in the 2014 Q4-
2015 Q1 period. Strong, persistent ex-
change rate shifts do have the potential to 
divert international goods fl  ows, but in 
 order for fi  nal demand to respond accord-
ingly, prices fi  rst have to be adjusted to this 
stage. However, exchange rate impulses are 
sometimes only partially and gradually 
 relayed across different levels, depending in 
particular on the country in question and 
the relevant type of good.6 Thus, the import 
prices for consumer goods in the USA have seen just a slight  reduction in the past few 
months.
What must also be considered is that pro-
nounced import movements, in particular, can also be accompanied by a change in 
inventory dynamics. In winter, for example, the dampening effect of foreign trade was counteracted by the positive contribution to growth made by increased inventory stock-
piling.7 It is possible that countermove-
ments in these expenditure components 
will again tend to offset each other in the 
current quarter.
In addition, the high volatility of foreign trade’s quarterly contributions to growth 
must also be borne in mind. As recently as summer 2014, a not insignifi  cant portion of 
GDP growth was attributable to net ex-ports. Between 2011 and 2014, however, 
the average annual contribution to growth made by foreign trade was almost nil. A dis-
tinctly dampening effect would have been 
expected, though, given the favourable growth in domestic demand in the USA compared with key trading partners. The 
growth in US imports in the past few years 
4 Since the rise in imports in March was greater than 
had been assumed by the US Bureau of Economic 
Analysis (BEA) in its initial GDP estimate for the winter, 
GDP could still be revised downwards in the second 
estimate.
5 After adjustment for the usual seasonal effects, Chi-nese statistics show that nominal goods exports to the USA shot up in February, before falling well below the January level in March. Provided that there is a connec-
tion between the foreign trade fi  gures for China and 
the USA, which lags by one month, US imports in April and also on average over the current quarter could be 
markedly lower than the average for the winter months. It is possible that macroeconomic growth would then be propped up by foreign trade, on bal-
ance.6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Japanese goods exports 
in the aftermath of the strong yen depreciation, 
Monthly Report, February 2014, pp 16-18.
7 Final domestic demand can be determined by sub-
tracting both net exports and inventory changes from GDP . Last winter, its quarterly growth was only slightly 
stronger than that of aggregate output (annualised 
+¾%).Selected phases in which real gross fi  xed investment by the US oil  industry contracted
*
 
PeriodShare in 
GDP 1 De crease 2Contri-bution to 
growth
3
Peak Trough
1981 Q4 1983 Q2 1.96 – 44.8 – 0.88
1985 Q1 1986 Q3 0.78 – 59.0 – 0.46
1991 Q1 1992 Q2 0.36 – 34.5 – 0.12
2001 Q3 2002 Q2 0.41 – 36.1 – 0.15
2008 Q4 2009 Q3 0.95 – 41.3 – 0.39
2014 Q4 2015 Q1 0.98 – 14.9 – 0.15
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis. * Approximated aggregate of real commercial investment in oil and gas production 
structures and of real commercial investment in mining 
and oilfi  eld machinery. 1 Gross fi  xed investment as a per-centage of nominal GDP at peak. 2 Cumulative percent-
age decrease in real gross fi  xed investment over the con-
traction phase. 3  Approximated contribution to rate of 
change in real GDP over the contraction phase in percent-age points.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
16

has thus been remarkably weak.8 Com-
pared with exchange rates, demand levels 
generally prove to be more signifi  cant de-
terminants of international goods fl  ows. US 
exports therefore have to be viewed not least in the setting of global economic 
 activity.
Yet even without directly affecting the vol-
ume of foreign trade, the appreciation in the US dollar can infl  uence US economic 
activity. In particular, it can alter the profi  t-
ability and hence ultimately the investment 
behaviour of enterprises that do business abroad. Such adjustments are also only 
likely to be made with a time lag, however. The current lull in commercial spending on machinery and equipment appears to be, if 
anything, a response to the very strong 
growth in 2014 Q2 and Q3.
Added to this are the latest corrections in the oil industry as a result of the drop in 
crude oil prices. This sector is small from a 
macroeconomic perspective. Expenditure of 
US$143 billion for oil and gas production structures was posted in the national ac-
counts last year. If investment in mining and 
oilfi  eld machinery of US$25 billion is also included, this corresponded to just 1% of 
economic output. However, after eliminat-
ing price effects, investment by the oil in-
dustry was very sharply constrained on dif-ferent occasions in the past. A correspond-ing approximated index fell by 41% over the 
fi  rst three quarters of 2009. In summer 
1986, it even posted a loss of 59% against 
its level at the start of 1985. Despite its  inherently low weight, this signifi  cantly  restrained the growth rate of real GDP . In 
the fi  rst quarter of 2015, the contraction in 
this index was not unusually strong com-pared with the aforementioned historical 
episodes, at -15% (non- annualised) on the 
previous quarter. This is likely to have re-duced the annualised expansion in overall economic output by just over ½ percentage 
point. Given the decline in drilling activity, 
which has persisted throughout the report-
ing period, a similarly strong effect could emerge again in the spring. But historical experience also shows that investment in 
the quarters following the end of a contrac-
tion has recovered perceptibly in some 
cases.
Overall, the signifi  cance of one- off factors for the virtual stagnation in the US econ-omy last winter defi  es a unique, defi  nitive assessment. The adverse weather condi-
tions are certainly likely to have had a per-
ceptible, but limited, impact. An equal but 
opposite movement is not to be expected in the current quarter. Even if weather ef-
fects are disregarded, the past few months 
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The decline in the elastic-
ity of global trade to global economic activity, Monthly Report, January 2015, pp 27-29.Real gross fixed investment*by the US oil industry
5075100150200250300
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Bur-
eau of Economic Analysis. * Approximated aggregate of real 
commercial  investment  in  oil  and  gas  production  structures and of real commercial investment in mining and oilfield ma-chinery.
Deutsche BundesbankUS recessions
according to NBER2009 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
17

United Kingdom
The United Kingdom, too, saw economic out -
put growth decelerate in the winter months. 
According to an initial estimate, after adjust -
ment for price and the usual seasonal effects, 
GDP grew by only ¼% from the previous quar -
ter, in which it had risen by a little over ½%; 
this was the slowest GDP growth since the end 
of 2012. Construction seems to have been hit 
by a renewed slump; real gross value added in 
this sector contracted by 1½% in the first quar -
ter of the year after having already fallen by 
2¼% in the preceding three- month period. In 
purely mathematical terms, the fact that out -
put growth in the services sector fell by nearly 
half to ½% was a more important factor in 
slowing down the economic recovery; how -
ever, this was in turn attributable in key meas -
ure to virtual stagnation in financial and other 
business-  related services, to which the con -
struction slump could have radiated. Produc -
tion sector output (excluding construction) was slightly lower in the winter, especially owing to 
considerable cutbacks in oil and gas produc -
tion. Nonetheless, the labour market situation 
continued its perceptible improvement. Ac -
cording to national data, the standardised un -
employment rate fell to 5.5% in the first quar -
ter, its lowest level since mid-2008. Consumer 
price inflation declined over the winter months, 
even excluding energy and unprocessed food; 
known as core Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) inflation, it fell from +1.2% in De -
cember 2014 to merely +0.8% three months 
later. This trend was dictated by movements in 
the prices of industrial goods (excluding  energy) 
and processed food, with increased competi -
tion in retail trade and the appreciation of the 
pound sterling likely to have been meaningful 
factors.Construction 
 extremely weakdo not reveal any indications of a substan-
tial increase in the pace of the overall econ-
omy, as many experts had predicted. The adjustments in the oil industry entailed by 
the steep drop in oil prices and their macro-economic effects were to be expected.
9 At 
the same time, the stimulating effects of 
the falling oil price on the US economy are 
generally less clear than has often been 
 assumed.10
Similarly to the setback at the start of last 
year, the bout of weakness in the US econ-
omy in winter 2015 is unlikely to herald a 
cyclical downturn. The solid labour market 
performance in April is just one factor sug-
gesting that the underlying moderate 
growth path of real GDP is sound. However, 
the virtual stagnation in winter is again highlighting the fact that, owing to lower 
potential growth, certain one- off factors or 
the usual fl  uctuations in expenditure com-ponents that are subject to volatility can push the rate of GDP growth down to or below the zero mark more often than be-
fore.11
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European 
 setting, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 10-22.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Potential impacts of the 
fall in oil prices on the real economy, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 12-14.11 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the 
current economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, pp 15-37.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
18

New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6)4 as a 
whole, the cyclical upturn accelerated further 
in the first quarter. Real GDP skyrocketed in the 
Czech Republic, in particular, though the ag -
gregate economic recovery accelerated in other 
countries as well. The sharp rise in domestic 
demand was the primary reason for the buoy -
ant economic activity. Private consumption 
benefited from the improved situation in the 
labour market, with the unemployment rate 
continuing to fall in many places. Households’ 
purchasing power was additionally boosted by 
lower consumer prices. Average aggregated 
annual headline HICP inflation in the first quar -
ter was -0.8%. Energy and unprocessed food 
prices were primarily responsible for the slide; 
excluding these goods, HICP inflation stood at 
+0.6%. Owing to the dampened underlying in -
flationary dynamics, the central banks of Hun -
gary, Poland and Romania slashed their policy 
rates once again in the past few months.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Despite the problems in the global economy, 
the euro area’s economic recovery even accel -
erated slightly. The more favourable financing 
terms, the euro’s depreciation and the lower 
crude oil price appear to have created an envi -
ronment which is conducive to the euro- area 
upswing. According to the first official esti -
mate, aggregate output was up by just under 
½% on the period in winter 2015, after sea -
sonal adjustment, and thus up by 1% from the 
same period a year earlier.
Economic growth in the first quarter of the 
year varied considerably from one country to 
the next. Of the 15 economies for which initial 
data are available, 11 showed positive quarterly Further accelera-
tion of upswing
Slight accelera-
tion in pace 
of economic 
 activity
Member states 
largely on growth  trajectory, ...Aggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 1598100102104Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, 
log scale
9698100102104106108
9698100102104106
969810010210410698100102104
Italy
SpainFranceof which
GermanyEuro area
4 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech 
 Republic, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
19

real GDP growth. Economic output grew 
strongly in Spain again, considerably in France 
and perceptibly in Germany and Italy. For Italy, 
this represented the first quarter of GDP growth 
since the summer of 2013. Real GDP was also 
up markedly in the Netherlands, Belgium and 
Portugal, while Slovakia, Latvia and Cyprus 
even posted, in some cases, strong growth. By 
contrast, Austria’s economy grew only mini -
mally. Aggregate output in Finland continued 
to contract slightly, whereas in Estonia and 
Lithuania dynamic economic growth was fol -
lowed by cyclical setbacks.
The deterioration of Greece’s economic situa -
tion, which already began late last year, contin -
ued in the first quarter of 2015. High uncer -
tainty about the country’s economic policy 
track following the change of government in 
January contributed in particular to the eco -
nomic slump. The rather optimistic expecta -
tions regarding economic growth in 2015 have 
been dashed thus far; for instance, the projec -tion published in early May by the European 
Commission puts growth for 2015 at a mere 
½%, down 2 percentage points from its Febru -
ary forecast. However, there are currently no 
signs that this is affecting economic growth in 
the other euro- area member states.
Euro- area real GDP growth, as seen from the 
output side, was driven particularly by the in -
dustrial sector, the average first- quarter output 
of which was up by 1% on the period. One of 
the forces behind this distinct growth was a 
strong increase in energy production. Interme -
diate and consumer goods production were 
also up perceptibly, while capital goods pro -
duction was increased a little. In April 2015, 
utilisation of production capacity was accord -
ingly up slightly from January, returning to its 
long- run average for the first time in four years. 
Construction output grew moderately in the 
first two months of 2015, surpassing its  autumn 
2014 level by ½%. Data already available for 
March imply a marked increase for Germany in 
the first quarter as a whole, whereas in France 
the construction sector remained mired in a 
slump.
On the expenditure side of GDP , the revival of 
private consumption, which had begun in mid-
2014, continued in the first quarter of the year. 
Real retail sales (excluding motor vehicles and 
fuel) were up by 1% on the period after sea -
sonal adjustment. In addition, the number of 
new car registrations took off, rising by 4¾% 
compared with the autumn months. Despite 
losing some swing in February and March, on a 
quarterly average they were still up by 9% on 
the year. Enterprises’ increasing capacity utilisa -
tion may have also helped additionally fuel in -
vestment activity. The steady increase in the 
output of capital goods and the more favoura -
ble financing terms are consistent with in -
creased expenditure by enterprises. With the 
global economy in the midst of a slump, for -
eign trade with non- euro- area countries has 
not yet generated any meaningful stimuli. For 
instance, on an average of the first two months 
of the year, nominal goods exports were down ... but Greece’s 
economic situa-tion expected to worsenCyclical recovery in industrial  sector, too
Perceptible 
 stimuli from  private  consumptionEuropean Commission survey of euro-area consumers
Source: European Commission Business and Consumer Survey. 
Weighted balance of positive and negative assessments, each 
as a percentage of responses submitted. Weighting based on 
individual  countries’  percentage  shares  of  real  private  con-sumer expenditure in the euro area. 1 Possible responses: “very 
likely”, “fairly likely”, “not likely” and “not at all likely”. 2 “In-
crease more rapidly”, “increase at the same rate”, “stay about the same” and “fall”. 3 “Yes, it is the right moment now” and 
“no, it is not the right moment now”.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015403020100102030
––––+++Quarterly averages, seasonally adjusted
Expected price
developments over
the next 12 months2Now is a very good time to save1
Now is the right time for 
major purchases3AprilDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
20

¼%, after seasonal adjustment, from their level 
in the last quarter of 2014. Imports fell percep -
tibly over the same period in terms of value 
(-½%).
According to the available short- term indica -
tors, the upturn in aggregate economic activity 
in the euro area continued at the beginning of 
spring. However, the indicators for orders-  
based industry, in particular, are no longer that 
favourable; in this area, new orders fell percep -
tibly in January-February compared to the 
fourth quarter of 2014, thus signalling more 
muted developments of late. If large orders are 
excluded, however, the decline was not as 
steep. By contrast, the purchasing managers’ 
index (PMI) for April, as already in the winter 
months, indicated a marked expansion of busi -
ness activity, especially in the services sector. 
The index was in expansionary territory for 
manufacturing as well. In April, the European 
Commission’s industrial confidence indicator 
– despite becoming slightly gloomier against 
the previous month  – was still somewhat 
higher than in the first quarter. Consumer con -
fidence likewise sagged in April, but was mark -
edly brighter than its average for the first quar -
ter. Households’ propensity to make big- ticket 
purchases seems to have increased in the past 
few months, in particular. In April, the relevant 
indicator remained on its ascending trajectory, 
which has already been observed for quite 
some time. The increase in real disposable in -
comes associated with falling oil prices and 
lower inflation is likely to have fuelled the pro -
pensity to consume.
The labour market situation continued to 
brighten during the period under review. In 
March 2015, as in the first quarter as a whole, 
the standardised (seasonally adjusted) unem -
ployment rate stood at 11.3%, compared with 
as much as 11.5% in the final quarter of 2014. 
It is on the decline in nearly all member states, 
France and Italy being two exceptions. The un -
employment rate in France has been trending 
back upwards slightly since mid-2014, peaking 
anew in the winter at 10.6%. Although the first- quarter unemployment rate in Italy, at 
12.8%, was 0.2 percentage point below the 
level of the last quarter of 2014, in March 2015 
it went back up to 13.0%.
While the number of unemployed persons in 
the euro area as a whole was declining, as it 
had been doing since mid-2013, jobs were 
concurrently being created. According to avail -
able employment data, which are not as recent 
as the available data on unemployment, the 
number of employed persons increased by a 
slim margin in the fourth quarter of 2014 from 
the previous period, and were up by just over 
½% on an average of the past year. Given the 
rather tame upturn in aggregate output, the 
addition of jobs in 2014 was thus compara -
tively pronounced. A large percentage of the 
increase was in services, whereas employment 
in the industrial sector all but stagnated. Job 
shedding continued in the construction sector. 
These sectoral shifts could be one reason for Survey indicators 
continuing to signal expansion
Gradual 
 improvement in the labour marketEuro-area HICP inflation excluding energy and contributions by groups of countries
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.5% or percentage points
HICP ex energy
Year-on-year change... Germany
... the rest of the euro area... Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
    Portugal and SpainContribution to HICP inflation ex energy by ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
21

Euro- area productivity growth
The steady but relatively fl  at macroeco-
nomic recovery seen in the euro area in  recent years was accompanied by a slight 
increase in employment. In the fi  nal quarter 
of 2014, the number of employed persons 
was 1% above the trough experienced at 
the beginning of 2013, while real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) exceeded its lowest 
level by 1¾%.  Given that employment nor-mally grows at a markedly slower rate than 
GDP due to technological progress and  increasing capital use, the relatively high employment intensity of growth experi-enced over the past two years is remark-able. This is refl  ected in low productivity growth, ie a rather small increase in value 
added per employed person. The relatively 
weak productivity growth in recent years raises the question as to whether this is a long- term trend or just a short- lived phe-
nomenon.
A cyclical and therefore temporary slow-
down would exist, for instance, in the event of labour hoarding despite a weak demand 
for goods. A cyclical slump in investment 
can also slow down the increase in capital 
intensity and thus average labour productiv-ity. By contrast, a trend change would exist, 
for example, if continuous technological progress were to cause persistently higher growth rates of labour productivity. Simi-larly, a sectoral change could also have long- term effects on labour productivity  dynamics. For example, a reallocation of 
employment to usually less capital-intensive services sectors triggers a decline in average 
labour productivity growth at the macro-economic level, even if it remains un-changed in individual sectors. Moreover, 
structural barriers in the labour and product 
markets can create unfavourable invest-
ment conditions and therefore persistently hamper growth in capital intensity and 
 labour productivity.
The relationship between economic output, 
employment and labour productivity can be illustrated as
LP = GDP / E,
meaning labour productivity (LP) measures 
the average economic output (GDP) per employed person (E). Alternatively, owing 
to cyclical or longer- term changes in aver-
age hours worked per employed person, 
output per hour worked (H) is measured in 
many cases. This hourly productivity is ex-
pressed as
.
The change in GDP can thus be explained 
by changes in the number of employed per-
sons, the average hours worked per em-
ployed person, and the average hourly pro-ductivity.
Euro- area productivity growth since the 
start of the new millennium can be broken down into four stages. Between 2000 and 
2007, real GDP per employed person saw comparatively steady growth. With the slump in economic output caused by the 
global fi  nancial crisis of 2008-09, productiv-
ity measured in this way did not fall as sharply as GDP initially and was able to 
 return to its previous peak relatively quickly 
during the following economic recovery 
phase. During the second period of weak 
economic activity (the sovereign debt crisis 
of 2011-12), productivity did not shrink; 
however, output per capita has remained 
stagnant since 2011. Overall, it saw annual 
growth of ¼% between 2007 and 2014, Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
22

Employment in the euro area as a whole and in selected member states
 
Item Totalof which
IndustryMarket 
services 1Construc-tionNon- 
market 
services
2
Euro areaChange in number of employed persons (in thousands)
2000 to 2007 11,429 – 1,462 9,375 1,426 2,685
2007 to 2014 – 3,155 – 2,436 1,379 – 2,880 1,389
Share of total hours worked
2000 . 19.2 45.7 8.2 20.0
2007 . 16.9 48.3 8.9 20.1
2014 . 15.6 50.5 6.7 21.8
Average annual growth in labour productivity (hours)
2001 to 2007 1.1 3.0 0.8 –   1.0 0.3
2008 to 2014 0.6 1.3 0.1 1.1 0.5
GermanyChange in number of employed persons (in thousands)
2000 to 2007 408 –   625 1,296 –   582 375
2007 to 2014 2,327 189 1,259 135 763
Share of total hours worked
2000 . 21.8 44.8 8.2 21.6
2007 . 20.3 47.4 6.7 22.5
2014 . 20.1 47.3 6.8 23.1
Average annual growth in labour productivity (hours)
2001 to 2007 1.5 3.4 1.3 –   0.4 0.2
2008 to 2014 0.4 0.7 –  0.1 1.2 0.7
FranceChange in number of employed persons (in thousands)
2000 to 2007 1,371 –   377 1,115 338 384
2007 to 2014 72 –   412 403 –    44 207
Share of total hours worked
2000 . 15.1 45.0 6.7 26.2
2007 . 12.8 47.1 7.8 26.3
2014 . 11.2 48.6 7.6 27.2
Average annual growth in labour productivity (hours)
2001 to 2007 1.4 3.6 1.3 –   0.5 0.7
2008 to 2014 0.4 1.2 0.4 –   2.3 0.8
Italy
Change in number of employed persons (in thousands)
2000 to 2007 2,274 23 1,716 453 126
2007 to 2014 –   952 –   683 290 –   405 – 87
Share of total hours worked
2000 . 21.5 48.9 6.8 15.6
2007 . 19.8 50.8 8.3 14.3
2014 . 17.4 54.4 6.5 15.3
Average annual growth in labour productivity (hours)
2001 to 2007 0.1 1.0 –  0.1 –   1.3 0.5
2008 to 2014 –   0.1 0.4 –  0.7 –   0.7 0.0
Spain
Change in number of employed persons (in thousands)
2000 to 2007 4,594 –    57 3,074 873 736
2007 to 2014 – 3,109 –   759 –  625 – 1,754 176
Share of total hours worked
2000 . 18.7 45.6 12.0 16.3
2007 . 14.7 49.4 14.4 15.9
2014 . 13.3 55.1 6.0 20.0
Average annual growth in labour productivity (hours)
2001 to 2007 0.4 2.7 –  0.3 –   3.2 1.0
2008 to 2014 1.7 2.1 0.8 6.2 0.4
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Trade, transportation, hotels and restaurants, information and communica-tion, fi  nancial service providers, business-related services, services relating to art and culture. 2 Public administration, defence, education, health.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
23

compared with ¾% per year between 2000 
and 2007.
In some cases, divergent developments in the four largest member states are being 
concealed by the aggregate picture for the 
euro area. For example, in Germany and France, labour productivity experienced a 
marked increase between 2000 and 2007. 
Since then, however, it has stagnated in Germany and has only inched upwards in France. Exactly the opposite occurred in Spain, where considerable productivity 
gains have been recorded in recent years.1 
In Italy, by contrast, output per employed 
person actually fell between 2007 and 2014 by just under ¾% per year.
2 The slow pro-
ductivity growth in the euro area as a whole over the past two years of economic recov-
ery, however, matches the situation in the 
individual countries.
The weakness in output per employed per-
son can be explained in part by trends in 
hours worked. The average working week 
of full- time employees has decreased from 
41.1 hours in 2007 to 40.5 hours in 2014. In 
addition, the number of full- time employ-
ees has declined signifi  cantly since 2007, while the number of people in part- time 
employment has risen. Now at 22.4%, part- 
time employment as a share of total em-ployment increased by 3.6 percentage 
points before the crisis (2000 to 2007) and by another 3.2 percentage points after the 
crisis began (2007 to 2014). On the one 
hand, this can be seen as a structural phe-
nomenon in the sense of a strengthened 
preference for part- time work. On the other 
hand, there has been a noticeably sharper 
rise in involuntary part- time employment as 
a share of total employment since 2007 than in voluntary part- time employment, which is a sign of cyclical factors.
3 This is 
also indicated by the fact that the share of 
involuntary part- time employment grew most in Spain and Italy during the crisis and that the share is the highest there.
In purely arithmetic terms, the reduction in 
the average hours worked per employed 
person has had a negative impact on the average output per employed person. Be-
tween 2007 and 2014, hourly productivity 
grew by ¾% a year and therefore some-
what stronger than real GDP per employed 
person. However, compared with the pe-
riod before the crisis, in which the growth 
was still just over 1%, a slowdown can also be seen here, which has become even more 
pronounced since economic activity began 
to rebound in 2013.
The reduction in productivity gains per hour 
worked affects not only the euro area but 
1 This is largely related to substantial adjustments in 
the construction sector, where the largest number of 
jobs were lost. The signifi  cantly countercyclical pro-
gression of labour productivity observed solely in 
Spain, however, seems to be mainly attributable to the 
country’s high labour market duality – during up-swings, a greater number of temporary workers are 
hired, who can quickly be laid off during a crisis. For 
various reasons, these employees tend to have low productivity. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Distinctive features of unit labour cost developments in Spain, 
Monthly Report, February 2014, pp 21-25, as well as 
S Bentolila, J J Dolado and J F Jimeno (2012), Reform-ing an insider- outsider labor market: the Spanish expe-rience, IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 1:4.
2 Various structural aspects – including not only 
 labour, product and capital markets but also the justice 
system and the public transport and telecommunica-
tions infrastructure – have contributed to the weak 
productivity growth. Furthermore, Italy has an unusu-
ally large number of small enterprises that manage to remain in the market despite lower productivity, which suggests frictions may be interfering with the effi   cient 
allocation of resources. See OECD (2015), Economic 
Survey Italy, as well as IMF (2014), Italy, Country Report No 14/ 283.
3 The involuntary part- time employees’ share of total 
employment did not rise as much before the crisis as 
the voluntary part- time employees’ share (+1.5 per-
centage points vs +2.1 percentage points). After 2007, however, their increase was greater than the voluntary 
part- time employees’ share growth (+2.2 percentage 
points vs +1.0 percentage point). Last year, 29% of part- time employees cited inability to fi  nd full- time 
work as the reason for their part- time employment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
24

also other mature economies.4 In addition, 
productivity gains were already starting to 
decrease before 2007.5 A possible cause of 
this development could be the sectoral 
structural change which involves the reallo-
cation of employment to services sectors.6 
Here, productivity increases at a slower rate 
on average than in other economic sectors because of the lower capital intensity. With an increasing weight on the services sector, productivity growth would fall at the macro-economic level, even if it remained constant in the individual sectors.
Despite signifi  cant differences between 
countries and horizons, the sectoral change can be observed in all member states under review. Generally, job creation was particu-
larly strong in the services sector, primarily 
in the area of market services. Between 
2000 and 2007, the number of persons em-ployed in the euro area rose by 11½ million 
overall and 9½ million in market services. By contrast, employment decreased in the industrial sector. After 2007, 3¼ million 
jobs were lost in this sector, while the area 
of market services grew by an additional 
1½ million jobs. In the euro area as a whole, as well as in its four largest member states, 
the share of persons employed in the ser-vices sector was markedly higher in 2014 
than in 2000. At the same time, growth in hourly productivity was distinctly stronger in 
the industrial sector than in market ser-
4 See, for example, Bank of England, The UK produc-
tivity puzzle, Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q2, pp 114-128, 
and Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the 
current economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, 
pp 15-37, as well as Deutsche Bundesbank, Weak pro-ductivity performance in the United Kingdom in com-
parison with the United States, Monthly Report, April 
2013, pp 28-30.
5 See Dabla- Norris et al (2015), The new normal: A 
sector- level perspective on productivity trends in 
 advanced economies, IMF Staff Discussion Note 15/ 03.
6 See S Klinger and E Weber, Seit der Großen Rezes-
sion: schwächerer Zusammenhang von Konjunktur und Beschäftigung, Wirtschaftsdienst 10/ 2014, 
pp 756-758.Aggregate output and labour productivity in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 05 10 20141001051101151202000 Q1 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
100105110115120
100105110115120
9095100105110115
100105110115120125130135
SpainItalyFranceGermanyEuro areaReal GDP
Real GDP per hour worked
Real GDP per employed personDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
25

vices.7 Although the gap between these 
growth rates narrowed after 2007, the 
larger productivity increases generally ob-
served in the more capital- intensive indus-
trial sector were also present in recent 
years.
The trend reallocation of employment to 
services sectors can, nevertheless, only ex-
plain part of the observed slowdown in pro-ductivity gains. The sectoral reallocation has 
tended to weaken somewhat since 2007. 
What is more signifi  cant, though, is that the 
productivity growth rate has also fallen 
within the individual sectors.8 The industrial 
sector is experiencing a particularly rapid 
decline in growth, which is concentrated on 
the cyclical recovery phase. Therefore, al-though the weaker productivity gains are 
likely to partly refl  ect an intersectoral shift in 
employment, intrasectoral changes in pro-
ductivity are more relevant.
The causes of the weaker productivity 
growth in the individual sectors are diverse. 
For example, uncertainty regarding the 
 future of the euro area has been very high among enterprises in recent years.
9 In addi-
tion, growth- enhancing structural reforms 
were not always rigorously implemented in the member states.
10 These points, together 
with cyclical sluggishness, have curbed  investment activity in recent years; capital 
intensity has risen slightly, if at all. Further-
more, the economic recovery in some member states was initially weaker than expected.
11 It is possible that these coun-
tries, anticipating higher growth in demand than what actually occurred, were hoarding labour.
The causes of the recently observed slow-down in productivity growth are not yet 
entirely clear.12 However, there is evidence 
to suggest that the recent stagnation of 
 labour productivity was only partly caused by structural factors. Hence, with stronger 
acceleration in investment activity, hourly 
productivity should start to rebound. Invol-
untary part- time employment is also ex-
pected to become less signifi  cant and real 
GDP per employed person should grow more substantially again. However, a sus-tainably steeper growth path can only be achieved through increases in investment and innovation. This would not least be 
supported by the consistent and continued implementation of growth- enhancing struc-tural reforms.
7 The main focus of this analysis is on the industrial 
sector and market services; employment in the con-
struction sector follows a highly pro- cyclical pattern. In 
the public services sector, especially in healthcare, an 
upward trend in employment has been observed for 
some time now, although productivity is particularly 
diffi   cult to measure here.8 One exception to this is Spain, where market services experienced a higher growth rate after 2007 than pre-viously, though it was unable to match the growth rate seen in the industrial sector.9 Although the economic policy uncertainty index for 
Europe (available at www.policyuncertainty.com) has fallen since 2011-12, the peak of the sovereign debt 
crisis, its level has remained higher than before 2007. See S Baker, N Bloom and S J Davis (2013), Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, manuscript.10 See, for example, OECD (2015), Going for Growth.
11 For instance, in winter 2013, the European Com-
mission’s euro- area GDP growth forecast for 2014 was 
1½%, which was ½ percentage point greater than 
 actual growth. For France, the gap was ¾ percentage point and for Italy, 1¼ percentage points.12 See, for example, Bank of England, The UK produc-
tivity puzzle, Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q2, pp 114-128, 
as well as Dabla- Norris et al (2015), op cit.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
26

the relatively dampened aggregate productivity 
growth (see the box on pages 22 to 26).
In the first quarter of 2015, euro- area consumer 
prices again dipped by 0.3% on the quarter af -
ter seasonal adjustment, owing to the energy 
component; however, impacted by rising oil 
prices, they went back up as the quarter pro -
gressed. Consumer price inflation excluding 
 energy accelerated slightly, after seasonal ad -
justment, to 0.2%. Whereas food and services 
prices were still rising tepidly, industrial goods 
prices continued to move sideways. The euro’s 
depreciation, which has become quite substan -
tial now, will probably only make itself percep -
tibly felt in the second half of the year. Annual 
HICP inflation flipped into slightly negative ter -
ritory (to -0.3%) for the first time since 2009. 
Excluding energy, it stood at +0.6%, as in the 
two preceding quarters.The decline in non- energy HICP inflation has 
been halted particularly in the former crisis 
countries, which had previously contributed in 
disproportionate measure; either the slump in 
prices was slowed or prices even went back up 
slightly. However, inflation initially continued to 
decelerate in the countries that were not hit as 
hard by the crisis; only towards the end of the 
reporting period have there also been signs of 
a turnaround.
Euro- area consumer prices continued their rise 
in April 2015 after seasonal adjustment. Ac -
cording to a Eurostat flash estimate, prices 
were, on average, unchanged from April 2014. 
Whereas annual energy price inflation was 
pointedly negative, food and services prices 
rose modestly. Excluding energy, annual HICP 
inflation rose slightly to 0.7%.HICP inflation 
has probably bottomed outNon-energy HICP inflation 
recently back up 
in former crisis 
countries
Annual HICP 
 inflation no longer negative in AprilDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In line with its forward guidance, during the 
reporting period the Governing Council of the 
ECB kept key euro- area interest rates at the 
 levels reached following the interest rate cut of 
4 September 2014, which it considers the lower 
bound. Therefore, the main refinancing rate 
 remains at 0.05%, the marginal lending rate at 
0.30% and the deposit rate at -0.20%.
On 9 March 2015, the Eurosystem began pur -
chasing additional bonds issued by euro- area 
central governments, agencies and European 
institutions under the expanded asset purchase 
programme (EAPP). These additional purchases 
constitute the new public sector purchase pro -
gramme (PSPP). Under the EAPP the Eurosys -
tem concurrently continued its third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3) and asset- 
backed securities purchase programme ( ABSPP), 
which were announced in September 2014, on 
the same terms. The monthly purchase volume 
under the EAPP , including the ABSPP and 
CBPP3, is to total €60 billion, and this monthly 
volume is to be maintained until the end of 
September 2016 or, in any case, until the Gov -
erning Council sees a sustained adjustment in 
the path of inflation that is consistent with its 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term. In its April meet -
ing, the ECB Governing Council also made it 
clear that, in line with its monetary policy strat -
egy, it would focus on inflation trends and look 
through unexpected outcomes in measured 
inflation in either direction if they were tran -
sient and did not have an impact on the me -
dium- term outlook for price stability.
By 8 May, the volume of purchases on the sec -
ondary market under the PSPP had reached 
€108.7 billion. To date, purchases under CBPP3 
and ABSPP on the primary and secondary mar -
kets have amounted to €78.0 billion and €5.8 
billion respectively. Purchases under these two 
programmes began in the fourth quarter of 
2014. For the months of March and April, the 
volume of securities purchased under the EAPP 
corresponds to the monthly volume of around 
€60 billion previously announced.
On 19 March 2015, the third of eight targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTROs) 
was carried out. In this operation, 143 institu -
tions borrowed an overall volume of €97.8 bil -
lion from the Eurosystem, which exceeded sur -
vey expectations and brought the combined 
volume of the first three refinancing operations 
of this kind to a total of €310.4 billion. A fur -
ther five TLTROs will be conducted up until 
June 2016, which, like the third and most 
 recent operation, will allow counterparties to 
borrow up to three times the amount of their 
eligible net lending above a certain benchmark. Key interest 
rates still at  historical low
EAPP launched 
in March 2015
So far, purchase volume consist -
ent with target
143 banks 
 borrow €97.8 
billion in third 
 TLTROMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month EURIBOR less 
three-month EONIA swap rate. The three-month EUREPO rate 
used hitherto was discontinued on 1 January 2015. See also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Money market risk premia: indicators for the state of the interbank market, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 30-31. • Average 1 to 14 May 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 20150.500.51.01.52.02.5
–+++++
050100Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods from 
28  January 2015 to 21  April 2015 saw a 
marked decrease in euro- area liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors. 
This specifi  cally applied to the March- April 
2015 maintenance period, in which autono-
mous factors averaged €465.2 billion and 
were €40.0 billion lower than in the Decem-ber 2014-January 2015 reserve maintenance period. This was primarily driven by the ag-gregate decrease in other autonomous fac-
tors (including net foreign assets) totalling 
€54.2 billion. A major part in this was played by lower net assets denominated in euro. By 
contrast, banknotes in circulation and gov-
ernment deposits with the Eurosystem rose by €10.4 billion and €3.9 billion net respec-
tively. Calculated liquidity needs were addi-
tionally expanded by the increase in the minimum reserve requirements which, at 
€4.4 billion, was distinctly higher than in the 
three previous maintenance periods (+€0.8 
billion); see table below.Overall, the outstanding volume of tender 
operations fl  uctuated within a broad range between €465 billion and €594 billion (see chart on page 31). The period under review 
included the maturing of the two three- 
year LTROs at the end of January and Febru-ary. The resultant liquidity effect was, how-
ever, largely offset by substitution via the main refi  nancing operations and three- month tenders, which led to a signifi  cant rise in such transactions. Furthermore, the main focus was on the allotment of the third targeted longer- term refi  nancing op-
eration (TLTRO). As at 25 March 2015, €97.8 billion had been credited, although the out-
standing tender volume showed a net in-crease on that day of only €73 billion as 
funds were shifted from the main refi  nanc-ing operation and three- month tender. The 
main refi  nancing operations tended to at-tract an increased demand from a higher number of bidders at the end of each month apart from at the end of March, 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2015
28 Jan to
10 Mar11 Mar to21 Apr
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  0.1 – 10.5
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  4.2 –  8.1
3 Net foreign assets
1 + 12.8 + 36.7
4 Other factors 1 +  7.1 –  2.4
Total + 24.2 + 15.7
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations + 23.6 – 23.7
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 79.4 + 11.1
(c) Other operations + 12.9 + 59.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 –  0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  7.8 – 26.2
Total – 35.2 + 20.8
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 11.0 + 36.5
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  1.4 –  3.0
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
29

which coincided with the allotment of the 
third TLTRO. In the period under review, the 
volume allotted in the three- month tenders 
remained comparatively high despite these 
shifts; thus at the end of the March- April 2015 period, they accounted for around 20% of total tender refi  nancing in the amount of €514.1 billion. The four- year TLTROs had a share of 60%, while the main refi  nancing operations made up 20%.
Additional liquidity was injected into banks 
from purchases under the public sector pur-
chase programme (PSPP) launched at the beginning of March 2015 as well as from 
outright operations under the third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3) and the 
asset- backed securities purchase pro-
gramme (ABSPP) launched back in October 
and November 2014. By 8 May 2015, pur-
chases under these programmes had 
reached balance sheet totals of €108.7 bil-
lion (PSPP), €77.9 billion (CBPP3) and €5.8 
billion (ABSPP). The balance sheet holdings 
of securities acquired through purchase programmes already completed concur-rently fell further during the period under 
review as a result of maturities and taking 
into account end- of- quarter revaluations 
(CBPP1 and CBPP2 declined by €1.8 billion 
to €25.7 billion and by €1.3 billion to €11.4 
billion respectively, while the SMP volume 
was down by €4.8 billion to €139.4 billion).
Excess liquidity proved volatile during the period under consideration owing to fl  uc-tuations in autonomous factors between 
€444 billion and €557 billion and changes 
in the demand for tenders (see chart above). 
It touched a trough of €139 billion on 9  March 2015 compared with a peak of 
€274 billion on 31 March 2015. While aver-
age excess liquidity, at €160 billion, was lower in the January- March 2015 reserve maintenance period than in the previous 
period (€180 billion), it rose considerably to €220 billion in the March- April 2015 reserve 
maintenance period under the impact of the third TLTRO and the PSPP . One of the 
reasons for the sharp rise in excess liquidity 
is that the demand for tenders barely de-
clined despite the considerable provision of 
liquidity by the purchase programmes. Ex-cess liquidity was boosted in addition by 
autonomous factors, which declined by €16 
billion on average in comparison to the 
 January- March 2015 maintenance period.Central bank interest rates, money
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.  1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankDec Jan Feb Mar Apr May
2014 20150.20.100.10.2
––++Daily data
€ bn%
050100150200250300 Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
Spread between Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight and the main refinancing rate
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankJan Feb Mar Apr May
20150.20.100.1
––+
Mean value for the
reserve maintenance periodPercentage points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
30

With the exception of the month- end lev-
els, the overnight money rates hovered be-
tween the main refi  nancing rate and the 
deposit facility rate in the two reserve main-
tenance periods under review. Secured 
overnight money (GC Pooling Overnight, 
ECB basket) rates remained consistently be-
low EONIA (by 8 basis points on average; 
see charts on page 30), although the spread 
between the rates widened over course of 
the two periods. After the spread between 
the main refi  nancing rate and the STOXX GC Pooling Overnight rate stood at -15  basis points on average in the January- March reserve maintenance period , it fell 
considerably in the following period to -21 
basis points on average in light of the in-crease in excess liquidity. EONIA stood at 
-0.06% on average in the March- April 2015 
reserve maintenance period (previous pe-riod: -0.04%), while secured overnight 
money reached an average of -0.16% (pre-vious period: -0.10%). The underlying turn-
over on the overnight money market con-
tinued to decline over the period under re-view. While the corresponding turnover on 
GC Pooling (ECB basket) sank markedly by 
€3.7 billion, in comparison to the previous 
period, to an average of €13.9 billion in the March- April period, EONIA turnover proved 
somewhat more stable, falling by €1.5 bil-
lion to around €26.0 billion, albeit at a very low level. One reason for the weaker Over-night GC Pooling and EONIA turnovers may 
have been the increase in excess liquidity, which, in conjunction with the ECB’s for-
ward guidance, led to an increasingly fl  atter 
money market yield curve. The fi  rst two 
weeks of the April- June 2015 reserve main-
tenance period were marked by a further 
increase in excess liquidity (€304 billion on 
5  May) owing to the continuous liquidity 
infl  ows, above all from the PSPP and CBPP3. 
One result of this was that the typical sharper increase in overnight rates on the last day of the month did not occur, even 
though this lasted for four days in April ow-ing to the May Day public holiday.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP) and public sector purchase programme (PSPP). 2 Current 
account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility
40020002004006008001,000
––+++++
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May
2014 2015Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tenders
Three-year LTROsPurchase programmes1
Targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs)Marginal lending facility
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
31

In the first two TLTROs, which took place last 
year, participating banks were able to take out 
central bank loans amounting to up to 7% of 
their outstanding credit volume to the non-  
financial private sector (not including loans to 
households for house purchase) as at 30 April 
2014.
Between the beginning of February and the 
end of March, excess liquidity showed no sig -
nificant increase despite the ongoing bond pur -
chase programmes because the liquidity in -
jected was more or less offset by contracting 
refinancing operations. The jump of around 
€70 billion at the end of March was mainly at -
tributable to the allotment of the third TLTRO. 
At the current end, excess liquidity, at some 
€300 billion, is considerably higher than the 
 average figure for 2014. It is expected to rise 
further in the next few months as a result of 
the EAPP outright purchases, although its 
growth could be somewhat dampened by the 
slight decrease anticipated in the demand for 
liquidity in the regular refinancing operations.
Overall, short- term money market rates contin -
ued to fall during the observation period. 
Whereas the overnight rates (EONIA, STOXX 
GC Pooling ON) did not initially decline further 
in February and March given the predominantly 
constant supply of liquidity and recorded higher 
levels than in the first half of January, they 
reached new lows in the light of the significant 
rise in excess liquidity from the end of March. 
The unsecured interbank money market rate 
EONIA temporarily reached a level of -0.143%, 
while the secured STOXX GC Pooling ON rate 
fell to as low as -0.183%. By contrast, given 
expectations of a further rise in excess liquidity, 
the three- month EURIBOR rate continued the 
negative trend seen in the last few months 
throughout the observation period. At the cur -
rent end it reached an all- time low of -0.009%, 
which was also the first time it has entered 
negative territory.Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The recovery in the broad monetary aggregate 
M3 observed since the first quarter of 2014 
gained further momentum during the report -
ing quarter. At an (annualised) quarter- on- 
quarter rate of just under 6%, the monetary 
aggregate showed sharper growth over the 
winter months than it had for three years. This 
pick- up was due, above all, to the further in -
crease in the money- holding sector’s prefer -
ence for highly liquid assets as interest rates 
continued to fall. In terms of its counterparts, 
the growth in M3 is also increasingly being 
supported by lending to the private sector. The 
recovery in lending comprised both loans to 
households and to non- financial corporations. 
Demand for credit is benefiting from excep -
tionally favourable financing conditions and the 
positive underlying trend in real economic 
 activity.
The monetary aggregate M3, which had 
 already recorded a significant expansion in the 
two previous quarters, increased again notice -
ably in the first three months of this year. This 
increase was once more primarily driven by 
overnight deposits, which benefited from a fur -
ther reduction in interest rates for other depos -
its and were further stocked up by households 
and non- financial corporations, in particular. 
Conversely, these sectors’ demand for short-  
term time deposits fell again significantly in the 
reporting quarter. As in the previous quarter, 
financial corporations also substantially in -
creased their overnight deposits and scaled 
back other deposits included in M3, albeit to a 
lesser extent than the non- financial private sec -
tor.
Against this backdrop, the upward trend in 
monetary growth that has been observed since 
the beginning of 2014 gained further momen -
tum in the reporting quarter, and the annual 
growth rate of M3 rose markedly to 4.6% at 
the end of the reporting quarter. The ongoing 
recovery also led to an increase in the annual Excess liquidity 
still trending  upwards
Three- month 
EURIBOR in 
 negative territory  
for the first timeMonetary growth increas-
ingly supported 
by lending
Significant M3 
growth still driven by over-
night deposits
Continued 
 upward trend in 
monetary and credit growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
32

growth rate for loans to the euro- area private 
sector (adjusted for loan sales and securitisa -
tion), which, at 0.8%, reached its highest level 
since March 2012. Despite these evident signs 
of recovery, growth in lending business and 
thus the underlying monetary dynamics in the 
euro area remain very moderate.
The broad- based recovery in lending included 
loans to non- financial corporations, which in -
creased noticeably in the quarter under review 
after recording a net increase in the previous 
quarter for the first time since the third quarter 
of 2011 (see the chart on page  34). This in -
crease pertained to loans with medium-  term 
maturities, in particular, while long- term lend -
ing went up only slightly during the reporting 
quarter. Short- term lending also continued its 
upward trend, though loans with short maturi -
ties again recorded slight outflows on balance. 
Given the strong cyclical nature of this maturity 
segment, a further upturn is expected in the 
wake of the economic recovery. The annualised 
rate of change for loans to non- financial corpo -
rations in the euro area as a whole subse -
quently continued its recovery and amounted 
to -0.3% at the end of the reporting quarter.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) carried out in 
the first quarter also pointed to a continued 
upward movement in lending to the non-  financial corporations sector. The surveyed 
euro- area institutions reported a further mod -
erate increase in demand for bank loans among 
non- financial corporations following a marked 
rise in the previous quarter. Banks reported that 
the demand for credit was supported mainly by 
the low general interest rate level. The banks 
responding to the BLS also stated they had 
once more moderately relaxed their credit 
standards for loans to enterprises and expected 
these standards to ease further in the wake of 
the Eurosystem’s expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme. The trend towards more expansion -
ary credit standards observed since the second 
quarter of 2014 therefore continued. Alongside 
their robust liquidity position, banks said that 
the easing of standards was due, in particular, 
to the high level of competition in the area of 
corporate banking.
In contrast to the recovery in lending in the 
fourth quarter of 2014, which was supported 
by a broad base of countries, the pattern 
among the four large euro- area countries in 
the reporting quarter was more mixed (see 
chart on page  35). While quarter- on- quarter 
corporate lending in France surged and the 
level of net redemptions in Spain declined no -
ticeably, German banks’ loans to non- financial 
corporations in the euro area decreased and 
Italy recorded a renewed rise in net redemp -Ongoing recov-
ery in loans to non- financial corporationsBLS, too, points to gradual  stabilisation in lending to  
non- financial corporations
Mixed develop-
ments in corpo-rate lending in the four large euro- area  countriesConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2015 Q1 2014 Q4
Central government deposits 16.8 8.8
Monetary aggregate M3 148.4 119.4
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 213.0 144.2
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 55.5 –  54.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) –  9.0 29.6
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 
to other non-MFIs – 67.7 –  97.3
of which
Capital and reserves 22.2 3.1
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 89.9 – 100.4Assets 2015 Q1 2014 Q4
Credit to private non-MFIs in the euro area 38.8 2.0
Loans 46.4 19.7
Loans, adjusted
1 55.4 30.1
Securities –  7.7 – 17.7
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 28.5 46.4
Loans 21.5 12.7
Securities 7.0 33.6
Net external assets – 14.4 36.9
Other counterparts of M3 35.7 – 64.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. The data shown have been extensively revised, mainly in connection with the new regulation concerning the balance sheet of the monetary fi  nancial institutions sector and changes to the statistical reporting framework 
of a number of national central banks. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
33

tions. As in the preceding quarters, German 
and Italian firms’ demand for bank finance was 
probably curbed in part by their greater re -
course to alternative sources of funding. Thus 
the BLS data for Italy indicate that the subdued 
borrowing demand from non- financial corpo -
rations was due, among other things, to the 
increased issuance of debt securities by large 
enterprises, while firms in Germany, in particu -
lar, relied primarily on own funds.
The recovery in loans to households observed 
since the third quarter of 2013 likewise per -
sisted. However, with a year- on- year expansion 
of 1.1% at the end of the reporting quarter, the 
growth rate of this aggregate is still moderate. 
In an environment characterised by historically 
low interest rates, growth was again driven by 
loans for house purchase, although consumer 
credit also made a distinctly positive contribu -
tion. Like the pattern of lending to non- financial 
corporations, the growth in household borrow -
ing reported for the euro- area aggregate 
masked relatively heterogeneous national de -
velopments. Whereas mortgage lending con -
tinued to increase markedly in Germany, in par -
ticular, housing loans showed a decrease in the 
euro- area periphery countries, not least owing 
to households’ continued need to deleverage, 
although there was a noticeable slowdown in 
net redemptions. For the euro area as a whole, 
the banks surveyed in the BLS likewise reported 
that demand in this credit segment had again 
risen considerably, while standards for loans to 
households for house purchase had remained 
virtually unchanged.
The upturn in consumer credit observed over 
the last few quarters probably reflects the on -
going pick- up in private consumption in the 
euro area. This tallies with the replies of the re -
spondent institutions to the BLS. They reported 
that a perceptible increase in demand in the 
consumer credit segment was accompanied by 
a slight easing of credit standards. They added 
that the demand for consumer credit was be -
ing boosted by improved consumer confidence 
and the low general interest rate level.Marked rise 
in household borrowingMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan sales and secur-
itisation.  5 Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  from 
2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations. 7 Non-finan-
cial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201563036912
––++++
–6–30+3+69+12
30369
–+++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
growth contributions 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Net external
asset position
Credit to theprivate sector 4
Financialcorporations 6
Non-financialcorporations 7
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
34

As well as lending to non- banks, monetary 
growth in the reporting period was mainly sup -
ported by a decline in longer- term financial lia -
bilities, which decreased considerably in the 
first quarter following outflows in the previous 
quarters. This was chiefly attributable to on-
going sizeable net redemptions of bank debt 
securities with a maturity of over two years and 
to marked withdrawals of funds from long-  
term time deposits; this was partly counterbal -
anced by an appreciable increase in capital and 
reserves.
The reduction of long- term bank debt securi -
ties in the hands of the euro-  area money-  
holding sector has been observed since the 
fourth quarter of 2011. While the net redemp -
tions were initially attributable, above all, to 
weak demand, banks’ refinancing situation in 
the market has clearly improved again in the 
meantime. This is corroborated by the com -
ment of the banks surveyed in the BLS, which 
reported improvements in the issuance of 
longer- term bank debt securities in the first 
quarter, as in the preceding quarters. The on -
going reduction of long- term bank debt securi -
ties despite improved market access suggests 
that this type of refinancing has become less 
attractive to banks compared with alternative 
sources of funding. These notably include 
mounting deposits and cheap liquidity provided by the Eurosystem. This is consistent with the 
answer of the BLS respondent banks that, be -
sides lending to enterprises, they were using 
the funds obtained under the Eurosystem’s ex -
panded asset purchase programme as a substi -
tute for alternative sources of funding .
In the three months up to March the MFI sec -
tor’s net external asset position, which has 
been the main counterpart supporting M3 for 
the last two years, recorded net outflows for 
the first time since mid-2012 despite higher 
current account surpluses. This is presumably 
attributable to net capital exports in portfolio 
business fuelled by strong demand from do -
mestic investors for securities issued outside 
the euro area. At the same time, foreign inves -
tors continued to reduce their holdings of debt 
securities issued by non- MFIs resident in the 
euro area, a development which began in mid-
2014. This is probably connected to the Euro -
system’s expanded securities purchases. By 
contrast, non- resident investors again notice-
ably expanded their activities in the euro- area 
stock market.
However, the decline in the MFI sector’s net 
 external asset position was not accompanied 
by a fall in aggregate total assets; both claims 
on and liabilities to the rest of the world in -
creased quite significantly. The balance sheet Marked fall in 
monetary capital as long- term bank debt  securities shrink
First outflows in net external asset position since 2012
Banks’ total 
 assets up againLoans to non-financial corporations*
€ billion; three-month changes at the end of the quarter, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * As from the implementation of ESA 2010, from December 2014, holding companies of 
non-financial groups are no longer counted as belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but are now allocated instead to 
the financial corporations sector in banks’ monthly balance sheet statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15 2011 12 13 14 15252015105051015
–––––+++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2011 12 13 14 1550403020100102030
–––––+++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
35

shrinkage in the banking sector, which com -
menced in mid-2012, came to a halt in 2014 
and has since given way to a discernible bal -
ance sheet expansion. The total assets of banks 
in the euro area increased perceptibly in the 
first quarter of 2015, with growth being broadly 
based across the individual balance sheet items. 
On an annual basis, this was driven by an in -
crease in financial derivatives in the trading 
portfolio (see the above chart). Claims on the 
rest of the world and on general government, 
too, featured prominently. Looking only at the 
first quarter, the balance sheet expansion en -
compassed all asset items. The four large euro- 
area countries continued to exhibit two diver -
gent developments. While banks in Germany 
and France clearly contributed to the balance 
sheet expansion observed in the euro area ag -
gregate, the balance sheet reduction of banks 
in Spain and Italy continued on a 12-month 
view, although it slowed considerably and 
 almost halted. In both countries it was mainly 
financial derivatives and in Italy bonds issued by 
other euro- area countries, too, that were 
bought; in addition, the decline in claims on 
the private sector slowed down perceptibly.German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers in the first quarter of 2015 was 
again dominated by growing overnight depos -
its. While domestic investors increased their 
overnight deposits with German banks even 
more considerably than in the final quarter of 
2014, they again distinctly reduced all longer-  
term bank deposits on balance. This develop -
ment reflects the money- holding sector’s con -
tinued preference for highly liquid forms of in -
vestment, which is being spurred by the his -
torically low interest rate level and the flat yield 
curve. As the chart on page 37 shows, the in -
terest rate spread of deposits with longer ma -
turities over overnight deposits has steadily 
narrowed over the past three years. In the case 
of long- term time deposits the declining inter -
est rate trend is mirrored in new business as the 
overall interest rate level responds very slowly 
due to the high share of older business.
Unlike in the previous quarter, growth in over -
night deposits in the three months under re -
view was supported by all money- holding 
 sectors, with the greatest inflows still being 
 recorded by households. As households simul -
taneously ran down –  in some cases mark -Deposit business 
still marked by portfolio shifts
Current increase 
in overnight de-posits supported by all sectorsBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20153,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++End-of-quarter 12-month changes1 in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
36

edly – all other types of deposit (ie short and 
long- term time deposits and savings deposits), 
their overnight deposits increased dynamically 
during the period under review (see the chart 
on page 40).
Non- financial corporations, too, exhibited a 
marked interest in overnight bank deposits in 
the reporting quarter. Besides the low interest 
rates on longer- term bank deposits, the reason 
for the perceptible increase in overnight depos -
its in this sector is likely to be non- financial cor -
porations’ high level of cash holdings at pre -
sent, which is due to their stable profit situa -
tion amidst still weak, albeit slightly rising, in -
vestment. A further reason for the corporate 
stocking- up of overnight deposits could be that 
enterprises on the whole are intending to 
 finance more of their forthcoming acquisitions 
of fixed assets through internal resources.
In the quarter under review domestic banks 
also recorded net positive deposit inflows from 
financial corporations for the first time in four 
quarters. This, however, masked disparate de -
velopments in the case of insurance corpora -
tions and pension funds, on the one hand, and 
other financial intermediaries, on the other. 
While other financial intermediaries considera -
bly built up their stocks of overnight deposits in 
the reporting quarter, insurance corporations 
and pension funds continued to scale back 
their bank deposits across all maturities (but 
 especially long-  term time deposits), a trend 
which has been observed for several quarters 
now. At least a part of these funds is likely to 
have been invested in riskier forms of financial 
asset acquisition in the search for higher yields 
(see the box on pages 39 to 41).
Banks’ credit business with the domestic non-  
bank sector in the period under review was 
likewise characterised by the historically low 
interest rate environment as well as by the pos -
itive income situation of German households 
and enterprises. Unlike in the final quarter of 
2014, when the decline in credit to general 
government had had a noticeable offsetting in -fluence on the overall positive development in 
lending to private non-  banks, lending to both 
private- sector and public- sector non- banks in -
creased in the reporting quarter. In this con -
text, MFIs in Germany markedly increased their 
holdings of securities issued by the domestic 
private and public sectors and granted consid -
erably more loans to both sectors. With regard 
to the changes in lending shown in the table  
on page 38 it should be noted that the data 
situation for the period from December to Feb -
ruary, which is still provisional, has been 
changed considerably retrospectively by the re -
vision of banks’ monthly balance sheet statis -
tics, in particular due to the implementation of Deposit business 
with financial corporations mixed
Buoyant credit 
business with non- banksInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 15012345% pa, monthly
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
up to 3 monthsDeposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsDeposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
37

the European System of Accounts 2010 (ESA 
2010) as at the December 2014 reporting date.1
As in the preceding quarters, the bulk of loans 
were granted to households. A decisive factor 
in this was the persistently vibrant demand for 
private housing loans, which is likely to have 
been driven by another slight decline in bor -
rowing costs as well as the positive household 
income situation and the low appeal of alterna -
tive investment options. The BLS results, too, 
indicate that household demand for housing 
loans rose substantially in the first quarter of 
2015, exceeding bank managers’ expectations 
in the previous quarter. According to the re -spondents, this was due primarily to the low 
general interest rate level. The MFI interest rate 
statistics recorded a distinct decline in interest 
rates on long-  term mortgage loans in the first 
quarter to 1.9%, marking a new historical low 
since the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics 
were introduced in 2003. The BLS data suggest 
that demand for credit in this segment was ad -
ditionally supported by households’ continuing 
positive outlook regarding the housing market 
and house price developments. Households’ 
borrowing requirements for debt refinancing, 
restructuring and renegotiating purposes had 
an additional positive effect on new business 
with housing loans. At the same time, banks’ 
lending policy was conducive to the rising de -
mand for loans for house purchase in the quar -
ter under review. Thus, although the banks par -
ticipating in the BLS did not adjust their credit 
standards for housing loans in the final quarter, 
they did slightly narrow their margins on loans 
subject to average risk.
In addition, the persistently positive income 
and wealth outlook in Germany was reflected 
in a significant increase in consumer credit. The 
banks participating in the BLS accordingly re -
ported a perceptible rise in demand in the first 
quarter of 2015. The bank managers respond -
ing to the BLS attributed this to consumers’ in -
creased propensity to purchase, buoyant con -
sumer confidence and the low general interest 
rate level. Consumer credit lending policy re -
mained unchanged on balance in the final 
quarter according to the BLS. The BLS banks 
did, however, narrow their margins for both 
average and riskier loans in light of the current Positive credit 
business with households driven by vibrant demand for  private housing loans and …… consumers’ increased  propensity to purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2014 2015
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 25.5 47.9
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years –  2.5 2.1
of over 2 years – 14.9 – 9.7
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months –  2.8 – 2.1
of over 3 months –  1.1 – 2.7
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  3.6 11.4
Securitised lending –  5.3 2.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 9.4 14.1
of which to households 3 6.3 9.0
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 4.1 3.2
Securitised lending 2.7 6.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corpora-
tions and quasi- corporations. As from the implementation of 
ESA 2010 in December 2014, holding companies of non- 
fi  nancial groups are no longer counted as belonging to the 
sector of non-fi  nancial corporations but are now allocated in-stead to the fi  nancial corporations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1 As from the implementation of ESA 2010 in banks’ bal -
ance sheet statistics, holding companies of non- financial 
groups (eg management holding companies with predomi -
nantly financial shareholdings) are no longer counted as 
belonging to the sector of non- financial corporations but 
are now allocated instead to the financial corporations sec -
tor as other financial intermediaries. Moreover, some enti -
ties and enterprises which are non- market producers (eg 
public utilities) and have been counted as non- financial 
corporations thus far are now allocated to the general gov -
ernment sector (under off- budget entities). See also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Methodological changes in the 
 financial accounts – background, approach and selected 
results, Monthly Report, October 2014, pp 13-26.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
38

Portfolio reallocations into higher-yielding assets 
in Germany
During the course of the crisis, the ECB 
Governing Council has incrementally re-duced the main refi  nancing rate to an all- 
time low o f 0.05%. Amongst other things, this caused interest rates for bank deposits 
to diminish and, as rates approached the zero lower bound, also narrowed spreads 
between deposit rates for different maturi-
ties (see the chart on page 37). Viewed in 
isolation, this is an incentive for investors to shift assets out of bank deposits into higher- yielding forms of investment. And the chart 
below does indeed demonstrate that de-
posits as a percentage of total assets in the 
money- holding sectors1 have shrunk in 
 recent years; at the same time, however, it 
shows that this decline was not evident 
across every single sector.
The banking statistics and fi  nancial ac-counts
2 data reveal that it is primarily the 
non- fi  nancial private sector – that is, house-
holds and non- fi  nancial corporations  – 
whose fi  nancial investment behaviour devi-
ates from the aggregate. Since Lehman 
Brothers collapsed, their deposits have seen a sustained and unusually robust build- up in 
overnight deposits (see the chart on 
page 40), coinciding with a sometimes per-ceptible reduction in other forms of deposit (short- term time deposits and longer- term savings deposits, mainly). Two factors ex-
plain the non- fi  nancial private sector’s pref-
erence for liquid assets: fi  rst, a general 
sense of uncertainty sparked by the fi  nan-
cial crisis in what is already a rather risk- averse sector; second, and now more im-
portantly, the declining opportunity costs of holding overnight deposits, both in relation to other forms of deposit and as compared 
with lower- risk securities such as Federal bonds. In addition, non- fi  nancial corpora-tions might have lifted the percentage of 
liquid assets in their portfolios in a move to fi  nance more of their potential forthcoming 
acquisitions of fi  xed assets using internal 
funds.3
A glance at the remaining acquisition of 
 fi  nancial assets in the non- fi  nancial private 
1 The “money- holding sectors” comprise households, 
non- fi  nancial and fi  nancial corporations (apart from 
monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs)) as well as gen-
eral government. The general government sector is 
omitted for the purposes of this box since its acquisi-
tion of fi  nancial assets is highly volatile and of a rela-
tively low volume compared with other sectors.
2 The analysis is based on quarterly transactions. 
 Financial accounts data are only available up to 2014 
Q4 at the current juncture, so the observation period 
ends on 31 December 2014.
3 The longer- term signifi  cance and development of 
internal fi  nancing in Germany’s non- fi  nancial corpo-
rate sector is discussed in Deutsche Bundesbank, Long- 
term developments in corporate fi  nancing in Ger-
many  – evidence based on the fi  nancial accounts, 
Monthly Report, January 2012, pp 13-27.Deposits as a percentage of total sectoral financial assets in Germany
1 Statistical changes and revaluations are hereby eliminated. 
2 Including mutual funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 141012141618202224Notional stocks with base year 2000,1 %
Money-holding sectors as a whole
of which
Households
and non-financialcorporations
Other financial intermediaries
 2
as well as insurance corporations
and pension fundsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
39

sector confi  rms the view that this sector has 
largely refrained from shifting assets out of 
deposit vehicles into higher- yielding forms of investment such as securities in recent years on account of its inherent risk aver-sion and preference for liquidity. House-
holds chiefl  y added to their claims on (life) 
insurers; holdings of shares in mutual funds, which offer a higher degree of risk diversifi  -cation for smaller investment sums than do 
direct securities holdings, were ramped up 
signifi  cantly while direct securities expo-
sures were scaled back on the whole. Non- 
fi  nancial corporations increasingly took to funding other non- fi  nancial corporations, making use of instruments such as equity and (trade) credits; all things considered, 
however, securities investments have played a negligible role for these enterprises in re-cent years.
Unlike the non- fi  nancial private sector,  fi  nancial corporations – that is, insurance 
corporations and pension funds as well as 
other fi  nancial intermediaries (OFIs)4 – have 
seen their deposits contract noticeably since 
the end of 2009 (see the adjacent chart). 
This was driven predominantly by a grow-
ing tendency since 2010 for insurance cor-
porations to run down their longer- term time deposits, a trend which was not 
matched by a build- up of other types of de-
posit. OFIs, too, have reduced their stocks 
of deposits on balance since mid-2012; un-like insurance corporations, however, there 
were spells in which they increased their holdings of overnight deposits at the ex-
pense of longer- dated types of deposit.
Financial corporations, with their profes-
sional portfolio managers, instead focused 
their investments on debt securities and mutual fund shares, taking in sometimes 
4 Including mutual funds but excluding MFIs (and thus 
excluding money market funds).Breakdown of deposits by German banks
* by selected sectors
* Including  money  market  funds.  1 Adjusted  for  statistical 
changes and revaluations. 2 Corporations and quasi-corpora-
tions.  3 Non-monetary  financial  corporations.  4 As  from  the 
implementation of the ESA 2010 as at the December 2014 re-
porting date, holding companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as belonging to the sector of non-financial 
corporations but are now allocated instead to the financial cor-
porations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 151801501209060300306090120150180210240
––––––++++++++Seasonally adjusted end-of-quarter 12-month changes1
in € billion
–300+30+60
603003060
––++Deposits with longer maturitiesDeposits redeemable at notice
of up to three monthsDeposits with an agreed maturity
of up to two yearsOvernight deposits
Non-financial corporations 2,4Households
Financial corporations 3,4Total depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
40

higher- yielding foreign paper. Furthermore, 
the era since the onset of the fi  nancial crisis 
has seen OFIs in particular stepping up their 
lending activity, especially to non- fi  nancial 
corporations. The pick- up in loans and se-
curities lending by fi  nancial corporations to 
the non- fi  nancial private sector points to the increasing importance of players out-side the regular banking system – that is, 
the shadow banking industry5 – in fi  nancial 
intermediation. All things told, the search for yield probably exerts a stronger infl  u-ence over investment behaviour in the fi  -
nancial sector than it does in other sectors. 
Data available since early 2013 on debtor 
sector classifi  cations and countries of domi-cile suggest that the risk appetite associated 
with this search for yield has been slightly 
less pronounced among insurance corpora-
tions in recent years than it has for OFIs. This is probably due, amongst other rea-
sons, to regulatory factors.
The differences in the investment behaviour 
of the fi  nancial and non- fi  nancial sectors 
provide important insights in a number of 
areas. One is that it allows deposit patterns 
to be interpreted from the angle of mone-
tary analysis. As a case in point, the fact 
that household and non- fi  nancial corpora-
tion infl  ows are the main engine driving monetary growth at the present time would, at fi  rst glance, point to a corre-sponding upturn in underlying monetary 
dynamics. After all, money holdings in the 
non- fi  nancial sector are generally more closely linked to consumption and capital 
expenditure – and thus also to changes in 
the consumer price index – than are money 
holdings in the fi  nancial sector, with its 
stronger focus on the fi  nancial markets. On closer inspection, however, it becomes clear 
that a signifi  cant portion of the deposit 
growth observed was caused by the non- 
fi  nancial sector’s strong preference for 
 liquidity and its aversion to risk in the face of the low- interest- rate environment. As far 
as monetary growth can be explained by 
these motives, it overstates the underlying 
monetary dynamics affecting infl  ation.
5 A defi  nition of the shadow banking system and a 
description of its activities can be found in Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implications, 
Monthly Report, March 2014, pp 15-34.Acquisition of financial assets and its 
components
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 2 Including 
mutual funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20142001000100200300400500
––+++++Sum of figures for the current and the three 
preceding quarters in each case,1 in € billion
–1000+100+200+300+400Other financial intermediaries 2
as well as insurance corporations
and pension fundsHouseholds and
non-financial corporationsOther
Loans
Claims on insurance corporations
Securities
Deposits
TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
41

heightened competition between banks. All in 
all, however, lending to households in Ger -
many continues to exhibit very moderate dy -
namics. Thus the 12-month growth rate for 
loans to households edged up only slightly 
from 1.6% in the previous quarter to 1.8% at 
the end of March.
Aside from loans to domestic households, Ger -
man banks also increased their loans to non-  
financial corporations discernibly in the report -
ing quarter. As in the previous quarter, lending 
by German banks therefore made a positive 
contribution to the expansion of credit busi -
ness with the non- financial corporations sector 
observed throughout the euro area. In contrast 
to their corporate counterparts in other euro-  
area countries, which seem to prefer medium- 
term loans, German firms recently chiefly in -
creased their demand for long- term loans. This 
was apparently prompted not only by the per -
ceptible decline in interest rates on long- term 
loans compared with short and medium-  term borrowing but also by the generally positive 
economic and business expectations, which 
stimulated entrepreneurs’ interest in long- term 
investment projects. By contrast, German firms 
probably financed their short and medium-  
term investments –  as in the previous quar -
ters – to a greater extent via internal funds and/
or alternative sources of funding, such as intra- 
group loans, trade credits and loans from 
shadow banks, which are gaining increasing 
importance.
The BLS results from the first quarter of 2015 
largely support these inferences. They show 
that enterprises’ demand for credit in the first 
quarter of 2015 remained unchanged on bal -
ance compared with the previous three months, 
when corporate borrowing requirements had 
risen considerably on the whole according to 
the respondents’ replies. The bank managers 
participating in the BLS ascribed this chiefly to 
firms’ ample scope for internal financing, but 
added that lower borrowing requirements for 
financing fixed investment, inventories and 
working capital per se  were denting the de -
mand for corporate credit. Conversely, enter -
prises’ demand for bank loans was boosted in 
the reporting quarter, according to the BLS, by 
greater financing needs for mergers, acquisi -
tions and corporate restructuring. Demand was 
additionally supported by banks’ lending policy. 
Although the surveyed institutions hardly 
changed their credit standards for business 
loans, they narrowed their margins for average- 
risk loans slightly on balance and also eased 
their non- interest rate charges and collateral 
requirements somewhat in favour of their cus -
tomers.
It may be assumed that domestic lending to 
enterprises was also underpinned by the very 
low level of bank interest rates: interest rates 
for short- term bank loans fell slightly and those 
for long- term bank loans fell perceptibly. At the 
end of March, the reporting institutions were 
charging average interest of 2.7% on short-  
term small- scale loans to domestic non-  
financial corporations and 1.5% for large- scale Renewed rise 
in loans to   
non- financial 
corporations …… due to 
 favourable 
 financing termsLoans of German banks to
selected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations.  3 Corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  4 As  from 
the implementation of ESA 2010 in December 2014, holding 
companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as 
belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but are 
now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20151.51.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–––+++++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2, 4
Non-financial corporations 3, 4Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
42

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number 
of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents report-
ing “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2015 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 20151.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 151.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
43

Why are interest rates for small loans to enterprises
in Germany higher than for large loans?
Bank loans are one of the most important 
sources of debt fi  nancing for small and 
medium- sized enterprises (SMEs).1 For this 
reason, the credit conditions which are set 
by banks and at which SMEs borrow these funds play an important role from a macro-economic and monetary policy perspective. Against this background, this box compares the lending rates that SMEs pay with those paid by large enterprises. Moreover, consid-
eration is given to the extent to which the 
bank’s cost factors, which are closely re-
lated to the (risk) characteristics of the bor-
rower, can explain the interest rate spread 
that is seen to exist.2
The harmonised MFI interest rate statistics for the euro area provide information on 
bank loan pricing. However, in new lending 
to enterprises they do not differentiate ac-
cording to the size of the borrowing enter-prise. For this reason, in the following, small business loans (up to €1 million)3 serve as 
an approximation for loans to SMEs, while 
it is assumed that large business loans (over €1 million) are more likely to be in demand by large enterprises.
4
Approximated in this way, the lending rates 
for SMEs are, on aggregate, systematically 
higher than those for large enterprises (see the chart below). This interest rate premium is driven mainly by the credit conditions for 
very small loans and decreases for all the 
considered size classes the longer the inter-est rate fi  xation period.
The determinants of this difference can 
generally be broken down into quantitative 
(eg credit risk) and qualitative (eg the bor-
rower’s bargaining power) factors. By their 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, An international com-
parison of the importance of bank credit as a debt 
 fi  nancing instrument for non- fi  nancial corporations, 
Monthly Report, November 2014, pp 42-43.
2 Specifi  cally, the extent to which the interest rate 
spread is attributable to differences in the credit risk 
and to the capital charge is examined. The remaining 
part of the interest rate spread represents the infl  uence of the other factors and is referred to as the residual. Ultimately, therefore, the analysis is based on a decom-position of interest rates for loans to SMEs and to large enterprises. For information on the methodology used 
in decomposing interest rates, see Bank of England, Understanding the price of new lending to house-
holds, Quarterly Bulletin Q3 2010.3 Since 2010, the small loans category has been bro-ken down into new lending volumes up to €0.25 mil-
lion (very small) and €0.25 million to €1 million 
(smaller).
4 Bundesbank evaluations made on the basis of the 
Bach database show this classifi  cation to be plausible. However, they also show that a major difference exists between small and medium- sized enterprises in terms of the average size of the loans they take up. Thus, the loan size category up to €0.25 million is pr obably more 
relevant for small enterprises. See also ECB, SME ac-
cess to fi  nance in the euro area: Barriers and potential policy remedies, Monthly Bulletin, July 2014.Interest rate spreads between smalland large loans to enterprises
*
* New lending. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate 
statistics for the euro area. 1 Aggregated across all initial rate 
fixation periods. 2 Over €1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 1500.51.01.52.0
++++Percentage points, based on 12-month moving averages
0.500.51.01.52.0
–++++Average interest rate premium
since May 2011 for loans …
over 10
years5 to 10
years1 to 5
yearsup to 1
yearInterest rate premium1 compared
with large2 loans for loans …
… up to €1 million (total)
… from €0.25 million to €1 million… up to €0.25 million
initial interest fixation period… up to €0.25 million
… from €0.25 million to €1 million
… up to €1 million (total)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
44

very nature, the former lend themselves 
more readily to empirical analysis. They comprise the differences in a bank’s ex-
penditure according to the size of the bor-
rower: the risk premium to cover the ex-
pected credit loss, the capital charge which 
represents the costs for the regulatory capi-
tal to be held, and the fi  xed costs incurred 
by the bank for, say, assessing the borrow-
er’s creditworthiness. The fi  xed costs also 
contribute to the interest rate spread even if 
they are, in absolute terms, identical for 
loans to SMEs and to large enterprises. This is because, in the case of loans to large en-
terprises, the fi  xed costs are accrued in re-spect of a larger loan amount, making them lower per euro of the loan amount granted.
The fi  rm- size- related risk premium can be 
approximated as the product of the proba-bility of default (PD) and the loss given de-fault (LGD).
5 The capital charge, which can 
also be calculated separately for SMEs and 
large enterprises, is roughly the product of 
the following three factors: the risk weight of the loan, the minimum capital ratio and 
the imputed cost of the regulatory capital 
to be held by banks.6 Owing to inadequate 
data availability the fi  xed costs are part of 
the residual, as are the qualitative factors.
Under the assumptions made here, the cap-
ital charge for both loan types is almost 
identical on aggregate. This is because 
there is only a slight difference between the 
risk weights of the two borrower catego-
ries. On the other hand, credit risk can ex-
plain, in part, the interest rate spread (see the adjacent chart).
7 The contribution of 
5 PD and LGD- related data, broken down by SMEs and 
large enterprises, are provided by the European Bank-
ing Authority (EBA). See EBA Risk Dashboard, Aggre-
gate Disclosure of EU Banks’ Risk Parameters and In-
structions, Annex Q3 2014, and Risk Parameters Dis-
closure of EU Banks, Annex Q1 2014. It should be 
pointed out that these data are based on reports from 
a relatively small number of banks; moreover, they 
 refer not only to new lending business but also to the overall credit portfolio.
6 The regulatory standard of 75% is assumed for the 
risk weight of SME loans. For loans to large enter-
prises, use is made of the standardised approach ac-
cording to the average Standard & Poor’s rating for 
non- fi  nancial corporations listed in the German share 
index (DAX). The 8% minimum capital ratio is equiva-lent to the value produced in accordance with Basel II and Basel III, disregarding any capital buffers. A general 
fi  gure of 10% is assumed for the cost of equity (for 
details on the amount of the cost of equity, see EBA, 
Risk Assessment of the European Banking System, June 2014).7 The fact that credit risk accounts for a smaller share of the interest rate spread when using the EBA’s LGD- related data, which are based on banks’ reports, prob-ably indicates that the collateralisation of loans is more 
relevant in business with SMEs than in business with large enterprises. Collateralisation generally plays a major role in corporate lending in Germany. For in-
stance, around 20% of the credit volume in this seg-
ment is secured by real estate collateral.Contributions of credit risk (two contribution methods) and capital charge to the interest rate spread between small and large loans to enterprises
*
* Sources: harmonised MFI interest rate statistics for the euro 
area, EBA Risk Dashboard and Bundesbank calculations. Calcu-
lations based on the assumption that small loans are granted 
to small and medium-sized enterprises and large loans to large 
enterprises. 1 45% is the standard value of the Capital Require-
ments Regulation for the loss given default (LGD). 2 Based on 
the values reported by banks to EBA.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
–++++++++++Percentage points, average values since 2009
LGD according
to EBA data²LGD 45%¹Interest rate spread
Residual
Credit risk
Capital chargeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
45

loans. The average interest charged on small 
and large- scale long- term loans to non- financial 
corporations latterly stood at 1.9% and 1.7% 
respectively (on the reasons for the different 
interest rate charges for small and large- scale 
loans, see the box on pages 44 to 46). Loans to 
enterprises were thus at their lowest levels 
since the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics 
were introduced in 2003.
The BLS in the first quarter of 2015 contained 
ad hoc  questions on banks’ funding condi -
tions, on the level of credit standards, and on 
the impact of the EAPP . Against the backdrop 
of the situation in the financial markets, the 
German banks again reported a slight improve -
ment in their funding situation compared with 
the previous quarter. The surveyed banks per -ceived their current credit standards for loans 
to both enterprises and households to be com -
paratively tight relative to the midpoint of the 
range covering their credit standards from the 
second quarter of 2010 until the present. How -
ever, the level was perceived as being even 
tighter one year previously on the whole. Ac -
cording to the participating banks, the EAPP 
improves their financing conditions but also 
significantly impairs their profitability. Hardly 
any of the German banks that take part in the 
survey intend to sell marketable assets under 
the EAPP . However, they anticipate higher 
 liquidity owing to a rise in customer deposits, 
which they intend to use for lending purposes 
amongst other things. The respondent banks 
are not expecting the EAPP to have any impact 
on their credit standards.German banks 
barely interested 
in buying market -
able assets under the EAPPthe credit risk to the spread points, despite 
the slight regulatory disparity, to a greater 
credit risk when lending to SMEs.
The factors which are combined in the re-
sidual play the most important part, how-
ever – a fact which is consistent with the 
fi  ndings of other studies, which ascribe an 
essential role to large enterprises’ greater bargaining power when banks set their credit conditions.
8 Amongst other things, 
this bargaining power results from the fact 
that large enterprises have more diversifi  ed 
sources of funding and are, therefore, im-
plicitly less dependent on bank fi  nancing. Moreover, the literature provides evidence 
to the effect that larger banks, in particular, 
seek to win new clients by offering them attractive credit conditions with a view to 
selling them other bank services in addition to the original loan.
9 These services include 
assistance in issuing capital market instru-ments, for example, or hedging transac-
tions, ie services that large enterprises may 
tend to require. Besides the additional in-
come that banks might potentially generate 
as a result, revenues from transactions of this kind allow banks to diversify their 
sources of income because they boost their commission income, in particular.
8 See R Elsas and J P Krahnen (1998), Is relationship 
lending special? Evidence from credit fi  le data in Ger-
many, Journal of Banking and Finance 22, pp 1283-
1316, and F Hanser (2001), Die Struktur von Kredit-
beziehungen, p 132.9 See L Lepetit, E Nys, P Rous and A Tarazi (2008), The 
expansion of services in European banking: Implica-
tions for loan pricing and interest margins, Journal of 
Banking and Finance, 32, pp 2325-2335.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
46

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in the financial markets in the 
year to date have been strongly influenced by 
monetary policy and by major portfolio shifts. 
With regard to the euro area, in mid-  January 
the ECB’s Governing Council agreed by major -
ity vote to expand its asset purchase pro -
gramme. Expectations in the euro- area bond 
markets regarding quantitative easing sent 
government bond yields markedly lower ahead 
of the programme, and once purchasing com -
menced these declines initially persisted. At 
times, Federal bonds (Bunds) with a maturity of 
ten years yielded no more than 0.04%. In addi -
tion, the low bond yields temporarily strength -
ened the equity markets. In the euro area, 
steep price increases persisted into April, as -
sisted by the fact that growth forces in the 
euro area had gained further traction, as well 
as the  euro’s distinct losses against the US dol -
lar, the pound sterling and the yen in the for -
eign exchange markets during this period. 
Moreover, yields on US Treasuries narrowed at 
times. This development may be partially attrib -
utable to weaker- than- expected US growth fig -
ures and assumptions among market players 
following the March meeting of the Federal 
Open Market Committee that the monetary 
reins would be tightened at a later date.
Since the end of April, however, there has been 
a massive countermovement in the financial 
markets, with investors adopting the view that 
yields on benchmark bonds had dropped to an 
unsustainably low level. As a result, interna -
tional investments have been realigned, caus -
ing bond yields to climb significantly around 
the world and equity markets in many econo -
mies to suffer a setback. The euro has also 
managed to recoup some of its losses.Exchange rates
Following the announcement in January of the 
ECB Governing Council’s decision to implement 
an expanded asset purchase programme, the 
euro depreciated against the dollar by 4 cents 
on the day to stand at a rate of US$1.12. Sub -
sequently, the single currency initially stabilised 
somewhat, but in the first half of March it 
came under fresh downward pressure. One 
factor here was that the euro was depressed by 
the commencement of government bond pur -
chases which went hand in hand with pro -
nounced yield declines on sovereign bonds in 
the euro area. Another factor was the release 
of surprisingly upbeat US labour market figures 
prompted market players to believe that there 
was a greater chance of an imminent interest 
rate  reversal in the USA, thus bolstering the US 
dollar. In mid- March the euro fell to a rate of 
US$1.06, its lowest level for 12 years.
In the second half of that month, the euro-  
dollar exchange rate initially managed to claw 
back some of the ground it had lost thanks to 
an interest rate policy statement by the Federal 
Reserve which effectively lowered its inflation 
expectations and the anticipated speed at 
which it would tighten monetary policy. But 
just a little bit later, at the beginning of April, 
the release of the minutes to the Fed meeting 
stoked fresh speculation over an imminent US 
interest rate hike, prompting the euro to slip 
back to US$1.06 by the middle of the month. 
On the back of favourable economic data and 
buoyed by sharp yield increases in the euro 
area, the euro has rallied considerably of late. 
By contrast, on the other side of the Atlantic, a 
raft of economic data proved gloomier than 
 expected, causing the euro to additionally gain 
in strength. As this report went to press, the 
euro was trading at US$1.14, around 6% below 
its value at the beginning of 2015.Financial 
 markets strongly  influenced by monetary policy and portfolio  restructuringEuro down against the US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
47

The Japanese government’s re- election in De -
cember 2014 and the concomitant end to po -
litical uncertainty that had contributed to the 
strong depreciation of the national currency 
prior to this result sent the yen on a marked 
recovery against the currencies of major trad -
ing partners at the beginning of 2015, includ -
ing against the euro. In January, the ECB Gov -
erning Council’s decision to expand its asset 
purchase programme put substantial pressure 
on the euro- yen exchange rate, too. Following 
the publication of unexpectedly positive data 
regarding GDP growth in the euro area and 
weaker-  than- expected growth figures for the 
Japanese economy, the euro- yen exchange rate stabilised in the second half of February at a 
rate of ¥135. However, once the bond pur -
chase programme commenced, the euro tum -
bled again in the first half of March, subse -
quently hovering without a visible trend be -
tween ¥127 and ¥131. In the meantime, how -
ever, it has rebounded against the yen given 
the downward revisions of Japan’s inflation 
and growth forecasts by the country’s central 
bank. As this report went to press, the single 
currency stood at ¥136, meaning that during 
the reporting period it had depreciated by 
around 6½%.
During the first few months of 2015, the euro 
likewise weakened against the pound sterling 
on the back of the decisions to add to the 
 extensive loosening of monetary policy in the 
euro area. In mid- March, the euro recovered 
somewhat when the Bank of England warned 
against the strains placed on the domestic 
economy by the strong pound and against the 
protracted phase of low inflation whilst also 
dampening the prevailing expectations of a UK 
interest rate hike. Surprisingly weak growth fig -
ures for the UK economy in the first quarter of 
2015 subsequently placed a strain on the 
pound. This was compounded by the uncer -
tainty surrounding the outcome of the British 
parliamentary election. However, the surpris -
ingly clear- cut result – which gave the Conserv -
ative Party an absolute majority in the House of 
Commons – put the pound back on the road to 
recovery. At the end of the period under re -
view, the euro was trading at £0.72. On bal -
ance, the euro has thus lost 7% of its value 
against the pound sterling since the beginning 
of the year.
During the reporting period, the euro recorded 
particularly heavy losses against the Swiss franc 
(-13½%), for which the Swiss National Bank 
had abandoned the minimum exchange rate of 
CHF1.20 per euro on 15  January 2015. The 
euro also depreciated against a number of 
Asian currencies by a comparatively large mar -
gin, although it fared somewhat better against 
several north and central European currencies. … the yen …… and against 
the pound  sterling
Euro records 
tangible losses in real termsExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2014 20151.201.301.40
1.001.101.20
120130140150
0.700.750.800.85
9095100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: ¥133.73
 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: £0.7111
 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100Launch exchange rate: 103.13
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
48

Overall, the effective exchange rate of the euro 
against 19 trading partners has contracted by 
5½% in net terms since the beginning of 2015.1 
The price competitiveness of euro- area exports 
has improved as a result of the euro’s deprecia -
tion and is currently closely shadowing its long- 
term average.
Securities markets and port -
folio transactions
At first, bond markets in the euro area contin -
ued to be influenced by the asset purchase pro -
gramme agreed upon in September 2014 and 
then expanded in January 2015. Since March 
2015, the Eurosystem has been purchasing not 
just covered bonds (CBs) and asset- backed se -
curities (ABSs) but also bonds issued by central 
governments, agencies and European institu -
tions in the euro area. Under this programme, 
the total monthly purchase volume amounts to 
€60 billion and the bonds in question have to 
fulfil a set of minimum quality requirements. In 
addition, they must have a residual maturity of 
between two and thirty years and at least yield 
the deposit rate at the time of purchase, which 
currently stands at minus 20 basis points. In 
this market environment, yields on ten- year 
Bunds fell by just over 45 basis points at times 
during the reporting period, hitting a new all-  
time low of 0.04%. Aside from the  expanded 
asset purchase programme, other factors con -
tributing to the decline in Bund yields included 
the interest rate linkage with the United States, 
where interest rates also fell appreciably for a 
time, and receding levels of uncertainty, as 
 reflected in the implied volatilities of options on 
futures. At the end of April, however, this 
downward trend reversed, with the Bund yield 
rising from its historical low in several waves on 
the back of extensive portfolio restructuring. Of 
late, it stood at 70 basis points, 20 basis points 
up on the levels recorded at the end of 2014.
By and large, yields on bonds issued by other 
euro- area countries have followed a similar 
path to that of Bunds. Measured in terms of the GDP- weighted yield on ten- year bonds is -
sued by euro- area countries, the spread latterly 
stood at 90 basis points, putting it 10 basis 
points below its level at the turn of the year. 
Yield movements are primarily affected by the 
monetary policy and global factors mentioned 
above. Country- specific influences played less 
of a role overall, with the notable exception of 
Greek sovereign bonds traded in the secondary 
market. During the period under review, these 
bonds sustained sharp losses, mirroring in -
vestor fears that the new Greek government 
would renege on its reform commitments 
agreed with the creditor countries and might 
not keep up its interest and debt repayments. European bond 
market influ-enced by mone-tary policy and portfolio shifts
Yield spreads 
over German Bunds broadly stableYields* in selected euro-area countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years. 1 Haircut of 9 March 2012. 2 Announce-
ment of the terms of the Greek debt buyback programme on 
11 December 2012.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 150510152025303540Weekly averages
% pa
ItalyIreland
Portugal
Spain
Greece
1
2
1 During the period under review, the euro depreciated by 
more than 20% against the rouble, which is excluded from 
the calculation of the effective euro rate for this group of 
countries. Latterly, however, it was trading at 57 roubles, 
close to its recorded rate before the rouble was allowed to 
trade freely in November 2014. The recent broad-based 
recovery of the rouble is inter alia attributable to the resur -
gence of crude oil prices since the beginning of the year 
and the fact that the Ukraine conflict has not escalated 
further.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
49

At present, Greece is cut off from the capital 
markets. Nevertheless, unlike at the peak of the 
euro- area sovereign debt crisis, the default risk 
attached to Greek sovereign bonds in the eyes 
of market participants has hardly impacted on 
financing conditions for other periphery coun -
tries.
In the US bond markets, following a period of 
fairly strong fluctuation, yields on ten- year gov -
ernment bonds likewise rose slightly on bal -
ance before temporarily experiencing a marked 
decline. This came in response to a raft of US 
economic data which, in some cases, fell well 
short of market expectations. Although a large 
number of market participants consider the 
subdued first- quarter activity indicated by these 
data to be primarily attributable to transitory 
factors, many investors lowered their expecta -
tions of an early interest rate reversal in the 
USA, not least because of the Fed’s comments 
in March signalling that it was “not impatient” 
to tighten policy rates. These comments im -pacted on interest rates around the world. 
However, as in the euro area and other cur -
rency areas, in late April the US bond market 
also saw major corrections to its high valuation 
levels. In Japan, too, yields rose towards the 
end of the reporting period, though they barely 
strayed outside the corridor in which they had 
been embedded since the end of 2014. For 
some time now, activity in the Japanese bond 
market has been dominated by disposals on 
the part of the Japanese central bank.
The slope of the German yield curve derived 
from the yields on Federal securities has steep -
ened since the end of December 2014 and is in 
negative territory almost up to the four- year 
segment. At times, yields were negative even 
on bonds with up to eight years’ residual matu -
rity and above. Latterly, the yield spread be -
tween ten- year and two- year bonds was 95 
basis points, putting it 25 basis points above its 
level at the beginning of the year (see the chart 
on page 51). Declining yields were solely evi -
dent at the short end of the yield curve during 
the period under review, while yields in the 
middle and long maturity segments took an 
upward turn. The yield movements in the 
shorter- term maturity band reflect market par -
ticipants’ anticipation of an accommodative 
monetary policy stance for some time to come.
The market- based five- year forward inflation 
rate in five years in the euro area as derived 
from inflation swaps nudged up slightly over 
the entire period under review, despite briefly 
dipping to 1.5%. At last count it stood at just 
over 1.8%, which is 10 basis points higher than 
at the end of 2014. The forward inflation rate 
in the United States largely followed the same 
pattern. Subsequent to the sharp fall last year, 
this was probably chiefly driven by global fac -
tors like the price of oil, which rose again from 
its level at the end of December following a 
previous plunge that had exerted downward 
pressure on reported forward inflation rates. 
The improved economic outlook in the euro 
area as well as the euro’s depreciation im -
pacted on spot inflation expectations for the Yields in inter-
national bond markets up amid fluctuationsYield curve 
for Federal 
 securities
Forward inflation  
rate virtually 
 unchanged on balanceYields* in the euro area and selected 
countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 20150.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
–+++++++++Weekly averages
% p.a.United StatesEuro area
JapanUnited Kingdom
Australia
SwitzerlandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
50

most part during the reporting period. Indeed, 
inflation expectations for the next five years 
have risen nearly twice as much as those for 
the next ten, showing that the longer- term for -
ward inflation rate has been largely unaffected 
by these developments. In the euro area, sur -
vey- based inflation expectations are still out -
pacing market- based break- even rates, which 
suggests that a negative inflation risk premium 
has been factored into market- based indica -
tors.
In the current environment of highly volatile 
bond yields and in light of the asset purchase 
programme, changes in market- based inflation 
expectations in the euro area must be inter -
preted with particular caution. While the risk of 
distortions is mitigated by the fact that these 
figures are based on inflation swaps, the fact 
that an arbitrage relationship exists between 
the bond market and the swap market means 
that it is impossible to rule out the possibility 
that indicators derived from inflation swaps are 
likewise influenced by the sovereign bond pur -
chase programme.
The already very favourable financing condi -
tions for financial corporations in the European 
corporate bond market improved further still in 
the period under review. Yields on bonds of 
 financial corporations with a residual maturity 
of seven to ten years and a BBB rating latterly 
stood at 2.8%, just over 15 basis points lower 
than at the end of December 2014. By con -
trast, the corresponding yields of non- financial 
corporations climbed by 20 basis points. As a 
result, corporate bond yields, which briefly 
even touched new historical lows, are now 
more than two percentage points down on 
their pre- financial crisis levels. With risk- free in -
terest rates higher on balance, yield spreads 
over Bunds with matching maturities narrowed 
for financial corporations by around 35 basis 
points and remained largely static on balance 
for their non- financial counterparts. The wafer- 
thin yield spreads, which are well short of their 
respective five-  year averages, indicate a rela -
tively high market valuation for corporate Financing 
 conditions for enterprisesYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.1 Day before the 
ECB Governing Council meeting.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.40.200.20.40.60.8
––++++
Residual maturity in years14 May 2015
21 January 2015 130 December 2014%
Forward inflation rates* in the euro area
and the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising from infla-
tion swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban 
Consumers for the USA) realised across the next five or ten 
years. 1 Brent blend (for one-month forward delivery).
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20152.32.62.93.2
1.41.72.02.3Weekly averages
US$% pa
80100120
406080
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swaps
USA
Euro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1
Spread between US and euro-area
forward inflation ratesPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$% paDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
51

bonds. This probably owes a great deal to 
stronger investor demand for corporate bonds 
in the search for yield in the current low-  
interest- rate environment.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €405½ billion in the first quarter of 
2015, well up on the figure for the previous 
quarter (€330½ billion). After deducting re -
demptions, which were also higher, and allow -
ing for changes in issuers’ holdings of their 
own bonds, net issuance amounted to €15 bil -
lion. In addition, foreign borrowers placed debt 
securities worth €37 billion in the German 
 market. Thus, funds totalling €52 billion net 
were raised in the German bond market in the 
reporting period.
Domestic credit institutions issued new bonds 
totalling €10 billion net in the first quarter of 
2015. Debt securities of specialised credit insti -
tutions (€18½ billion) constituted the lion’s 
share of issues, followed on a smaller scale by mortgage Pfandbriefe (€3 billion). This con -
trasted with net redemptions of other bank 
debt securities which can be structured flexibly 
(€11 billion) and public Pfandbriefe (€½ billion).
In the first quarter of 2015, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth €10 billion 
net. On balance, the vast majority of these 
were bonds with maturities of more than one 
year. In the upshot, the bulk of these issues 
were attributable to other financial intermedi -
aries (€6½ billion), with non- financial corpora -
tions issuing bonds for €2½ billion net.
By contrast, the public sector took advantage 
of the favourable fiscal situation and once 
again reduced its capital market debt, trimming 
its borrowings by €5 billion net in the first quar -
ter of 2015 (previous quarter: €4 billion). These 
figures include issues by resolution agencies of 
German banks, which are ascribed to the pub -
lic sector for statistical purposes. The Federal 
government itself redeemed mainly five- year 
Federal notes (€9 billion), and to a lesser extent 
two- year Federal Treasury notes and Federal 
Treasury discount paper (€1½ billion). This con -
trasted with net issuance of ten- year bonds in 
the amount of €1½ billion and net issuance of 
30-year paper in the amount of €5 billion. In 
each case, the bonds were sold at record- low 
issue yields. In the quarter under review, state 
governments issued their own bonds to the 
value of €3 billion in net terms.
In the first quarter of 2015, purchases in the 
domestic bond market were made solely by 
German buyers, who added paper worth €52 
billion to their portfolios. Domestic non- banks 
were the main purchasers, acquiring €30 billion 
of debt securities, with foreign paper the focus 
of investor interest. The Bundesbank’s pur -
chases within the framework of the asset pur -
chase programme included debt securities for a 
total of €12½ billion. In accordance with the 
programme’s rules, the vast majority of these 
debt securities were Bunds. Domestic banks, 
too, upped their holdings of interest- bearing 
paper, with demand extending to public as well Net sales in the 
bond market up
Increase in 
credit institu-tions’ capital market debtNet issuance of 
corporate bonds
Public sector 
capital market debt down
Purchases of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 4.1 12.3 52.2
Credit institutions –  5.4 –  12.8 9.5
of which
Foreign debt securities 5.0 7.4 2.3
Deutsche Bundesbank –  2.3 –  1.6 12.5
Other sectors 11.7 26.7 30.2
of which
Domestic debt securities – 14.5 7.5 –  3.2
Non-residents 14.0 – 10.2 0.0
Shares
Residents 8.7 6.9 –  2.7
Credit institutions 7.2 4.8 10.5
of which
Domestic shares 5.7 4.7 11.8
Non-banks 1.5 2.1 – 13.2
of which
Domestic shares –  0.4 –  5.8 – 17.8
Non-residents –  4.4 2.8 6.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 20.9 31.3 45.9
Investment in retail funds 2.7 –  1.5 9.6
of which
Equity funds –  0.6 –  4.4 3.0
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
52

as private issuers in Germany and abroad. 
Hence, non- resident holders were the sole sell -
ers of public bonds, offloading €23½ billion of 
debt securities to domestic counterparties. In 
net terms, nearly the same amount was rein -
vested by non-  resident investors in the debt 
securities of private domestic issuers. There -
fore, on balance foreign investors played only a 
marginal role in market events.
Buoyed by accommodative monetary policy, 
European and Japanese equity markets have 
recorded sharp price gains on balance in the 
year to date, while US equities managed to 
edge up only slightly. In the euro area, equities 
were given fresh impetus at the start of the 
quarter as the expectation became further en -
trenched among market participants that the 
ECB Governing Council was set to adopt a 
large- scale government bond purchase pro -
gramme. After the announcement of the ex -
panded asset purchase programme on 22 Jan -
uary 2015, European equities once again re -
corded significant price gains. These increases 
were fuelled in part by intermittent dips in gov -
ernment bond yields, which, as a result of a 
lower discount rate, boost the present value of 
future corporate earnings and make equity 
 investment more attractive. Export- oriented 
European enterprises also benefited from the 
depreciation of the euro against the currencies 
of major trading partners (see page 49). Fur -
thermore, global equity markets reflected the 
mixed nature of economic developments 
around the world. Both the European and Jap -
anese equity markets were buoyed by largely 
upbeat economic signals. In the United States, 
by contrast, relatively weak economic data 
curbed the optimism of equity market partici -
pants.
Despite recent losses, European and Japanese 
shares were, at the time of going to press, 
16.5% and 12.1% higher respectively than at 
the end of December, as measured by the 
broad Euro Stoxx and Nikkei indices. US stocks 
(S&P 500) rose by 3.0%. At the same time, un -
certainty among market participants – as gauged by the implied volatility of options – 
receded across the globe. That being said, the 
VDAX, viewed in isolation, is well up again on 
its level at the end of March. European equities 
significantly outperformed their US counter -
parts, as also reflected in the banking sector. 
US bank stocks saw no more than marginal 
price gains (0.8%), while those in the euro area 
surged (17.3%). The strong performance by 
 European bank equities, which benefited from 
the higher valuation of their equity holdings, is 
attributable in large part to credit institutions in 
the periphery countries. Market opinion that a 
Greek default was more likely sent the shares 
of Greek banks plummeting. However, these 
price losses did not appear to impact on banks 
in the other periphery countries. Indeed, the 
stocks of Portuguese and Italian banks, in par -
ticular, recorded sharp price gains.
At last count, the price/earnings (p/e) ratio, 
based on 12-month earnings expectations, 
stood at 16.0 for the Euro Stoxx, which was Equity markets 
up worldwide
Marked price 
gains for  European banks
Equity risk  premium down slightlyEquity market
Source: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Monthly, lin scale
Price/earnings ratio based on
12-month earnings expectationsEuro StoxxEnd of December 2008 = 100, weekly averages,
log scale
Price indices
5075100150200250
81012141618
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Standard &
Poor's 500
Standard & Poor's 500
Euro StoxxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
53

markedly higher than its level at the end of 
 December, and at 17.2 for the S&P 500, which 
was slightly up on the December figure. These 
higher p/e ratios, which lie above the respective 
five- year averages on both sides of the Atlantic, 
are, when looked at in isolation, indicative of 
relatively high valuations in the  equity markets. 
However, any assessment of valuations should 
also look beyond short- term earnings expecta -
tions and also allow for expected long- term real 
interest rates. In the year to date, analysts have 
only tweaked the  medium- term earnings 
growth expectations for the Euro Stoxx, while 
long- term real interest rates, as measured by 
ten- year Bunds and survey- based inflation ex -
pectations (Consensus Forecast) have fallen 
somewhat. A dividend discount model that 
takes these variables into  account reveals that 
the equity risk premium for the Euro Stoxx lat -
terly stood at 8.9%, which is down slightly on 
its level at the end of December. This indicates a 
moderately increased risk appetite on the part 
of equity market participants.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
was quite muted in the first quarter of 2015, 
with domestic enterprises scarcely issuing any 
new shares. The volume of foreign equities 
outstanding in the German market climbed by 
€3½ billion. Equities were purchased primarily 
by German credit institutions (€10½ billion), 
which, on balance, invested solely in domestic 
paper (€12 billion). Foreign portfolio investors, 
meanwhile, purchased equities for €6 billion. 
By contrast, resident non- banks offloaded equi -
ties worth €13 billion, which on balance were 
exclusively domestic paper.
During the reporting period, domestic collec -
tive investment firms posted record- high in -
flows of €55½ billion, as against €30 billion in 
the previous three months. The fresh cash 
mainly accrued to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€46 billion). Among 
the asset classes, mixed securities- based funds 
 attracted the most inflows (€29½ billion), but 
bond funds (€11 billion), equity funds (€5½ bil -
lion) and funds of funds (€5 billion) were also Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I Current account + 49.5 + 67.3 + 60.4 
1 Goods 1 + 53.3 + 60.1 + 59.6 
2 Services 2 –  7.2 –  7.3 –  6.5 
3 Primary income + 17.5 + 24.8 + 22.4 
4 Secondary income – 14.1 – 10.4 – 15.2 
II Capital account +  2.2 –  0.7 +  0.3 
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 60.0 + 58.5 + 53.0 
1 Direct investment + 15.6 + 22.4 + 24.2 
Domestic investment 
abroad + 23.8 + 16.5 + 38.2 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  8.2 –  6.0 + 13.9 
2 Portfolio investment + 34.9 + 46.2 + 49.0 
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 43.2 + 35.5 + 55.3 
Shares
3 +  3.1 +  3.3 +  0.3 
Investment fund shares 4+ 10.7 +  6.1 + 17.8 
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  2.3 +  1.5 –  1.6 
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 24.0 + 28.8 + 31.0 
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 23.6 + 20.5 + 20.0 
Short-term debt  securities
7 +  5.4 –  2.7 +  6.2 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic debt securities +  8.3 – 10.7 +  6.3 
Shares 3 –  5.6 +  2.9 +  1.9 
Investment fund shares –  0.1 –  3.5 +  4.4 
Long-term debt  securities
5 +  6.9 +  6.4 – 13.6 
of which
Public bonds and 
notes 8 + 18.1 +  7.8 – 18.7 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  7.1 – 16.7 + 13.6 
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  5.2 +  7.0 + 11.6 
4 Other investment 10 +  4.9 – 15.5 – 31.9 
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 –  1.0 + 31.2 – 66.4 
Enterprises and  households
12 + 17.2 – 24.8 +  8.3 
General government +  6.0 +  8.7 –  6.4 
Bundesbank – 17.4 – 30.5 + 32.7 
5 Reserve assets 13 –  0.6 –  1.7 0.0 
IV Errors and omissions 14 +  8.3 –  8.1 –  7.6 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4 Including reinvestment of earnings. 
5  Up to and including 2012, without accrued interest. Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
54

active in the market. Foreign funds distributed 
in the German market attracted €18 billion net 
in the first quarter of 2015. Domestic non-  
banks were the main buyers, adding mutual 
fund shares worth €63½ billion to their port-
folios. Their focus was exclusively in domestic 
paper. Domestic credit institutions and foreign 
investors made acquisitions, too, purchasing 
mutual fund shares for €5½ billion and €4½ 
billion respectively.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows amounting to €49 bil -
lion in the first quarter of 2015, there were also 
net capital exports in the field of direct invest -
ment, amounting to €24 billion.
The largest contributing factor was the com -
paratively high level of funding provided to 
 affiliated enterprises abroad, which amounted 
to just over €38 billion in the first quarter of 
2015. Domestic owners primarily bolstered 
their equity capital (€12½ billion) and re -
invested earnings generated abroad (€11 bil -
lion). Furthermore, funds totalling just under €15 billion on balance were transferred abroad 
as part of intra- group lending. Almost two-  
thirds of direct investment originating in Ger -
many in the first quarter of 2015 was made in 
enterprises in the EU, with key target countries 
being the Netherlands (just under €8 billion), 
Belgium (nearly €5 billion) and the United King -
dom (just over €3 billion). Outside the EU, do -
mestic enterprises invested fairly large amounts 
in the United States (just over €4 billion) as well 
as around €2 billion each in Switzerland and 
Hong Kong. The breakdown of domestic direct 
investment by economic sector reveals the spe -
cial significance of investment in service- sector 
enterprises (which accounted for approximately 
88% of funds invested as equity capital).
In the first quarter of 2015, domestic enter -
prises received inflows of nearly €14 billion 
from direct investment in Germany by non-  
resident investors. Foreign investors bolstered 
their equity capital by €6 billion, primarily by 
reinvesting earnings (€4 billion). On balance, 
resident enterprises received roughly €8 billion 
via intra- group credit transactions, particularly 
through reverse investments, in which foreign 
(financing) subsidiaries grant loans to their 
 domestic parent companies.Capital exports 
in direct  investment
German direct 
investment 
abroadForeign direct 
investment 
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
55

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The upturn in German economic activity, which 
began at the end of 2014, continued into the 
early months of 2015. According to the flash 
estimate of the Federal Statistical Office, real 
GDP in the first quarter of 2015 was 0.3% up 
on the previous three-  month period after sea -
sonal and calendar adjustment. However, de -
spite buoyant domestic activity, the expansion 
failed to match the rapid pace of 0.7% set in 
the preceding period. While the dip in global 
activity put a brake on exports, imports showed 
substantial growth. Aggregate production 
 capacity utilisation remained within normal 
bounds.
Domestic demand was still expanding strongly. 
Private consumption continued almost seam -
lessly at the rapid pace set in the second half of 2014. Favourable underlying conditions had 
been in place for some time, such as the labour 
market being characterised by rising employ -
ment, declining unemployment and perceptibly 
higher wages; an additional boost now came 
from the gain in purchasing power linked to 
the dramatic fall in crude oil prices at the end 
of 2014, which was still having an impact  going 
into 2015. Moreover, various economic policy 
measures (full pension at 63, the additional 
mothers’ pension and the new general statu -
tory minimum wage) were supporting con -
sumer spending over the short term. Housing 
construction likewise remained on the up. The 
fact that orders remained healthy, even though 
the intake was falling somewhat, as well as the 
exceptionally mild winter are likely to have 
played a part in this. Enterprises also increased 
their investment for the first time in almost a 
year.
By contrast, German firms’ export business in 
the first quarter of 2015 failed to maintain the 
momentum of the second half of 2014. The 
impact of the rather subdued pace of global 
activity at the beginning of the year out -
weighed the stimulating effects of the sharp 
depreciation of the euro, the impact of which is 
likely to become apparent only after some time 
has elapsed. In price and seasonally adjusted 
terms, exports of goods just about held up at 
the admittedly high level of the previous quar -
ter. While exports to countries in the euro area 
remained buoyant, exports to non- euro- area 
countries are unlikely to have entirely matched 
their volume in the final quarter of 2014. On 
the one hand, according to the regional data, 
which are available only up to February, Ger -
man enterprises significantly increased their 
 exports of goods to the United States and 
Switzerland and expanded their sales some -
what in central and east European countries. 
On the other hand, they saw a decline in their 
exports to Asia. The minor growth in sales to 
Japan and the new industrial countries in Asia Robust eco-
nomic growth ...
... sustained by 
strong impulses from domestic activity
Exports subdued, however
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015949698100102104106108
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
56

failed to offset the marked fall in exports of 
goods to China and the south and east Asian 
emerging market economies. Sales in the OPEC 
countries also underwent a slight decline. The 
downward trend in exports to Russia became 
more marked; in terms of value, exports in the 
first two months of 2015 were roughly one-  
third down on the year.
In terms of the range of exports, in the first two 
months of the year it was only intermediate 
goods that showed a price and seasonally ad -
justed increase on the average of the final 
quarter of 2014. Sales of metal and metal prod -
ucts went up in particular, while sales of chem -
ical products failed to match the volume of the 
preceding three- month period. On the whole, 
exports of capital goods roughly maintained 
their level of the previous quarter. Exports of 
computers, electronic and optical products as 
well as electrical equipment performed very 
well, while sales of motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle parts remained muted and machinery 
saw a sharp fall. Exports of consumer goods 
fell somewhat.
By contrast, goods imports experienced marked 
growth in real terms during the reporting 
 period, after trailing behind final demand in the 
second half of 2014. In seasonally adjusted 
terms, there was an increase of 2¾% com -
pared with the final quarter of last year. The 
rise in imports from non- euro- area countries 
was much more marked than that in imports 
from the euro area. More capital goods were 
imported chiefly in January and February. This 
applied to motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
parts in addition to computers, electronic and 
optical products as well as electrical equip -
ment. Furthermore, following a six-  month lull, 
a significantly larger number of machines was 
imported again. There was a continuation of 
the moderate upward movement in imports of 
intermediate goods. Imports of consumer 
goods remained muted as in the second half of 
2014, and the volume of energy imports was 
roughly at the level of the preceding period.Investment in machinery and equipment 
showed a marked increase in the first quarter 
of 2015 after generating virtually no stimuli in 
the previous three quarters. Firms invested 
more, above all, in their motor vehicle fleets; 
businesses reported a substantially larger num -
ber of passenger cars and commercial vehicles. 
They procured markedly more machinery, both 
domestic and imported. Additional computers, 
electronic and electrical equipment were pro -
cured chiefly from abroad, while purchases of 
domestically produced items did not exceed 
the level of the final quarter of 2014.Rise only in 
 exports of inter-
mediate goods
Marked rise  
in imports
Sharp increase 
in machinery and  equipment ...90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Jan-
Feb8090100110120
Jan-
Feb
120
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
57

There was also strong growth in construction 
investment in the reporting period. The mild 
weather at the start of the year is likely to have 
played a part in this. According to the data on 
turnover in the main construction sector in the 
first two months of this year, private housing 
construction was extremely buoyant, while 
commercial and industrial construction was 
marking time. There was also a marked in -
crease in turnover in public sector construction 
projects, however.
Private consumption continued its marked up -
ward movement into the early part of the year, 
thus remaining an important mainstay of 
growth. Sharp growth in real incomes had not 
yet been fully absorbed in the fourth quarter of 
2014, leading to a marked rise in the saving 
ratio; against this backdrop, households made 
a further marked increase in their retail spend -
ing. Clothing and footwear were in particular 
demand during the period under review along 
with mainly furniture and furnishings, which may also have been connected with the in -
creased completion of new apartments. By 
contrast, consumers were not so keen to buy 
electrical household appliances or ICT equip -
ment. Households are also likely to have 
 acquired a somewhat larger number of motor 
vehicles. In view of the very low prices, they 
also began to fill up their heating oil tanks at 
the beginning of the year. Furthermore, they 
increased their spending on hotel and restau -
rant services.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output rose at no more than a mod -
erate pace, which is consistent with the rather 
sluggish intake of orders. Industrial output in 
the first quarter of 2015 went up by only ¼% in 
seasonally adjusted terms compared with the 
final three months of 2014, which saw a rise of 
¾% following a slowdown in production in the 
second and third quarters of last year. At +¾%, 
intermediate goods producers markedly 
stepped up their output for the second quarter 
in succession, while, in the first three months 
of this year, capital goods producers did not, 
on average, fully maintain the outcome 
achieved in the final quarter of 2014 (-¼%). It 
was mainly the production of machinery that 
underwent a quite sharp decline, at 1¾%, fol -
lowing a steep upward movement in the 
second half of 2014. It should be taken into 
 account, however, that large- scale orders have 
led to pronounced fluctuations in the season -
ally adjusted quarterly pattern. Output in the 
automotive sector was somewhat down on the 
quarter (-½%). Production of computers, elec -
tronic and optical products and electrical equip -
ment showed a sharp increase in seasonally 
adjusted terms during the reporting period 
(+1½%), whereas there had not yet been any 
significant growth in the previous quarter. 
 Exceptionally buoyant consumption was also 
evident after the turn of the year in the produc -
tion of durable goods, which held up well at 
the sharply increased level (2¾%) of the fourth 
quarter of 2014. Nevertheless, this category of ... and  
in buildings
Private con-
sumption still clearly pointing upwardsOnly slight  increase in  industrial outputOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
58

goods accounts for no more than 2½% of 
overall industrial output. Food production, 
which is counted as part of non- durable goods 
production, and the production of pharmaceu -
ticals underwent a decline in the first quarter, 
however. Owing to the higher weighting of 
these industries, the output of the consumer 
goods industry was ½% down overall on the 
quarter.
With the upturn in output in the fourth quarter 
of 2014 and the first quarter of 2015, industrial 
capacity utilisation has now gone back up 
slightly above the longer- term average. Ac -
cording to the Ifo Institute, manufacturing 
firms once again reported that utilisation was 
running at 84½% of normal full capacity; the 
average of the period from 1995 to 2014 was 
just under 84%.
Not least owing to the mild weather, construc -
tion output in the first three months of this 
year showed a sharp seasonally adjusted rise of 
2¼% on the quarter. In the main construction 
sector, the weather effect in January was the 
key reason for output in the period under re -
view being well up on its level in the final quar -
ter of 2014. While there was a clear increase in 
building construction in the first quarter, civil 
engineering showed only a small rise. Follow -
ing two quarters with losses, activity in the fin -
ishing trades showed a significant improve -
ment again. Energy production saw a percepti -
ble expansion (+1%).
Services sector activity is benefiting at present 
from buoyant private consumption. In the re -
porting period, there was a further sharp in -
crease in retail and motor vehicle sales. Whole -
sale business also picked up. Hotel and restau -
rant turnover likewise increased. The mostly 
business- related service providers surveyed by 
the Ifo Institute have been rating their situation 
as quite positive for several months. There is an 
identifiable upward trend in those sectors, such 
as leasing, which have a particularly close rela -
tionship with industry. In view of the mileage 
covered by domestic motor vehicles subject to motorway tolls, which showed a seasonally 
 adjusted increase of 1% on the quarter, this 
probably also applied to the goods transport 
sector.
Employment and labour 
 market
The upward trend in the labour market contin -
ued at the beginning of 2015. There was a 
marked decline in unemployment. Employment 
overall increased only marginally in the first 
quarter of the year, however. According to ini -
tial estimates by the Federal Employment 
Agency, this was due to a sharp decline in low- 
paid part- time employment. Such jobs are par -
ticularly affected by the general statutory mini -
mum wage, as it is estimated that nearly half of 
those persons in such “mini jobs” were previ -
ously receiving hourly wages below the current 
minimum wage level. In many cases, “mini 
jobs” have probably been transformed or com -
bined into jobs that are subject to social secu -
rity contributions. At all events, since autumn 
2014, sectors with an above- average percent -
age of marginal employment, such as trade, 
logistics, and hotels and restaurants have been 
increasingly reporting employment subject to 
social security contributions.
Employment in the first quarter of 2015 was 
only 21,000 up on the quarter (+0.0%) in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, compared with a 0.2% 
increase in the final quarter of last year. This 
slowdown in the pace of employment growth is 
due primarily to the above- mentioned fall of 
100,000, or 2%, in low- paid part- time employ -
ment over the last three months up to February.
Conversely, new jobs subject to social security 
contributions were being created continuously. 
On an average of January and February, a total 
of 127,000 additional jobs were filled in sea -
sonally adjusted terms, which was an increase 
of 0.4% compared with the fourth quarter of 
2014. Growth in employment was especially 
strong in the services sector and was broadly Utilisation virtu-
ally unchanged 
Marked rise in 
construction output also due 
to the weather 
Services sector 
activity under-pinned by con-sumption Further improve-ment in the  labour market at the beginning of 2015, but perceptible  impact of the 
general statutory minimum wage
Employment 
stable with 
sharp fall in the 
number of per-
sons exclusively 
in part-time 
 low-paid work ...
... and strong 
growth in jobs subject to social security  contributionsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
59

based. The number of persons working in the 
construction sector saw a marked rise, too. 
There was only a slight increase in manufactur -
ing, however.
The seasonally adjusted official unemployment 
figure went down significantly by 48,000 to 
2.82 million in the first quarter of the year. The 
unemployment rate fell by 0.1 percentage point 
to 6.5%. The decline among persons receiving 
benefits under the statutory unemployment in -
surance scheme was somewhat stronger than 
that among those receiving the basic allow -
ance. After going up in the meantime, unem -
ployment within the statutory insurance 
scheme, which is more frictional and cyclical in 
nature, has not yet entirely matched its lowest 
level reached at the end of 2011. Even so, it is 
unlikely that the number of 880,000 unem -
ployed persons in the insurance scheme – which 
corresponds to a proportionate unemployment 
rate of 2.0% – could be reduced much further 
even in a boom period. At 1.93 million, the 
number of persons receiving the basic allow -
ance has reached its lowest level since it was 
introduced in 2005. Nevertheless, the reduction 
of such predominantly structural underemploy -
ment is proceeding only very slowly. Registered 
unemployment declined further in April 2015, 
albeit at a slower pace than in the first three 
months of 2015. According to the figures of the 
Federal Employment Agency, 2.79 million per -
sons were without work in April, which is equiv -
alent to an unemployment rate of 6.4%.
Enterprises’ recruitment practice will probably 
continue to be geared to expansion over the 
next few months. The Ifo employment barom -
eter, which provides information on firms’ 
 employment plans over the short term, has re -
mained at the high level of the past few months. 
Despite already having reached a high level, the 
Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X labour mar -
ket index, which records stock figures as well as 
the inflow of newly reported vacancies for un -
subsidised jobs, is showing an ongoing slight 
upward tendency. The fact that vacancies are at 
a very high level might also be a reflection of Further fall  
in registered 
 unemployment in 2014 Q4
Positive outlook 
for employmentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Apr40.541.041.542.042.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500AprSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sandOfficially unemployed
 3Unemployed
Year-on-year change1TotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan-
FebDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
60

greater difficulty in filling them due to experi -
enced skilled workers retiring on a full state pen -
sion at the age of 63, the number of whom may 
have increased sharply again in the first quarter 
of 2015. The IAB labour market baro meter, 
which is based on surveys of the managers of 
local employment agencies, had moved back 
into neutral territory at the end of the period 
under review. This means that the decline in the 
unemployment figures in the final quarter of 
2014 and the first three months of this year is 
unlikely to continue for the time being.
Wages and prices
The rise in negotiated rates of pay in the first 
quarter of 2015 was significantly weaker than 
in the preceding period. This applies to the 
contractually agreed basic rates of pay (+2.3% 
year on year, compared with +2.9%), but even 
more so to negotiated rates of pay including 
one- off payments and ancillary agreements 
(+2.1%, compared with +2.8%). The main rea -
sons for this are months with a pay freeze in 
some sectors, a negative base effect owing to 
a back payment negotiated in the retail trade 
one year before as well as low incremental pay 
increases resulting from agreements in the pre -
vious year. In line with the agreements that 
have been concluded, the pace of growth in 
negotiated pay rates is likely to increase slightly 
in the second quarter of 2015 but not quite 
match the growth rates of 2014.
In contrast to previous quarters, actual earn -
ings in the first quarter may have risen some -
what more sharply than negotiated rates of 
pay. The key reason for a reversal in the wage 
drift should have been the introduction of the 
general statutory minimum wage of €8.50 per 
hour from 1 January 2015, which has probably 
led a number of sectors to perceptibly increase 
earnings in the lower wage segments.1
The 2015 pay round settlements thus far pro -
vide for quite moderate wage increases. In this 
connection, it should also be noted that, in a number of cases, the social partners have 
agreed on additional measures that benefit em -
ployees and entail costs for employers. In the 
metal- working and electrical engineering indus -
tries, the new pay agreement runs for 15 
months with a one- off payment of €150 for the 
first three months as well as a 3.4% increase in 
basic rates of pay from April 2015. Added to 
this are new agreements with regard to em -
ployees’ entitlements to qualifications and 
phased retirement. For the chemicals industry, 
the wage bargainers agreed a pay increase of 
2.8% running for 17 months. Furthermore, pay -
ments into the sector- specific demography fund 
were considerably increased. In the public ser -
vice of the state governments (excluding Hesse), 
the wage bargaining partners agreed on a 
phased increase of 2.1% in scheduled rates of 
pay – over a two- year period – backdated to 
March 2015 and a further 2.3% in March 2016; 
in the second phase, a guaranteed additional 
income of €75 will bring a disproportionately 
high increase in the earnings of the lower and 
middle pay groups.2 This will mean a further Muted growth 
in negotiated rates of pay in 2015 Q1
Minimum wage 
likely to increase actual earnings
Rather moderate 
wage rise in the 2015 pay round so farNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1
Q1
1 The introduction of the general minimum wage barely 
has any direct impact on the Bundesbank’s pay index, as 
this relates to developments in middle pay groups (“bench -
mark pay rates”) where the hourly rates are above the 
€8.50 threshold in the majority of cases.
2 The collective agreement is usually transferred to civil 
servants in federal (and thus also) local government, albeit 
sometimes at a later date and not in full.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
61

flattening of the already compressed wage 
structure in the public sector. In addition, the 
social partners agreed on a considerable in -
crease in the contribution rates – to be paid by 
both employees and employers – for financing 
supplementary old- age provisions.
Price developments throughout the first quar -
ter of 2015 were shaped by the sharp decline in 
oil prices that continued into January. After 
seasonal adjustment, not only import prices, 
but also industrial producer prices and con -
sumer prices were down on their levels in the 
final quarter of 2014. The consequences of the 
euro’s depreciation have been apparent so far 
mainly in the import prices of consumer goods. 
This will be reflected in consumer prices over 
the coming months.
In terms of imports, the fall in oil prices led to 
energy prices on an average of the first quarter 
of 2015 being almost one- sixth lower than in 
autumn 2014. The composite index for import 
prices also showed a marked seasonally ad -
justed decline of 1½%, although there was a 
perceptible, chiefly depreciation- related in -
crease, if energy is excluded. Excluding energy, 
import prices were 2.1% up on the year. The 
impact of the euro’s depreciation was also re -
vealed by the fact that prices for imports from 
non- euro- area countries went up by 3.6%, 
whereas imports from other euro- area coun -
tries showed a further slight fall of 0.5%. There 
was a particularly sharp increase in the case of 
imported consumer goods. The year- on- year 
increase in import prices for clothing rose to 
5.2% (and to as much as 6.6% in March) and 
to 3.4% for furniture (March: 4.3%). Going by 
all experience, such strong price rises are re -
flected quite rapidly in retail prices. In the case 
of industrial producer prices, the impact of fa -
vourable energy and commodity prices was still 
predominant in domestic sales at the beginning 
of 2015. Prices showed a further seasonally ad -
justed fall on the quarter both overall and if 
energy is excluded. The (negative) year- on- year 
rates increased to -2.0% and -0.5% respec -
tively. By contrast, domestic enterprises percep -Prices under the 
impact of lower oil prices and euro  depreciation
Import prices 
 excluding energy clearly pointing upwardsExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20159095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Apr95100105
AprDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
62

tibly increased their earnings per unit in euro 
terms in their export sales. Export prices were 
0.8% higher year on year. With a 2.9% decline 
in import prices, the terms of trade improved 
considerably.
The pace of price inflation for domestic con -
struction work slowed down again in the first 
quarter of 2015 and the annual rate fell to 
1.5%. This was due to structural work, which 
contrasted with slightly faster price inflation in 
the finishing trades. Prices in the real estate 
market have increased again following a slow -
down last year. According to data provided by 
the Association of German Pfandbrief  Banks 
(Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp ), 
prices for owner- occupied apartments in the 
first quarter of 2015 were 5.0% up on the year 
following an increase of 4.3% in the fourth 
quarter of 2014.
In the first three months of 2015, seasonally 
adjusted consumer prices were 0.2% down on 
the quarter, having already fallen by 0.3% in 
the final quarter of 2014. The decline was es -
sentially due to the sharply reduced energy 
prices up to the end of January. Food products 
also played some part in the lower prices, how -
ever. The costs of industrial goods (excluding 
energy) rose faster than in the final quarter of 
2014, however. Consumers also had to pay 
more for services. The introduction of the mini -
mum wage played a part in this and is likely to 
have contributed around 0.3 percentage point 
overall so far to the higher cost of services with 
a much stronger impact in some subsectors 
(see the box on pages 64 to 66). Housing rents 
continued their muted upward trend. The an -
nual figure as measured by the national con -
sumer price index (CPI) showed a further de -
cline to 0.0% and, in fact, turned slightly nega -
tive (-0.2%) as defined by the Harmonised In -
dex of Consumer Prices (HICP). This is likely to 
have been a short- lived development, however. 
Indeed, in quarter- on- quarter terms, the price 
tendency went into reverse under the impact 
of the partial recovery in crude oil prices and 
the depreciation of the euro. The increase in prices continued in April and the annual CPI 
rate went up to +0.5%; the annual HICP rate 
increased to +0.3%.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy will probably go on ex -
panding over the coming months. Households 
are increasingly using their growing scope for 
expenditure for consumption purposes. Con -
sumer spending is therefore set to bolster mac -
roeconomic growth further, even though most 
of the purchasing power effect due to the 
sharp fall in oil prices has probably already 
been felt. The broad- based surge in orders in 
the construction sector at the beginning of this 
year gives reason to believe that construction 
activity might gain more momentum. Invest -
ment in machinery and equipment is likely to 
increase at a rather subdued pace. Even though 
capacity utilisation is now at a high level, mixed 
signals coming from the external environment 
mean that enterprises feel it to be inappropri -
ate at present to make a large investment in 
expansions. In the industrial sector, in particu -
lar, the economic upswing is intact, but is likely 
to  remain rather sluggish initially in view of the 
overall disappointing growth in orders at the 
start of the year. Nevertheless, in a setting of 
euro- area recovery and strengthening global 
economic activity, there exists the expectation 
that new export opportunities will be opened 
up, not least given the euro’s comparatively 
low external value.
The business climate in the corporate sector 
has shown a perceptible improvement over the 
past half year, but is not without a downside. 
According to a survey conducted by the Ger -
man Chamber of Industry and Commerce 
(DIHK) at the beginning of 2015, industrial 
 enterprises, in particular, are feeling heightened 
cost pressure, which might have an impact on 
business within the euro area. Surveys by the 
Ifo Institute for the manufacturing sector show 
that, despite the sharp depreciation of the 
euro, there has been no further improvement Slower rise in 
construction prices
Consumer dis-
inflation process probably at an endContinued  perceptible eco-nomic growth
Enterprises’ eco-
nomic optimism not without a downsideDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
63

Impact of the introduction of the minimum wage 
on consumer prices – initial fi  ndings
A national statutory mini mum wage of 
€8.50 gross per hour was introduced in 
Germany on 1 January 2015. Prior to this, it was already the case in several sectors that 
collectively agreed minimum wages had 
been declared generally binding by way of 
a statutory order. In many sectors, the new general statutory minimum wage brought a steep rise in hourly wages in the lower pay 
groups. Experience has shown that such a 
surge in costs infl  uences enterprises’ price 
setting.
Nevertheless, there are likely to be marked 
differences between the sectors. No price 
effects were to be expected in cases where mostly higher sectoral minimum wages had already been set in recent years, such as in the construction sector, since the new gen-
eral statutory minimum wage had not pushed up wages in this instance. Generally 
speaking, low wages do not play all that great a role in industry. By contrast, there 
are a number of services sectors where low- 
paid jobs predominate and where labour 
costs also account for a considerable share of the total costs. Very different adjustment 
strategies were selected here in some in-stances, which had implications for the strength and timing of the price impulse triggered by the minimum wage. Further-
more, the conditions set by the regulatory 
framework are playing a major role in some sectors.
In the hairdressing trade, for example, a generally binding sector- specifi  c minimum wage of €7.50 per hour for western Ger-
many and €6.50 for eastern Germany was 
introduced on 1 November 2013 in antici-
pation of the general minimum wage; this 
was increased to €8.00 and €7.50 respec-
tively on 1 August 2014. The uniform mini-
mum wage of €8.50 will not come into 
force in Germany as a whole until 1 August 
2015. Use will thus be made of the transi-
tional regulations envisaged in the Min-imum Wage Act (Mindestlohngesetz).  
 According to the Collective Agreement Archive of the Institute of Economic and Social Research (WSI), the collectively 
agreed hourly wage in the lowest pay group 
previously ranged between €5 and €8 in western Germany, whereas it did not amount to much more than €3 in some 
federal states in eastern Germany. Although 
the increase in the lowest pay group is an 
extreme example, negotiated wages in the 
other groups also showed a clear rise. Thus 
hairdressing services were already becom-ing distinctly more expensive before the 
introduction of the general minimum wage, and price infl  ation in eastern Germany was Consumer prices and minimum 
wage-related rise in negotiated rates of pay in the lowest pay group of the hairdressing trade
0246810121416182022
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Sources:  Regional  statistical  offices  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions. 
Deutsche BundesbankBaden-WürttembergIncrease in CPI sub-index for hairdressing services
since December 2012
Minimum wage-related rise in negotiated
rates of pay in the lowest pay group of the hairdressing
trade from December 2012 to 1 August 2014.North Rhine-WestphaliaThuringiaMecklenburg-West Pomerania
Saxony-Anhalt
Berlin
HesseRhineland-Palatinate
Lower
Saxonyand BremenBavariaBrandenburg
Saxony%, cumulatedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
64

clearly stronger than in western Germany in 
line with the wage increases.
Since December 2012, prices for hairdress-
ing services in Germany have been raised by 
more than 8%, while the previous decade 
had seen price infl  ation of no more than 
just over 1% per year. Prices for hairdressing services were up by one- sixth on average in the east German federal states, with the in-
crease being only one- third as strong in 
western Germany.1 The price impulses were 
spread fairly evenly over an extended period 
of time. This is probably due primarily to the 
fact that small proprietor- run businesses 
predominate in the hairdressing sector, and 
price adjustments are therefore carried out 
to a large degree in a decentralised manner.
By contrast, on 1 January 2015, taxi fi  rms 
raised wages fairly abruptly from between €6 and €6.50 per hour in western Ger-
many2 and from signifi  cantly lower amounts 
in eastern Germany3 to the general mini-
mum wage level of €8.50. It should be noted, however, that taxi fi  rms have hith-
erto often paid employees on a commission 
basis and that only a typical hourly wage can be given. There can, however, be no 
doubt about the sharp cost- raising effect of the general minimum wage, which has also 
had a direct impact on consumer prices. 
 According to the offi   cial consumer price 
statistics, the average taxi fare in Germany 
suddenly rose by 5.2% at the beginning of 
2015. The increases in eastern Germany of 
just over one- tenth were again signifi  cantly sharper than in western Germany, at 4½%. 
There were further marked price increases in the following months. Prices have risen 1 Data for eastern and western Germany are Bundes-
bank calculations based on information provided by 
the regional statistical offi   ces. The sub- indices for the 
federal states are aggregated with the federal state 
weightings used in the consumer price index. Eastern 
Germany: Brandenburg (2.6%), Mecklenburg- West Po-
merania (1.6%), Saxony (4.3%), Saxony- Anhalt (2.4%) 
and Thuringia (2.3%). Western Germany: Baden- Württemberg (14%), Bavaria (16%), Bremen (0.9%), Hesse (7.7%), Lower Saxony (9.6%), North Rhine- 
Westphalia (22.8%), Rhineland- Palatinate (4.8%) and 
Saarland (1.2%). Schleswig- Holstein and Hamburg do 
not publish their own consumer price indices.
2 Information provided by the Deutscher Taxi-  und 
Miet wagenverband e.V. (BZP).
3 The Regional Association of taxis and hire car com-
panies in Saxony calculates a gross hourly wage of 
€5.50 for Leipzig.Consumer price index for hairdressing services and taxi fares
Source: CPI for Germany as a whole: Federal Statistical Office. 
CPI  areas:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  information 
provided  by  the  regional  statistical  offices.  1 Introduction  of 
and/or  increase  in  the  generally  binding  (sectoral)  minimum wage.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20151001051101151201252010 = 100, log scale
100105110115120125130135
Taxi faresHairdressing and personal grooming
establishments
11 1
Germany as a whole
Eastern Germany
Western GermanyNegotiated rates of pay in the hairdressing trade
*
* For eastern Germany the negotiated rate of pay is based on 
the minimum wage, for western Germany on a person work-
ing  autonomously.  1 Introduction  of  and/or  increase  in  the 
generally binding (sectoral) minimum wage.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015951001101201301401502010 = 100, basic rates of hourly pay, log scale
Eastern Germany
Western GermanyGermany as a whole
1 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
65

in short- term export expectations following the 
recovery in the autumn months. Assessments 
thus fall well short of the optimism that pre -
vailed for a time, say, one year ago. The fact 
that the strength of the cyclical pick-  up in in -
dustry is predominantly being rated with some 
caution is revealed by business expectations for 
the next six months.
After seasonal adjustment, the intake of indus -
trial orders in the first three months of 2015 
was 1½% down on the final quarter of last 
year. This means that there was initially no con -
tinuation of the upturn that set in around the 
middle of 2014. The main dampening effect 
stemmed from the export markets and was felt 
in all the major industrial sectors. The marked 
decline was due in part to the fact that rela -
tively few major export orders were received in 
the first quarter, while there had been a very 
large number of them between October and 
December 2014. The very strong inflow of 
 orders from non- euro- area markets did not continue in the first three months of this year 
(-2¾%). Orders from the rest of the euro area 
were as much as 4¼% lower than in the previ -
ous quarter, although the level in the final 
quarter of 2014 had been relatively high. Sea -
sonally adjusted orders from domestic custom -
ers were 1% up on their prior- quarter level, 
however, not least owing to a large order in 
other transport equipment.
Orders placed with producers of intermediate 
goods in the first quarter of 2015 were 1½% 
down on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms. There was a somewhat stronger decline 
in the case of capital goods at -1¾%. Further -
more, there were clearly fewer orders for com -
puter, electronic and optical products and elec -
trical equipment than on an average of the 
 final quarter of 2014. There was also a marked 
quarter- on- quarter fall in orders (-1½%) for 
 automotive products. Given the sharp rise in 
the final quarter of last year, the orders situation 
in this branch of industry may still be seen as No improvement 
in the orders  situation in 
 industry of late ...... with both 
 intermediate and capital goods affectedby some 10% overall since the beginning of 
the year. The fact that taxi fares are subject to local government approval was probably a key reason for the minimum wage- related 
cost surge being passed through to prices 
in such a short period of time.
On the whole, the minimum wage has thus 
shown a very clear impact on consumer 
prices in some services sectors, which are perceptibly more marked in the east Ger-man federal states than in western Ger-many. The implications for the consumer 
price index overall are likely to remain lim-
ited, however. The minimum wage is likely 
to have had a notable effect on just under one- third of the services represented in the 
consumer price index, for example.4 In the 
fi  rst few months of 2015, annual price infl  a-
tion in these sectors was slightly higher than average, contributing more than 
0.1 percentage point to the overall CPI rate. However, the price adjustment process is probably not yet complete, especially in 
those sectors making use of the transitional periods of the Minimum Wage Act. In addi-tion, there may have been smaller price ef-fects in the retail trade and in hotels, restau-rants and catering, which are not taken into 
consideration here, and there will still be some lagged wage increases, so that the overall effect is likely to be somewhat 
greater.
4 Components of the CPI basket of goods which are 
likely to be particularly affected by the minimum wage 
(CPI weighting): Dry- cleaning, washing and repair of 
clothing (0.107%), services for the maintenance and 
repair of dwellings (0.412%), street cleaning (0.114%), 
charges for garden maintenance (0.162%), repair of furniture and furnishings (0.081%), domestic and 
household services (0.291%), taxi rides (0.122%), com-
bined passenger transport services (1.06%), furniture 
transport (0.046%), postal services (0.235%),  catering services (3.423%), accommodation services (1.044%), 
hairdressing and personal grooming establishments (0.995%), social services (1.135%), funeral services 
(0.114%).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
66

extremely favourable. Demand conditions in the 
mechanical engineering sector are not so good, 
however. The decline in orders in the final quar -
ter of 2014 was followed by another fall after 
the turn of the year (-1¼%). Seasonally adjusted 
quarter- on- quarter growth in consumer goods 
orders in the reporting period amounted to 
¼% following a marked rise in the previous 
quarter. The past half year has seen increased 
demand for durable goods in particular.
Construction demand has picked up sharply 
since the beginning of 2015. This new momen -
tum has been felt by all construction subsec -
tors. It is particularly obvious in civil engineer -
ing, which is due mainly to the fact that public 
sector customers have not been as hesitant as 
in the second half of 2014. Moreover, construc -
tion firms received more orders for building 
commercial properties. Housing construction 
demand also saw an increase. The estimated 
costs of approved housing units in new and 
 existing buildings on an average of January and 
February 2015 were 1% up on the average of 
the preceding three- month period.
The conditions for marked expansion of private 
consumption are still in place, even though it 
can probably no longer be assumed that 
growth rates in the near future will be on the 
scale of those in the last three months of 2014 
and the first quarter of this year. The gains in 
purchasing power due to the slump in crude oil 
prices at the end of last year are allowing con -
sumers to enjoy a higher level of consumption, 
to which they have adapted quite quickly. 
Much the same applies to the additional scope 
for expenditure stemming from pension policy 
measures. Even so, given the existing marked 
propensity to consume, rising employment and 
higher rates of pay (which – in view of very low 
inflation at present – perceptibly increase the 
scope for expenditure) mean that there is fur -
ther potential for expansion. Added to this are 
the income-  increasing effects of the minimum 
wage, which are likely to become apparent es -
pecially in the case of households with rela -
tively high consumption ratios.Sharp pick-up 
in construction demand
Private con-
sumption to  remain the pri-
mary engine of the economy in the short termDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Jan-
Feb
Jan-
Feb90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
67

Public finances*
General government budget 
German public finances have benefited for 
some time now from very favourable under -
lying conditions. As things currently stand, 
these are set to continue, although there are 
uncertainties at the international level, in par -
ticular. If the economy runs smoothly on the 
whole, there is likely to be little change in the 
fiscal balance, with a surplus of around ½% of 
gross domestic product (GDP) on the cards for 
2015 (2014: 0.7% of GDP). Nevertheless, the 
fiscal policy stance is generally expansionary, 
meaning that the balance is likely to worsen 
significantly after adjustment for interest ex -
penditure and cyclical factors. However, this is 
masked by the fact that the economy is picking 
up1 and interest expenditure is continuing to 
fall in relation to GDP . The latter is a result of 
very low interest rates but also reflects the 
declin ing debt ratio.
The revenue ratio may dip slightly. While the 
financial impact of various changes to social 
contribution rates2 and a reduction in income 
tax cuts all but balance each other out, other 
factors such as the Bundesbank’s lower profit 
distribution will depress the ratio. Growth in 
expenditure is likewise expected to lag behind 
GDP . This is due, on the one hand, to a sharper 
rise in GDP owing to cyclical influences. On the 
other hand, significant growth in some spend -
ing categories (particularly pensions, health -
care, long-  term care, education, research and 
infrastructure) will be offset by falling interest 
expenditure.
The debt ratio had slipped to 74.7% by the end 
of 2014, with a further marked decline ex -
pected for 2015. This is primarily attributable to 
growth in nominal GDP in the ratio’s denomi -
nator but is also likely to be bolstered by the 
positive fiscal balance and a further portfolio 
reduction by government- owned bad banks.3Developments are currently expected to follow 
a similar pattern in 2016. While economic ac -
tivity and falling interest expenditure could pro -
vide further relief for the government budget, 
the budgetary stance is expected to remain 
 expansionary. With a more or less unchanged 
fiscal balance, the debt ratio is likely to fall fur -
ther. To date, only a few changes affecting the 
tax and social contribution burden have been 
outlined in detail, and another clear rise in pri -
mary expenditure (ie expenditure excluding in -
terest payments) is forecast. As in 2015, this is 
especially the case for social payments. At pre -
sent, it is still the impact of the selective benefit 
increases in the statutory pension insurance 
scheme that is being felt. In 2016, it will instead 
be that of higher general pension rises. With -
out any new cost- curbing measures and in the 
light of recent plans, especially for hospital 
care, spending on healthcare is likely to again 
expand significantly. In addition, expenditure In 2015, 
 expansionary budgetary stance masked by more favour-able  economic 
conditions and falling interest expenditure
Revenue and 
 expenditure ratios down slightly
Continued 
 decline in 
debt ratioSimilar outlook 
currently ex-
pected for 2016
* The section entitled “General government budget” con -
cerns the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. The 
subsequent reporting on the budgets of central, state and 
local government and of the social security funds is based 
on the figures as defined in the government’s financial 
 statistics (which are generally in line with the budget 
 accounts).
1 Pursuant to the Eurosystem’s cyclical adjustment method, 
which is used here, the cyclical impact on the 2014 and 
2015 level of the fiscal balance is close to zero, but up 
somewhat on the year. By contrast, the cyclical adjustment 
procedure used for EU budgetary surveillance and for cen -
tral government’s debt brake when drawing up the budget 
paints a clearly negative picture of the economic situation 
in 2014. Despite GDP being expected to rise significantly, 
the negative output gap is set to narrow at a relatively slow 
pace in 2015 as potential growth is assumed to be rela -
tively high.
2 At the start of the year, the contribution rate to the stat -
utory pension insurance scheme was cut and the average 
additional contribution rate to the statutory health insur -
ance scheme declined, whereas the contribution rate to 
long- term care insurance was raised considerably.
3 As far as European assistance mechanisms are con -
cerned, additional loans to Greece as part of the current 
EFSF assistance programme would inflate Germany’s debt 
level. However, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) 
would likely be responsible for launching any new pro -
grammes. Loans granted by the ESM do not inflate the 
debt levels of the member states backing the ESM as the 
ESM is classed as an independent European institution for 
statistical purposes. Consequently, only new capital injec -
tions to the ESM would be recorded in Germany’s govern -
ment account.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
68

will climb in other areas, such as housing al -
lowance, and additional funding has also been 
earmarked for education, research and infra -
structure, among other areas.
The Federal Government presented its updated 
stability programme for the period up to 2019 
in April.4 The general government surplus is ex -
pected to decline initially up to 2016 but then 
rise gradually in the years thereafter. Here, too, 
an expansionary fiscal policy stance is reported 
for 2015 and 2016, which will be masked, in 
part, by favourable economic developments 
and falling interest expenditure. Nevertheless, 
European budget requirements will be met 
with a safety margin.5 The debt ratio is set to 
decline to 61½% by 2019.
In the light of the current decisions on budget -
ary and financial planning, achieving the tar -
gets set out in the German stability programme 
appears feasible. Given the very favourable un -
derlying conditions, persistently high debt ratio and foreseeable demographic adjustment bur -
dens, it is certainly advisable to exceed the 
minimum EU requirements. Maintaining a 
safety margin vis- à- vis the central government’s 
national debt brake in order to be prepared for 
unpleasant surprises should the situation take a 
turn for the worse is also to be welcomed. 
Therefore, the aim in good times should be not 
to merely balance budgets but rather to allow 
for marked surpluses. While national rules stip -
ulate that the federal states have to record at 
least balanced budgets (after cyclical adjust -Stability pro-
gramme envis-ages compliance with EU rules
Put public 
fi  nances on 
 stable footing when conditions are favourableKey data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme*
 
Item 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Real GDP growth (%)
Stability programme April 2015 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.3 1.3
Stability programme April 2014 1.8 2.0 1.4 1.4 1.4 –
General government fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2015 0.6 ¼ 0 ¼ ¼ ½
Stability programme April 2014 0 0 0 ½ ½ –
Structural fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2015 1.1 ¾ ¼ ½ ½ ½
Stability programme April 2014 ½ ½ ½ ½ ½ –
Debt level (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2015 74.7 71½ 68¾ 66 63¾ 61½
Stability programme April 2014 76 72½ 70 67½ 65 –
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * The projections in the April 2014 stability programme were still based on the European System of 
Accounts (ESA) 1995, which was replaced by the revised standards in ESA 2010 in summer 2014. The fi  scal balance was only slightly 
 affected by the changeover. However, there was a considerable upward revision of the debt level, while the debt ratio was signifi  cantly 
lower owing to the stronger upward revision of GDP in the denominator. In the updated stability programme for 2014, projection values 
were rounded up to the nearest ½% of GDP and in the updated version for 2015, values were rounded up to the nearest ¼% of GDP .
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 As part of European budgetary surveillance, EU member 
states publish a stability or convergence programme every 
April. The Federal Government regularly bases this on its 
macroeconomic forecast from the beginning of the year; 
this forecast and the tax estimate that is based on it are 
updated shortly afterwards. However, these reassessments 
have only resulted in a minimal need for adjustment to the 
fiscal forecast in the latest stability programme (for details 
on the official tax estimate, see pp 76-77).
5 Although the structural situation appears to again be 
overstated when calculated in accordance with the method 
of cyclical adjustment used in European budgetary surveil -
lance, there would, nevertheless, still be a safety margin 
even if it were calculated using the ESCB procedure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
69

Fiscal developments in the euro area
General government defi  cit ratio fell 
in 2014, but debt ratio continued to rise
At the end of April, Eurostat published data 
on the general government defi  cits and 
debt levels of the EU member states (notifi  -
cation) as part of the European budgetary 
surveillance procedure. According to these 
data, the euro- area defi  cit fell from 2.9% to 
2.4% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 
2 014. This improvement was attributable to 
subdued interest expenditure, a rebound in 
economic growth and lower outlays on support for the banking sector. Without 
these factors, the fi  scal stance would have 
resulted in a slight rise in the defi  cit ratio. 
Thus, the euro area’s fi  scal policy cannot be deemed to have been austere in 2014. The debt ratio continued to rise, from 93.2% to 94.2%.
1
Debt ratio likewise expected to decrease from 2015
The European Commission’s spring forecast 
expects the euro- area defi  cit to decrease to 
2.0% of GDP in 2015, based on a broadly 
neutral fi  scal policy course. This is attribut-
able to an increasingly positive cyclical im-
pact and a further fall in the interest ex-penditure ratio. These positive factors are 
set to continue in 2016, too, with a defi  cit ratio of 1.7% forecast despite fi  scal easing. 
Not all measures envisaged in the national 
stability programmes from 2016 onwards, 
in particular, are taken into account as some of them have not yet been concretely spec-
ifi  ed. The debt ratio is expected to decline 
in 2015 – albeit slightly – for the fi  rst time 
since 2007 to 94.0%. This is primarily due 
to stronger GDP growth. A more signifi  cant 
fall in the debt ratio to 92.5% is on the 
cards for 2016.The Greek exception
The situation in Greece still gives cause for 
concern, and it is virtually impossible to make a reliable forecast at present.
2 The 
country’s outlook had brightened percepti-bly up until the end of 2014, as, following a 
tough adjustment phase, growth had 
gained a foothold again. The public fi  nance 
situation could probably have been stabi-lised without excessive additional fi  scal measures. Furthermore, thanks to the ex-tremely favourable interest rate terms 
granted under the assistance programmes, 
Greece’s general government fi  nancing costs are by no means unreasonable de-
spite its very high debt ratio. Thus the coun-try’s ratio of interest expenditure to GDP in 
2014 was below the fi  gures for Portugal, Italy and Ireland. However, the abrupt 
change of course embarked on by the new 
Greek government halted and, in some in-
stances, reversed the reform and stabilisa-
tion course. The uncertainty which this cre-ated is burdening public fi  nances both indi-rectly through the setback in economic ac-
tivity and directly owing to an apparently diminishing willingness to pay taxes. Fur-thermore, additional expenditures have 
been approved. The risk premiums on Greek 
sovereign bonds have consequently in-
creased sharply, and the incipient progress 
made last year towards regaining access to 
the capital market has been lost again. 
1 Unlike the data reported in the Eurostat notifi  cation, 
the European Commission fi  gures on the debt level in the euro area as a whole cited in this box also include lending between euro- area countries. Excluding these inter- governmental loans, the debt ratio rose by a sim-ilar amount to 91.9% in 2014.2 The European Commission’s forecast for Greece can-not be compared with those made for the other euro- 
area countries. The politically induced uncertainty means that the macroeconomic basis and the fi  scal 
estimate are subject to huge uncertainty.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
70

However, as the assistance programme for 
Greece – which has since been extended 
until the end of June – cannot be continued 
under the current conditions, meaning that no more assistance loans and transfers can be paid, there is an acute danger of Greece becoming insolvent.
Those European countries that have pro-
vided assistance up to now and the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund already stopped fur-
ther payments some time ago as the Greek 
government has not honoured the existing 
agreements and has also made no new pro-
posals that could form the basis for a com-promise. At present, Greece is managing to stay solvent solely by mobilising the remain-
ing liquidity in its government sector and because Greek banks – which have them-selves forfeited access to the capital mar-ket  – keep rolling over maturing govern-
ment bonds (T- bills). The latter is only pos-
sible as the Greek central bank is granting 
emergency liquidity, and is moreover con-
tinuously extending the amount provided in 
view of the ongoing outfl  ows of deposits, 
thereby ensuring the solvency of both the 
Greek banks and the Greek government in 
the short term. However, this will probably 
only be possible for both sectors beyond the immediate horizon if further fi  scal as-
sistance payments are made, at least on a 
temporary basis, and Greece creates a basis 
for sustainable public fi  nances by imple-menting economic and fi  scal reforms. The decision about providing further funds –  which not least involves redistributing considerable risks and hinges on political 
agreements – should clearly rest with those 
responsible for fi  scal policy and thus with 
the national governments and parliaments.
A sustainable solution will not be possible 
without substantial reforms and measures 
being taken in Greece, which previous 
Greek governments had committed to. Only this path will ensure that Greece can 
regain independent access to the capital market in the foreseeable future and that 
the fi  nancial assistance merely amounts to 
bridging payments, which can be repaid at a later date. This is another reason why the 
granting of fi  nancial assistance should be 
coupled to corresponding conditionality. It 
is up to the current Greek government to present suitable proposals, implement the 
agreements made and thus make its contri-bution to preventing a sovereign insolvency, which would result in severe dislocations in Greece. Any future agreements should take 
on board that an easing of the conditions 
for the fi  scal targets would probably delay a return to the capital market and mean that 
the additional assistance for government 
 fi  nancing would have to be higher. A debt 
waiver by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and in respect of bilateral 
loans would currently not help to provide a solution to the Greek government’s liquidity 
problems as the European assistance loans 
will not mature in the coming years and the associated interest costs are particularly low 
and, for the most part, deferred for 10 
years. By cutting interest rates, granting de-
ferrals and extending maturities, the other 
countries providing assistance have already 
granted substantial debt relief, even if these concessions have not been labelled as debt forgiveness.
3
Consolidation efforts likely to stall in euro- area countries with signifi  cant budgetary problems
According to the European Commission’s forecast, the defi  cit ratio will fall up until 
2016 not only in the euro area as a whole 
but also in most of the member states. 
3 In 2012, private creditors agreed to a haircut on their 
claims together with maturity extensions and low in-
terest rate charges.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
71

However, seven euro- area countries (in 
addition to Greece4) are still subject to an 
excessive defi  cit procedure (EDP). For Ire-land, Slovenia and Portugal, the deadline for correcting the excessive defi  cit will ex-
pire this year. While the European Commis-sion’s forecast expects both Ireland and Slo-venia to achieve a defi  cit ratio of just under 
3% by the deadline, Portugal could just 
miss this target. Cyprus is set to correct its 
excessive defi  cit on time in 2016, while 
Spain – which also has a 2016 deadline – is 
expected to miss the target by a substantial 
margin. However, there is still scope for ad-
ditional consolidation measures, particularly 
for 2016, and the Spanish government 
plans to meet the deadline. France’s dead-
line for correcting its excessive defi  cit is 
2017 and thus beyond the European Com-
mission’s forecast horizon.5 On an average 
of the years 2015 and 2016, none of the 
countries subject to an EDP is expected to 
record a suitably ambitious improvement in 
its general government fi  scal balance in structural terms, ie net of cyclical effects and one- off measures. In fact, the Euro-pean Commission even forecasts a struc-tural deterioration for Cyprus, Portugal, Spain and Slovenia if no additional meas-
ures are taken. Overall, the forecast reduc-
tion in the defi  cit ratios of the countries 
subject to an EDP is in all cases largely at-
tributable to the improving macroeconomic situation and lower interest rates. This is not 
consistent with the objective of the exces-
sive defi  cit procedure, which is namely to make tangible progress towards achieving 
sound public fi  nances.
For those countries that are not subject to 
an excessive defi  cit procedure, the consoli-
dation process has generally also not yet 
been completed. Only three of these coun-
tries (Germany, Luxembourg and the Neth-
erlands) met the minimum requirement of a 
structurally (close- to-) balance budget in 2014 and will also comply with the require-
ment up to the end of the forecast horizon. The other countries should, in principle, re-duce their structural defi  cit by 0.5% of GDP 
each year (although, in individual cases, a higher or lower amount of improvement can be requested on account of the eco-
nomic situation, for example). None of the countries concerned is expected to fulfi  l the fundamental requirement on an average of the years 2015 and 2016, and in four of the countries the structural defi  cit is actually set 
to worsen (Austria, Estonia, Finland6 and 
Latvia). In countries with very high debt 
 ratios – as is the case in Italy and Belgium, for example – the delay in moving towards 
the medium- term budgetary objective is 
particularly problematic.
Since the beginning of the fi  nancial and economic crisis, almost all countries have 
recorded sustained and considerable rises in their debt ratios over many years. A reversal of this trend is envisaged from 2016 at the latest. Only in Finland, Spain and France are 
the debt ratios expected to continue to climb thereafter in the absence of addi-
tional measures. Despite a forecast decline, 
the second highest debt ratio for 2016  (after Greece) is recorded for Italy (over 
130%). Furthermore, debt levels are also ex-
pected to exceed GDP in Portugal, Cyprus, 
4 Greece is disregarded in the following analysis re-
garding the key indicators of the Stability and Growth 
Pact.
5 In addition to complying with the defi  cit criterion, 
member states with a debt ratio of more than 60% 
must rapidly bring it down to this threshold. Malta is 
subject to an excessive defi  cit procedure because it 
failed to comply with the debt criterion. The deadline for correcting this expired in 2014. The European Com-mission has recommended that the European Council close the procedure.
6 On 13 May 2015, the European Commission pub-
lished a report pursuant to Article 126.3 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which con-
cludes that neither the defi  cit criterion nor the debt criterion can be deemed to be fulfi  lled. It is likely to 
recommend that the European Council open an exces-sive defi  cit procedure against Finland.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
72

Belgium, Ireland and Spain. Only Estonia, 
Luxembourg, Lithuania, Latvia and Slovakia 
are set to comply with the 60% reference 
value in 2016. The Finnish debt ratio is ex-
pected to exceed the reference value from 
2015.
European Commission further weakens 
binding force of fi  scal rules
In the coming weeks, on the basis of guide-
lines provided by the European Commis-
sion, the European Council will have to as-
sess whether the requirements of the Stabil-
ity and Growth Pact have been complied 
with. In a departure from the normal proce-dure, decisions for France, Italy and Belgium 
were already made in March. For France it 
was evident that it would fall well short of 
meeting the 2015 deadline initially set for correcting its defi  cit. Nevertheless, various mitigating circumstances for missing the 
target were acknowledged. This justifi  ed a 
renewed extension of the deadline, without 
the procedure being stepped up or sanc-tions being considered. France now has un-til 2017 to bring its defi  cit ratio back down 
below 3%. The granting of a two- year ex-
tension, instead of the one year “generally” 
envisaged by the regulations, was grounded, inter alia,  on the structural re-
forms that the French government has committed to. Overall, this gives the im-
pression that the recommendations are in-
creasingly being adapted to government 
plans, rather than vice versa. For Italy and 
Belgium, the need to initiate a procedure was considered as these countries fall far short of the agreed quantitative require-ments for compliance with the debt crite-
rion (suffi   ciently diminishing debt ratio). But 
for these countries, too, various mitigating 
circumstances were taken into account. In 
particular, it was argued that the goals are 
too ambitious and compliance therewith would have undesirable economic reper-
cussions. In view of this, it was decided that 
expected future convergence with the me-
dium- term budgetary objective of the pre-
ventive arm (improvement of the structural Forecast for the public fi  nances of the euro-area countries
 
CountryEuropean Commission spring forecast, May 2015 Deadline for 
 correcting 
excessive 
defi  cit Budget balance as a percentage of GDP Government debt as a percentage of GDP
2014 2015 2016 2014 2015 2016
Austria – 2.4 – 2.0 – 2.0 84.5 87.0 85.9 –
Belgium – 3.3 – 2.6 – 2.4 106.5 106.5 106.4 –
Cyprus – 8.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 107.5 106.7 108.4 2016
Estonia 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 10.6 10.3 9.8 –
Finland – 3.2 – 3.3 – 3.2 59.3 62.6 64.8 –
France – 4.0 – 3.8 – 3.5 95.0 96.4 97.0 2017
Germany 0.7 0.6 0.5 74.7 71.5 68.2 –
Greece – 3.6 – 2.1 – 2.2 177.1 180.2 173.5 2016
Ireland – 4.1 – 2.8 – 2.9 109.7 107.1 103.8 2015
Italy – 3.0 – 2.6 – 2.0 132.1 133.1 130.6 –
Latvia – 1.4 – 1.4 – 1.6 40.0 37.3 40.4 –
Lithuania – 0.7 – 1.5 – 0.9 40.9 41.7 37.4 –
Luxembourg 0.6 0.0 0.3 23.6 24.9 25.3 –
Malta – 2.1 – 1.8 – 1.5 68.1 67.2 65.4 2014
Netherlands – 2.3 – 1.7 – 1.2 68.8 69.9 68.9 –
Portugal – 4.5 – 3.1 – 2.8 130.2 124.4 123.0 2015
Slovakia – 2.9 – 2.7 – 2.5 53.6 53.4 53.5 –
Slovenia – 4.9 – 2.9 – 2.8 80.9 81.5 81.7 2015
Spain – 5.8 – 4.5 – 3.5 97.7 100.4 101.4 2016
Euro area – 2.4 – 2.0 – 1.7 94.2 94.0 92.5 –
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
73

balance) would be taken as the gauge for 
assessing compliance with the debt crite-
rion. The Commission ruled that the targets 
of the preventive arm are not being missed to a signifi  cant extent and that the debt cri-
terion as a whole is therefore deemed to 
have been broadly complied with. In Italy’s case, this was chiefl  y facilitated by the fact 
that the European Commission had signifi  -
cantly lowered the requirement regarding 
the preventive arm shortly beforehand. Fur-thermore, in the case of both Belgium and Italy, the Commission likewise took account 
inter alia of planned structural reforms as relevant factors, thereby ensuring that a procedure does not need to be opened. 
The reform of the Stability and Growth Pact was actually intended to reinforce the debt 
criterion in order to encourage rapid debt 
reduction. However, the European Commis-
sion’s interpretation looks set to largely 
counteract that intention.
The recent decisions and decision- making 
processes once again demonstrate that the fi  scal framework has in many respects been shaped and interpreted so elastically that a 
reliable and transparent binding force is achieved in neither the preventive nor the 
corrective arm of the Stability and Growth 
Pact. Owing to the growing complexity of 
the budgetary rules, frequent changes and 
numerous, open- ended exceptions, it is now barely possible to apply it in a trans-parent manner. Determining whether or not targets have been missed and proce-dures need to be stepped up, and thus whether sanctions might have to be im-
posed, is often no longer rule- based in the 
strict sense but is above all the result of 
ad hoc considerations and negotiations. It 
remains to be seen whether the recently announced assessment of the European 
Council’s Legal Service has an impact. This 
assessment fi  nds that several aspects of the “fl  exibility” in the Stability and Growth Pact presented by the European Commission are 
not backed up by the regulations. This could result in the decision- makers being 
less generous, at least in terms of their lib-
eral consideration of investment spending 
and structural reforms that are only at the 
planning stage. However, irrespective of 
this, there remains large scope for ad hoc  
decisions, with the European Commission’s 
assessments playing a key role. There are increasing signs of a changeover from a 
rule- based to an institution- based approach 
in which the fi  scal framework is not defi  ned 
by rules but instead by the European Com-
mission on a discretionary basis. With 
 regard to reliably ensuring sound public 
 fi  nances in the euro area as a key prerequis-
ite for pursuing a stability- oriented monet-
ary policy, the recent developments in con-
nection with the fi  scal rules give cause for 
concern.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
74

ment) only from 2020 onwards, it would be 
advisable to conclude consolidation as quickly 
as possible and factor in a certain level of struc -
tural surpluses.
When national budgetary rules were reformed 
in the crisis year of 2009, this spelt a regime 
change for fiscal policy. A structurally balanced 
government budget was to become the norm 
and cyclical fluctuations were, as a rule, to be 
cushioned by automatic stabilisers. The debt 
brake does not stand in the way of important 
reforms or investment; instead, it provides an 
essential foundation by ensuring sustainable 
public finances. Significant progress has been 
made in consolidating public finances since 
2011. It would be a major step backwards if 
attempts were made to circumvent budgetary 
rules in order to create new scope for borrow -
ing – for instance, for government investment.
Many have criticised the level of government 
investment in Germany as being too low. At 
the same time, Germany’s public infrastructure 
is still deemed very good in international 
terms.6 There is currently much debate as to 
how much additional expenditure is required. 
In any case, the aim should be to efficiently 
eliminate any shortcomings and bottlenecks in 
the provision of infrastructure rather than 
achieving certain investment ratios or setting 
an economic stimulus in order, for instance, to 
help boost demand in other euro- area coun -
tries or lower the current account surplus.7 
 After all, the planned moderate structural sur -
pluses in Germany appear to be wholly appro -
priate in view of both structural and cyclical 
conditions. The impact of additional investment 
on other countries is likely to be small, and any 
plans to fine- tune the economic cycle in other 
economies using German public finances hold 
little promise of success. In this regard, any ad -
ditional need for investment in Germany should 
be covered without allowing the country’s 
 financial position to deteriorate, which is all the 
more the case as most of it would probably be 
to cover a need for replacement investment 
anyway. In addition, it is possible to improve public infrastructure without incurring addi -
tional spending to the extent that efficiency 
reserves that have not yet been depleted can 
be tapped, in particular in the area of govern -
ment investment. In general, it would also 
make sense to spread potential additional pro -
jects over a number of years.
An expert commission appointed by the Fed -
eral Minister for Economic Affairs recently 
called, on the one hand, for an expansion of 
government investment.8 On the other hand, it 
also emphasised that the way in which projects 
are selected and carried out should be im -
proved. It claims that the manner in which 
state government establishments currently 
manage central government’s orders for the 
construction of motorways is fraught with 
flawed incentives. Proposals aimed at improv -
ing efficiency − for example, by centralising the 
provision of expertise − are to be welcomed. 
For instance, a central contact point could 
 advise local and, where appropriate, state gov -
ernments on planning, cost management, 
drawing up contracts and financing issues. En -
suring that cost- benefit calculations are better 
founded and sufficiently up to date could im -
prove which projects are actually selected. 
 Creating a national motorway association (Bun-
desfernstraßengesellschaft),  as proposed in the 
report, could also help further progress. How -
ever, it would be problematic if this were to 
give rise to a shadow budget enabling borrow -
ing outside the debt brake. Greater involve -
ment of the private sector could also be con -
sidered, as has been recommended on a num -
ber of occasions, if clear cost benefits could be 
reaped in specific, individual cases. But it must 
be ensured that the risks are actually trans -
ferred to the private sector rather than creating Budgetary rules 
do not put brake on invest -
ment but rather create basis  
for growth- enhancing  policy
Cover investment 
needs without weakening budgetary rules or easing fiscal stanceApproaches to stepping up 
government in-
vestment activity
6 For instance, according to the Global Competitiveness 
Report 2014-2015 published by the World Economic 
 Forum, Germany occupies seventh place and has a loca -
tional advantage in this regard.
7 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The German economy’s 
current account surplus, Annual Report 2013, pp 39-60, 
particularly pp 56-60.
8 Expert Commission, Increasing Investment in Germany, 
Report Prepared on Behalf of the Federal Minister for Eco -
nomic Affairs and Energy, April 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
75

subsidised forms of capital investment at the 
government’s expense.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue9 came to 
5% in the first quarter of 2015 (see the chart 
and table on page 77). This was buoyed by on -
going favourable developments in gross wages 
and salaries, which have a major influence on 
tax revenue. Combined with tax progressivity, 
this resulted in dynamic growth in wage tax 
revenue. Child benefit – which is deducted 
from revenue – increased only slowly but still 
pushed up the growth rate. By contrast, 
changes in tax legislation (above all, the ongo -
ing increases of tax exemption due to pension 
expenditure) had a slight dampening effect. 
Growth in profit- related taxes was below aver -
age on balance, at 3%. This growth was driven 
solely by assessed income tax, whereas revenue 
from corporation tax as well as non- assessed 
taxes on earnings fell slightly, while receipts 
from withholding tax on interest income and 
capital gains continued to decrease considera -
bly. At 2½%, growth in turnover tax revenue 
– which is highly volatile – slowed somewhat 
on the year compared with annual growth in 
2014. By contrast, at 4½%, receipts from other 
consumption taxes were up significantly. How -
ever, this is likely to be primarily attributable to 
one- off effects, such as revenue from motor 
vehicle taxes returning to normal following a 
temporary dampening in the first quarter of 
2014 due to the transfer of receipts to central 
government, as well as a subsequent payment 
of nuclear fuel tax in January following a ruling 
by the Federal Fiscal Court at the end of 2014.
The latest official tax estimate expects overall 
revenue growth (including local government 
taxes) to be sound (at 3½%) for 2015 as a 
whole. With respect to the major tax assess -ment bases, gross wages and salaries are to 
rise roughly in line with nominal GDP (around 
4%), whereas growth in nominal private con -
sumption is set to be somewhat weaker.10 
 Fiscal drag11 will give revenue an extra boost, 
while tax shortfalls are expected as a result of 
court rulings. By contrast, on balance, tax 
 revenue is forecast to fall only somewhat as a 
result of legislative changes.12
Revenue growth of between 3½% and 4% is 
also expected for subsequent years up to 2019. 
Developments are mainly being driven by mac -
roeconomic growth forecasts and fiscal drag. 
Legislative changes that have already been ap -
proved are expected to curb this expansion on 
balance. The tax ratio (as defined in the gov -
ernment’s financial statistics) is thus projected 
to increase slightly to 22.4% by the end of the 
forecast period (2014: 22.2%).
Compared with the November 2014 forecast, 
the budgeted figures have been revised up -
wards by €6½ billion for 2015 and around €8 
billion for each of the years thereafter. This is 
mainly due to more favourable macroeconomic 
estimates for the current year as well as a Marked rise 
in tax revenue in 2015 Q1
Revenue growth 
expected to be sound for 2015 as a wholeRevenue growth of a similar size expected in sub-sequent years
Revenue 
 expectations up overall
9 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
10 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection. For 2015, real GDP growth is 
expected to be 1.8% and nominal growth 3.8% (Novem -
ber: +1.3% and +3.2%, respectively). GDP growth for 2016 
is forecast to be 1.8% in real terms and 3.3% in nominal 
terms (November: +1.3% and +3.1%, respectively). In the 
medium term, nominal growth of around 3% per annum is 
still forecast.
11 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
overall (positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income 
taxation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific 
excise duties are largely independent of prices.
12 The working party’s estimate is based on current tax 
legislation and thus does not include the planned rise in 
the basic income tax allowance, the child income tax 
 allowance and the increase in child benefits from 2015 and 
2016. By contrast, the gradual changeover to downstream 
taxation of pensions, in particular, is still causing moderate 
shortfalls. Expected tax refunds, notably following rulings 
by the Federal Fiscal Court and the European Court of Jus -
tice on the reduction of intermediaries’ commission when 
granting price discounts and the corresponding adjustment 
of input tax paid by beneficiaries as well as the taxation of 
dividends paid to EU/EEA companies, are slowing revenue 
growth.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
76

better- than- anticipated annual result for 2014 
compared with the November forecast.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a deficit of €7 
billion in the first quarter of 2015 compared 
with a deficit of €10½ billion one year previ -
ously. Revenue rose sharply by 6½% (€4½ bil -
lion), with tax revenue climbing by 5% and 
thus making the largest single contribution 
(€3 billion). Additional revenue from asset sales 
(€1 billion) and the extended share of the cen -
tral government core budget in the Bundes -
bank’s profit distribution (€½ billion) also had a 
perceptible impact. On the expenditure side, 
there was a more moderate increase of 1½% 
(€1 billion) overall. However, given that this 
growth was broadly distributed across almost 
all expenditure categories, the increase would 
have been twice as high if it had not been for 
a further significant decline in interest expend -
iture by €1½ billion.
As there were already indications in the first 
few months of the year that the goal of a bal -
anced budget in 2015 would probably be ex -
ceeded by a considerable margin, the Federal 
Cabinet adopted the draft of a supplementary 
central government budget for 2015 in mid-  
March. Most notably, this envisages transfers 
of €3½ billion to a central government special 
fund for promoting investment expenditure by 
financially weak local authorities. However, 
 irrespective of any need in this regard, the fed -
eral states would initially be called upon in 
 addition to the local authorities in question to 
bring about targeted financial relief. If – as is 
now planned – central government funds are 
made available to local government, the use 
thereof is subject to relatively tight restrictions, 
as central government is only allowed to pro -
vide investment grants for areas that fall under 
its legislative authority. This could therefore 
 result in funds currently required for particularly 
urgent matters not being covered by this meas -
ure.13In addition to the financial resources for the 
special fund, the draft supplementary budget 
envisages, in particular, €½ billion higher pay -Marked decline 
in deficit at start 
of year thanks to  
strong revenue growth and  further easing of 
interest expend-iture burden
Draft 2015 
 supplementary budget contains additional  burdens for  municipal invest -
ment fund, …
… but still no net borrowingTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 201501234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 2015
1,2 2014 2015
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total
2 140.0 146.9 +  4.9 + 3.7
of which
Wage tax 39.0 41.6 +  6.5 + 6.1
Profi  t-related taxes 3 23.9 24.7 +  3.2 + 2.5
Assessed income 
tax 11.8 13.1 + 11.2 + 6.4
Corporation tax 5.6 5.4 –  3.1 + 3.8
Investment 
 income tax 4 6.5 6.1 –  6.0 – 5.8
Turnover taxes 5 50.5 51.9 +  2.6 + 2.5
Energy tax 4.7 4.7 +  0.6 + 1.9
Tobacco tax 2.5 2.2 – 10.3 – 2.9
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2015. 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ 
grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4  With-
holding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed 
taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
13 For instance, the federal states are apparently already 
calling for an easing of the restriction in funding for 
schools, for example, where funds are limited to renova -
tion work to improve energy efficiency.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
77

ments to the post office pension fund. As -
signed turnover tax revenue of €½ billion – to 
compensate state and local government for the 
higher burdens arising from the elevated num -
ber of asylum seekers – is to be counter financed 
by reclaiming financial resources from the as -
sistance fund (flood assistance fund) set up in 
the summer of 2013 to tackle damage caused 
by flooding. In terms of the remaining tax rev -
enue, additional receipts of €3 billion are fore -
cast compared with the previous budget esti -
mate in the light of improved macroeconomic 
conditions and more favourable revenue devel -
opments. A further €½ billion boost in income 
– which has already been received – comes in 
the form of the Bundesbank’s profit distribu -
tion, which was absorbed in its entirety on a 
one- off basis and thus exceeded the normal 
statutory upper limit of €2½ billion. Further -
more, on the expenditure side, €½ billion in 
relief is envisaged owing to lower interest rate 
levels. On balance, central government is still 
expected to record a balanced budget with no net borrowing. However, in structural terms, 
based on the current estimation of potential 
output and taking into account the expected 
balances of certain off- budget entities, this 
nevertheless constitutes a €3½ billion deterio -
ration in the budgetary position in year- on- year 
terms.14
All in all, as things stand, the planned figures 
appear to be rather cautious. In accordance 
with the latest tax estimate, if the additionally 
planned income tax allowances and child ben -
efit are also taken into account, revenue short -
falls of €1 billion would initially have to be off -
set. Conversely, however, labour market- related 
spending could be one particular area to fall 
short of current estimates, and further interest 
expenditure relief seems feasible given the ex -
tremely low interest rate level. Last but not 
least, the frequency auction due to start at the 
end of May – for which the total minimum bids 
for all of the frequency packages already 
amount to €1½ billion – could generate sub -
stantial additional revenue. Although this 
should, as a rule, be spent on enhancing broad -
band provision, it may take longer for some of 
the funds to be spent; these will be released in 
later years. Risks to the budget plans in con -However,  
year- on- year 
 deterioration in structural b alance
Result could 
once again be more favourable than currently envisaged, but risks also existCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–25–20–15–10–50
20142013Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20132015
20152014€ billion
14 A balanced structural balance pursuant to the debt 
brake is recorded in the draft supplementary budget, 
whereas the original budget had envisaged a surplus of 
0.1% of GDP . The deterioration reflects the fact that 
– based on an unchanged, unadjusted balance – cyclical 
factors are now expected to have a less negative impact in 
view of the upward revision of GDP . Under the debt brake 
rules, if a revision of GDP takes place after final approval of 
the budget, the cyclical adjustment procedure is not carried 
out again from scratch; instead, this revision is classified as 
cyclically induced. By contrast, on the basis of the current 
recalculation – including potential output – using the Fed -
eral Government’s procedure, there would still be a rela -
tively high cyclical burden of €3½ billion. Furthermore, off- 
budget entities are not taken into account consistently in 
the structural balance for the debt brake recorded in the 
draft supplementary budget. Thus, on the one hand, the 
sizeable deficit of the flood assistance fund – which should 
be included and is listed in the borrowing plan – is not 
taken into account (although reclaiming financial resources 
from the fund results in an improvement in central govern -
ment’s structural balance). On the other hand, however, 
the high surplus of the new municipal investment fund 
(which is due to advance payments) is also not included 
(although the resulting burden in the central government 
budget worsens the figure recorded for the structural bal -
ance).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
78

nection with macroeconomic developments 
and the European sovereign debt crisis remain.
Along with the draft supplementary budget, 
the Federal Cabinet also adopted the bench -
mark figures for both the 2016 budget and the 
financial plan up to 2019. The goal of a bal -
anced central government budget was main -
tained. However, the now more favourable 
macroeconomic projection and the significantly 
lower interest rate expectations mean that the 
budgetary course has been eased considerably. 
Compared with the summer 2014 plan, the es -
timates for annual interest expenditure, in par -
ticular, have been lowered by up to €9½ bil -
lion. Furthermore, among other things, an in -
vestment programme totalling €10 billion be -
tween 2016 and 2018 was already announced 
in November 2014. A more in- depth analysis of 
the medium- term budgetary policy of central 
government must be postponed until the Fed -
eral Cabinet decision scheduled for the start of 
July, which will contain important more  detailed 
information. Nevertheless, given the assumed 
very favourable underlying conditions up to 
2019, it seems wholly appropriate to factor in 
surpluses. Looming demographic burdens and 
general budgetary risks are indicators that any 
relief compared with previous budget estimates 
should not be used up in its entirety. However, 
during periods with stable surpluses, it is also 
advisable – not least following the  recent ex -
penditure increases – for additional budgetary 
leeway to be earmarked to a greater extent for 
cuts in taxes and social contributions. Along -
side the compensation for cold progression, 
which was recently announced by the Federal 
Finance Minister for 2014 and 2015, it would 
also be worth considering reducing the solidar -
ity surcharge.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks) recorded a surplus of €2½ 
billion in the first quarter of 2015, compared 
with €3 billion one year previously. As was the 
case in 2014, the pension reserves and the 
postal workers’ pension fund recorded moder -
ate surpluses. Furthermore, the ERP special fund and the Energy and Climate Fund – which 
this year has already received an advance cen -
tral government grant that is ultimately in -
tended to offset its deficit – each recorded a 
surplus of €½ billion. The Investment and Re -
payment Fund (which was established in 2009 
to help overcome the severe economic crisis) 
also recorded a surplus of €½ billion. This con -
stitutes a deterioration of €1½ billion in year-  
on- year terms. Whereas the surplus in the first 
quarter of 2014 stemmed from the fund’s share 
of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution, the sur -
plus in the first quarter of 2015 is apparently 
attributable to central government making a 
redemption payment at the closing of the 2014 
budget. The outflows from the flood assistance 
fund also remained moderate at the beginning 
of 2015. However, central government’s plans 
to reclaim €½ billion in connection with the 
asylum compromise, in particular, are likely to 
contribute to more sizeable payments being 
made from the fund during the remainder of 
the year. This will, of course, be set against the 
likewise newly envisaged allocation of re -
sources to the municipal investment fund in the 
amount of €3½ billion. All in all, central gov -
ernment’s off- budget entities are likely to re -
cord a substantial surplus at the end of 2015, 
which is also due to the surpluses that are still 
on the cards for the precautionary reserves.
State government budgets15
State government core budgets recorded a 
deficit of only €½ billion – which was €1½ bil -
lion lower than one year previously – owing to 
robust revenue developments and moderate 
expenditure growth. The rise in revenue by 
4½% (€3½ billion) was almost exclusively due 
to the continued dynamic growth in tax re -
ceipts (+5½%). The increase in expenditure by 
2½% (€2 billion) was driven by transfers to 
public administrations (+9%, or €2 billion). Benchmark 
 figures for 2016 
central govern-ment budget and for financial plan up to 2019 indicate easing of budgetary course
Perceptible 
 surplus for off- 
budget entities at start of 2015 and positive 
 result also on 
the cards for 
year as a wholeGrowth in tax revenue driving improvement in state govern-ment budgets in 2015 Q1
15 The development of local government finances in 2014 
was analysed in greater detail in the short articles in the 
Bundesbank’s April 2015 Monthly Report. These are the 
most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
79

However, other operating expenditure also 
rose significantly (+5½%). Spending on person -
nel recorded moderate growth – despite the 
ongoing impetus from pension benefits – while 
investment expenditure stagnated and the 
downward trend in interest expenditure contin -
ued (-8½%).
Given the now upgraded assessment of macro -
economic developments, as well as extremely 
low interest rates, state government budgets 
could record somewhat better- than- expected 
results in 2015. For example, the latest tax esti -
mate (excluding the local government taxes of 
the city states) for 2015 expects additional rev -
enue totalling €3 billion for state government 
compared with the autumn 2014 estimate. 
Overall, there could thus be an improvement in 
the fiscal balance in 2015 and in the years 
thereafter. Central government’s growing 
 financial support for investment, education 
(above all, the assumption of state govern -
ment’s share of the costs for student grants and loans), research, day care for small children 
and social benefits (for example, for asylum 
seekers) is  ultimately likely to play a role here, 
too, as this also provides relief for state govern -
ment by inter alia  reducing the need for it to 
transfer financial resources to local government 
from its own funds.
Although there is therefore a good chance that 
state government as a whole will comply with 
the debt brake requirements enshrined in the 
German constitution from 2020 onwards, 
some individual federal states still need to sub -
stantially consolidate their finances if they are 
to meet the requirements. All five federal states 
in receipt of consolidation assistance are likely 
to have complied with the agreed deficit reduc -
tion paths in 2014 and still have safety margins. 
Yet the progress towards consolidation seems 
to be stalling in some cases despite the favour -
able setting with very low interest rates. In 
Bremen, for example, the high structural deficit 
rose perceptibly again according to the latest 
consolidation report.16 Looking at the east Ger -
man states, it needs to be borne in mind that 
the currently still substantial special supplemen -
tary central government grants will be gradu -
ally phased out by 2020. Overall, it is still im -
portant for many federal states to ensure that 
they do not let up in their consolidation efforts. 
If the structural budgetary situation in individ -
ual federal states is significantly less favourable 
than in the majority of states, there is a danger 
of tax cuts desired by the majority hampering 
compliance with the debt rule. It does not 
seem logical for federal states with ongoing 
structural deficits to receive supplementary as -
sistance from the German state as a whole as 
part of a federal structure reform – as is occa -
sionally called for – if these states cannot prove 
that they have exhausted their own scope for 
action. Extending the federal states’ tax auton -
omy to a certain extent would enlarge the cor -
responding room for manoeuvre and at the Ongoing favour-
able develop-ments for state government as a whole, …… but some  individual states 
still need to 
 substantially 
consolidate their 
 financesFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015626466687072
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
16 See the report of the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen of 
April 2015 on the implementation of the restructuring pro -
gramme 2012-2016 and the press release of the Bremen 
Senator for Finance of 28 April 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
80

same time appropriately reflect the federal 
states’ own responsibility for budgetary policy, 
which is often emphasised elsewhere.17
Social security funds18
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the first quarter of 2015, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of 
€2½ billion. This constituted a year- on- year de -
terioration of €2 billion. At almost 6%, expend -
iture rose extremely sharply, which was primar -
ily due to benefit increases in connection with 
the pension benefits package (in particular, the 
mothers’ pension and full pension at 63). At 
just under 3%, receipts still recorded a com -
paratively strong increase despite the cut in the 
contribution rate from 18.9% to 18.7%.19 
However, this growth still lagged well behind 
that of expenditure.
In mid-2015, pensions will be raised by 2.1% in 
western Germany and 2.5% in eastern Ger -
many. The revision of the national accounts has 
resulted in the increase being around 1 per -
centage point lower. In particular, the inclusion 
of disabled persons employed at special work -
shops means that gross wages and salaries per 
employee will now be lower. However, the cal -
culation of the pension adjustment rate is not 
modified for such “jumps” caused by revisions. 
Consequently, the average wages for 2014 
(which are now lower) are compared with the 
old value for 2013 (which has not been re -
duced). But as pensions generally stay in line 
with the income subject to contributions of 
persons in the statutory pension insurance 
scheme –  which is not affected by the revi -
sion – a correction, and thus a correspondingly 
higher pension increase, will be made in 2016.
Following a surplus of just over €3 billion in 
2014, a substantial deterioration in the fiscal 
balance culminating in a deficit is on the cards 
for 2015 as a whole. Yet it is unlikely that the reserves will be scaled back to a maximum of 
1.5 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure, as 
is actually envisaged if the contribution rate is 
set in line with the statutory requirements. If 
favourable employment and wage develop -
ments continue, it cannot be ruled out that 
– based on the contribution rate remaining un -High deficit in 
2015 Q1 due to additional  expenditure fol-lowing pension benefits pack-age and cut in  contribution rate
Mid- year 
 pension increase  reduced owing to statistical changeover
Further contribu-
tion rate cut on the cardsFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015789101112
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue 1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 2
17 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of financial 
relations in the German federal system, Monthly Report, 
September 2014, pp 33-52.
18 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long-  term care insurance schemes in 2014 was 
 analysed in the short articles of the March 2015 Monthly 
Report. These are the most recent data available.
19 Viewed in isolation, the cut in the contribution rate 
causes the growth rate to fall by almost 1 percentage 
point.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
81

changed and despite the additional expendi -
ture owing to the pension benefits package 
and the expected sharp pension increase in 
mid-2016 – the upper limit for the financial 
 reserves will still be exceeded at the end of 
2016 as well. In this case, the contribution rate 
would have to be reduced again in 2016 de -
spite the anticipated deficit.
Federal Employment Agency
In the first quarter of 2015, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s deficit halved on the year to just 
under €½ billion. The continued robust growth 
in contributions of just over 4% and the slightly 
sharper rise in refunds of administrative costs 
were accompanied by cuts in expenditure on 
unemployment benefit I (insurance- related 
benefit) and phased retirement subsidies (which 
are gradually being brought to an end), in par -
ticular. Overall, revenue increased by just over 
4½% and expenditure fell by 1%.
The extremely favourable developments on the 
labour market are resulting in lower expendi -
ture on wage substitutes, such as unemploy -
ment benefit I, short- time working benefits or 
insolvency benefit, and facilitating lower  expenditure on active labour market policy 
measures. At the same time, growth in contri -
bution receipts remains high. In view of this, 
the surplus is set to be significantly larger than 
last year (€1½ billion, excluding the civil serv -
ants’ pension fund). If these positive develop -
ments continue, the Federal Employment 
Agency will build up considerable reserves over 
the coming years, which will provide a financial 
buffer for less favourable years. Given the posi -
tive labour market conditions at present, it cer -
tainly seems appropriate to build up reserves. 
Yet, as a rule, the ongoing favourable labour 
market situation should not obscure the fact 
that labour market downturns have a greater 
impact on the Federal Employment Agency’s 
budget than on the finances of the other social 
security funds, therefore resulting in any re -
serves being more rapidly depleted. The current 
labour market situation and the number of 
 recipients of unemployment benefit I would 
need to prove to be the new structural norm 
before any cut in the contribution rate (from 
the current level of 3.0%) were implemented.20Further improve-
ment in Agency’s  
finances in 2015 
Q1 …
… and same 
 expected for 2015 as a whole
20 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
evolution of labour market-  related government expendi -
ture in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2015, pp 13-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2015  
82

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  79•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 1 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2015
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2013          July 7.1 4.1 2.1 2.3 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.2 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 2.9
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.2 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.1 2.4 1.3 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.16 0.29 2.6         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.1 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.5
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.25 0.32 2.2         June 5.4 2.4 1.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 0.08 0.24 2.1
         July 5.6 2.5 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.8 2.7 2.0 2.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.02 0.19 1.7         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct 6.2 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 6.9 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5         Dec 7.9 3.6 3.6 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan 8.9 4.0 3.7 3.8 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 9.1 4.1 4.0 4.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 10.0 4.6 4.6 ... 0.6 0.1 − 3.2 − 0.05 0.03 0.9
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.07 0.00 0.9
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2013          July
+ 20,157 + 21,484 + 14,126 − 8,144 + 12,308 + 4,033 + 6,151 − 221 1.3080 101.6 99.3
         Aug + 9,303 + 12,117 + 40,714 + 1,296 + 5,412 − 4,327 + 36,308 + 2,025 1.3310 102.3 99.8
         Sep + 14,625 + 15,024 + 44,171 + 15,472 + 2,856 + 5,866 + 18,833 + 1,144 1.3348 102.1 99.4
         Oct + 20,279 + 20,689 + 44,573 − 10,999 + 9,053 + 4,660 + 42,675 − 816 1.3635 102.9 100.1
         Nov + 24,324 + 22,137 + 30,485 + 22,278 − 52,332 + 4,990 + 55,713 − 164 1.3493 102.7 99.8         Dec + 34,272 + 17,165 + 108,084 + 29,335 + 15,260 + 3,265 + 58,843 + 1,381 1.3704 103.9 101.0
2014          Jan − 3,559 + 3,433 − 27,994 − 9,476 − 39,897 − 86 + 18,773 + 2,691 1.3610 103.5 100.6
         Feb + 5,157 + 18,780 − 2,100 − 3,129 − 53,050 + 1,808 + 52,713 − 442 1.3659 103.6 100.7         Mar + 21,440 + 21,906 + 74,844 + 15,225 + 43,439 + 3,179 + 12,750 + 253 1.3823 104.7 101.6
         Apr + 12,767 + 19,008 − 3,740 + 9,222 + 28,393 + 5,189 − 46,940 + 397 1.3813 104.6 101.3
         May + 1,275 + 20,284 + 2,430 − 6,153 − 64,840 + 6,701 + 66,245 + 477 1.3732 103.9 100.4         June + 17,983 + 20,288 + 91,164 − 7,464 + 6,998 + 5,007 + 87,073 − 451 1.3592 103.1 99.6
         July + 27,134 + 25,982 + 26,890 + 5,767 + 26,857 + 4,505 − 9,546 − 693 1.3539 102.7 99.1
         Aug + 10,886 + 10,536 + 5,160 − 1,556 + 9,251 + 3,851 − 7,663 + 1,277 1.3316 102.0 98.5         Sep + 27,826 + 24,876 + 49,283 + 18,270 + 56,107 + 10,095 − 33,261 − 1,927 1.2901 100.5 97.0
         Oct + 29,082 + 26,688 + 34,569 + 1,206 + 44,357 + 6,185 − 17,310 + 131 1.2673 99.6 96.1
         Nov + 25,420 + 22,816 + 74,566 + 30,983 + 16,078 + 657 + 26,057 + 791 1.2472 99.6 96.1         Dec + 35,870 + 26,704 − 42,313 − 27,125 + 23,143 + 2,111 − 41,459 + 1,017 1.2331 99.7 96.0
2015          Jan + 8,316 + 10,865 − 20,340 + 5,967 − 32,024 + 5,179 − 658 + 1,196 1.1621 95.9 p 92.4
         Feb + 13,768 + 25,233 + 16,862 + 4,309 + 8,867 + 6,430 − 6,944 + 4,200 1.1350 94.0 p 90.7         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0838 91.4 p 88.2
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0779 90.5 p 87.3
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2012 − 0.8 0.1 0.4 4.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 2.8 4.8
2013 − 0.4 0.3 0.1 1.6 − 1.3 0.3 − 3.9 0.2 − 1.7 4.22014 0.9 1.1 1.6 2.1 − 0.1 0.4 0.8 4.8 − 0.4 2.4
2013          Q4 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.7 − 0.1 0.6 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.9 4.52014          Q1 1.1 1.3 2.6 0.5 0.1 0.7 − 0.5 4.0 − 0.1 2.8
         Q2 0.8 1.0 1.0 2.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.4 7.3 − 0.5 2.3         Q3 0.8 1.0 1.2 2.4 0.0 0.3 2.0 3.5 − 0.4 2.4         Q4 0.9 1.1 1.6 3.0 − 0.1 0.4 1.2 ... − 0.6 2.1
2015          Q1 1.0 ... 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2012 − 2.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 6.3 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.9 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 0.42014 0.8 1.0
r 1.3 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.3 19.9 − 0.6 − 0.9
2013          Q4 1.5 4.0 3.0 2.1 − 2.3 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.6
2014          Q1 1.3 3.3 r 3.0 − 1.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 2.5 11.9 0.6 − 2.0
         Q2 0.8 2.1 r 0.9 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 3.1 21.0 0.0 − 0.2
         Q3 0.6 0.0 r 0.7 3.2 − 1.9 0.0 − 3.2 19.1 − 1.4 − 0.8
         Q4 0.3 − 1.5 r 0.7 5.3 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 27.8 − 1.4 − 0.7
2015          Q1 e 1.5 ... p 0.6 2.6 − 3.7 1.5 p 2.1 p 31.3 − 0.2 1.6
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2012 79.1 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 71.8 70.82013 78.2 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 71.6 72.02014 80.1 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2014          Q1 80.3 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.8 65.9 − 73.6 72.1
         Q2 79.8 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 81.3 67.7 − 73.5 72.0         Q3 80.0 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.5 70.4 − 73.6 71.5         Q4 80.3 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 73.9 73.3
2015          Q1 81.0 79.7 84.8 71.2 78.6 81.9 69.2 − 74.6 71.3
         Q2 81.2 79.8 84.4 70.7 79.1 82.4 67.7 − 76.1 72.2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2012 11.4 7.6 5.4 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.02013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.92014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2014          Oct 11.5 8.6 5.0 6.8 9.0 10.4 26.1 10.6 13.0 10.4
         Nov 11.5 8.6 5.1 6.4 9.0 10.5 25.9 10.4 13.2 10.4         Dec 11.4 8.5 4.8 6.3 8.9 10.5 25.9 10.1 12.7 10.4
2015          Jan 11.3 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.0 10.6 25.6 10.0 12.6 ...
         Feb 11.3 8.5 4.8 5.9 9.1 10.6 25.4 9.9 12.7 ...         Mar 11.3 8.5 4.6 ... 9.1 10.6 ... 9.8 13.0 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.32013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.02014
8 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2014          Nov 0.3 0.1 0.5 0.0 1.1 0.4 − 1.2 0.2 0.3 0.9         Dec − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.3
2015          Jan 
9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.3
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.4 r 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.4 0.1 0.0
         Mar − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 0.0 0.5
         Apr e 0.0 ... 0.3 ... ... ... − 1.8 ... e 0.0 0.6
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2012 − 3.6 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 4.8 − 8.7 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 2.9 − 2.9 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 4.1 − 12.3 − 5.8 − 2.9 − 0.7
2014 − 2.4 − 3.2 0.7 0.6 − 3.2 − 4.0 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 3.0 − 1.4
 
General government debt 10
 
2012 89.1 103.8 79.3 9.7 52.9 89.6 156.9 121.7 123.1 40.9
2013 90.9 104.4 77.1 10.1 55.8 92.3 175.0 123.2 128.5 38.2
2014 91.9 106.5 74.7 10.6 59.3 95.0 177.1 109.7 132.1 40.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. justed data. 3  ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for wor-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual king-day variations. 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- January, April, July and October. 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
3.8 − 0.2 2.5 − 1.6 0.9 − 4.0 1.6 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 2.4 2012
3.3 2.0 2.7 − 0.7 0.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 20132.9 ... 3.5 0.9 0.3 0.9 2.4 2.6 1.4 − 2.3 2014
3.3 1.0 2.5 1.0 0.9 0.8 2.0 2.1 − 0.1 − 4.9 2013          Q4
3.3 2.5 3.2 0.0 0.5 0.7 2.3 2.1 0.7 − 3.4 2014          Q1
3.4 1.3 3.3 1.1 0.6 0.8 2.6 2.9 1.1 − 1.7          Q2
2.7 4.0 3.7 1.0 0.3 1.6 2.4 3.2 1.7 − 2.1          Q3
2.5 ... 4.0 1.4 − 0.1 0.5 2.4 2.4 2.1 − 2.0          Q4
... ... ... ... 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... 2015          Q1
 
Industrial production1,4
 
3.7 − 6.0 5.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 8.0 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.6 2012
3.3 − 4.4 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 5.2 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 12.5 20130.2 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 0.8 1.8 3.7 1.3 1.3 − 0.8 2014
− 2.4 3.8 − 10.1 0.8 0.6 3.8 10.9 1.3 1.0 − 9.8 2013          Q4
− 6.4 8.2 − 7.7 − 6.9 2.1 3.2 6.8 − 0.3 1.6 − 1.7 2014          Q1
4.7 6.5 − 8.8 − 1.6 0.9 2.6 5.4 1.2 2.3 − 0.4          Q2
− 0.6 7.0 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 1.8 2.3 2.3 0.8 0.3          Q3
3.5 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.3 0.6 − 0.2 0.7 1.8 0.5 − 1.5          Q4
3.7
p 3.5 p 3.4 p 3.7 ... 0.2 ... p 5.2 1.7 ... 2015          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
72.1 76.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 2012
73.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 201374.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 54.6 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
74.2 67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
75.1 64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 46.8 79.5 74.1 54.1          Q2
75.1 65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 56.5 80.8 75.3 54.5          Q3
75.1 66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 57.3 81.2 76.9 54.5          Q4
74.4 66.4 80.5 80.6 84.1 78.0 75.0 85.1 78.1 54.9 2015          Q1
74.4 65.6 78.7 82.3 84.2 77.6 79.4 83.4 77.2 60.3          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
13.4 5.1 6.3 5.8 4.9 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 201211.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 201310.7 5.9 5.9 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
10.3 5.9 6.0 7.1 5.7 13.5 12.7 9.5 23.9 16.3 2014          Oct 
10.1 5.8 6.1 7.1 5.7 13.5 12.6 9.5 23.7 16.5          Nov 
10.0 5.8 6.1 7.2 5.6 13.6 12.4 9.4 23.6 16.3          Dec 
9.9 5.8 6.0 7.2 5.4 13.8 12.4 9.4 23.3 16.1 2015          Jan 
10.0 5.8 5.9 7.1 5.4 13.6 12.3 9.4 23.1 16.1          Feb 
9.5 5.7 5.8 7.0 5.6 13.5 12.2 9.3 23.0 16.0          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.2 2.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 20121.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 0.0 2014          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.9 0.4 − 0.1 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.0          Dec 
− 1.4 − 1.1 0.8 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 0.7 2015          Jan 
− 1.5 − 0.3 0.6 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8          Feb 
− 1.1 0.1 0.5 − 0.3
p 0.9 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 1.4          Mar 
− 0.6 0.0 1.4 0.0 ... ... ... − 0.7 ... ...          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 3.1 0.1 − 3.6 − 4.0 − 2.2 − 5.6 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 10.3 − 5.8 2012
− 2.6 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 2.6 − 14.9 − 6.8 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 0.6 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.9 − 4.9 − 5.8 − 8.8 2014
 
General government debt 10
 
39.8 21.9 67.4 66.5 81.5 125.8 52.1 53.7 84.4 79.5 201238.8 24.0 69.2 68.6 80.9 129.7 54.6 70.3 92.1 102.2 201340.9 23.6 68.0 68.8 84.5 130.2 53.6 80.9 97.7 107.5 2014
seasonally adjusted. 7  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation 10  As a percentage of GDP (based on ESA 2010); Euro-area aggregate: European
based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. Central Bank, member states (Maastricht Treaty definition): European Commission. 
8  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 9  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards.

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Aug − 53.7 − 35.9 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.3 − 15.8 − 50.1 − 8.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 13.7 12.0
         Sep 3.2 19.3 − 0.6 − 16.1 − 16.3 23.8 − 31.6 − 55.4 − 8.6 − 4.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 1.0
         Oct − 43.1 − 61.4 − 26.5 18.2 5.8 34.1 65.3 31.3 8.4 2.0 − 0.5 15.3 − 8.4
         Nov − 18.9 7.6 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.2 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.4         Dec − 182.0 −107.0 − 38.6 − 75.0 − 73.1 78.0 − 85.8 − 163.8 − 11.4 − 8.9 − 0.5 − 9.8 7.7
2014          Jan 43.5 − 18.9 9.5 62.4 42.6 9.0 125.0 116.0 − 1.1 − 2.7 0.1 − 12.4 13.9
         Feb − 5.1 − 9.2 − 16.4 4.1 12.3 32.5 16.1 − 16.4 − 11.9 − 5.9 0.1 − 11.3 5.2
         Mar 7.7 6.1 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.6 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.4
         Apr − 6.1 − 6.2 − 17.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 64.8 74.2 − 24.9 − 31.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 7.4         May − 25.7 − 36.4 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.6 37.0 − 14.6 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.0         June 9.3 23.6 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.3 − 34.0 − 103.4 − 15.4 − 10.6 − 1.4 − 22.3 18.8
         July − 25.9 − 15.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.2 61.1 34.0 − 6.8 − 12.4 0.6 − 10.3 15.2         Aug − 45.7 − 51.0 − 15.6 5.3 15.9 − 1.3 − 5.8 − 4.5 0.2 − 5.0 1.3 − 5.9 9.8         Sep 34.8 26.2 − 14.5 8.6 9.2 − 25.0 − 17.7 7.3 − 6.0 − 16.5 0.3 − 12.0 22.1
         Oct 5.0 − 24.0 − 9.0 29.0 23.1 10.4 − 4.0 − 14.4 − 37.0 − 13.9 − 0.2 − 26.5 3.6
         Nov 33.7 25.6 5.5 8.1 5.2 60.2 76.5 16.3 − 13.3 1.1 − 0.4 − 13.1 − 0.9
         Dec − 47.6 − 9.5 − 6.0 − 38.1 − 46.2 − 2.4 − 111.5 − 109.1 − 39.4 − 1.0 2.3 − 41.9 1.2
2015          Jan 92.6 16.8 1.2 75.9 54.1 − 20.3 191.5 211.9 − 17.8 − 17.7 0.6 − 9.4 8.7
         Feb 4.8 18.4 0.9 − 13.6 − 3.8 − 26.5 − 18.2 8.3 − 18.7 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 8.5 − 5.0
         Mar 74.1 46.8 2.7 27.3 24.2 − 1.3 − 39.8 − 38.5 − 35.0 − 15.5 − 1.2 − 29.9 11.6
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2
         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.5 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.8 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.7 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.9 − 11.4 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 2.8 0.5
         Sep 10.2 6.2 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 2.5 − 3.2 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.5 1.5
         Oct 5.3 − 4.2 − 4.5 9.5 2.4 16.5 10.9 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.1
         Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8
         Dec − 15.6 1.6 5.4 − 17.2 − 10.2 − 5.5 − 33.2 − 27.7 − 17.5 − 7.3 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.2
2015          Jan 28.5 12.9 6.9 15.6 6.7 − 57.8 52.3 110.2 − 1.3 − 3.4 0.0 1.2 0.8
         Feb 9.5 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 − 0.2 − 10.9 − 10.7 2.7 − 1.5 − 1.3 3.2 2.3
         Mar 5.7 9.4 7.8 − 3.7 − 2.1 − 12.8 − 19.0 − 6.2 − 24.0 − 4.5 − 1.3 − 18.3 − 0.0
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 55.7 12.4 − 32.8 27.4 25.4 1.4 24.0 0.5 1.5 4.4 9.5 1.1 2013          Aug 
11.2 58.1 − − 33.8 − 1.3 23.6 − 0.2 23.8 − 19.2 − 5.6 − 8.0 − 26.4 6.5          Sep 
− 28.0 − 5.3 − 15.7 22.0 38.5 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 5.5 1.3 − 12.4          Oct 
18.4 − 11.9 − 28.4 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 3.7 − 1.1 − 4.0          Nov 
− 49.3 − 26.3 − − 17.0 15.2 13.7 17.9 − 4.2 − 0.2 1.7 − 15.5 − 12.8 − 12.9          Dec 
20.4 37.7 − − 4.5 − 39.7 − 36.5 − 13.6 − 23.0 − 15.6 12.5 − 6.9 25.3 − 0.9 2014          Jan 
36.9 − 13.6 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.1 − 0.8 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.3 3.0 − 12.3 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 12.8 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 6.8 − 26.8 27.9 38.2 5.3 32.9 − 7.9 − 2.4 − 8.9 5.4 − 11.9          Apr 
33.1 − 50.1 − 63.8 57.8 54.9 7.1 47.8 1.0 1.9 − 13.9 − 4.1 8.6          May
26.4 51.1 − 16.6 23.1 44.4 6.4 38.0 − 19.4 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.4          June
− 23.1 2.4 − 28.8 15.0 10.3 9.4 0.9 6.4 − 1.6 2.7 16.9 − 7.3          July
− 46.4 − 48.2 − 47.5 40.7 34.9 2.0 32.8 3.5 2.4 2.9 3.7 2.4          Aug 
− 6.1 22.8 − − 0.8 14.7 33.4 0.3 33.1 − 12.8 − 5.8 − 18.3 − 11.6 6.0          Sep 
− 6.5 33.8 − 25.2 8.8 38.3 3.5 34.8 − 20.6 − 8.9 25.6 14.6 − 4.3          Oct 
25.9 − 11.4 − 92.7 90.5 100.6 6.2 94.4 − 14.5 4.4 − 2.7 5.6 0.6          Nov 
− 46.7 15.5 − 20.6 30.7 50.9 23.8 27.1 − 17.8 − 2.4 − 13.8 − 17.6 21.3          Dec 
80.2 − 32.9 − 42.8 24.8 52.8 − 2.7 55.5 − 36.3 8.3 23.6 20.3 − 7.7 2015          Jan 
− 30.7 − 14.2 − 41.8 23.2 26.5 4.1 22.4 − 6.2 2.9 36.4 9.0 − 3.2          Feb 
20.4 53.7 − 33.7 57.1 53.5 7.7 45.8 − 4.6 8.2 2.0 − 9.8 − 6.6          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0 2013          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 
2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.5 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.0 3.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.7 0.0 0.6          Sep 
− 1.3 6.5 3.2 0.8 18.2 25.6 − 9.3 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.4          Oct 
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8          Nov 
2.3 12.4 3.6 5.0 − 18.2 − 18.1 4.6 2.2 − 6.2 0.0 − 0.8          Dec 
5.8 − 58.9 2.4 − 0.8 25.0 26.4 − 4.6 − 1.1 3.4 0.0 1.0 2015          Jan 
− 8.7 − 12.3 2.1 0.8 27.6 23.5 2.8 0.9 1.2 0.0 − 0.8          Feb 
2.9 9.7 2.3 2.2 4.4 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 0.2          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnotemonetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Feb 26,517.2 16,640.3 13,243.1 11,048.6 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.8
         Mar 26,567.8 16,698.5 13,262.6 11,044.6 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,025.1
         Apr 26,709.3 16,730.7 13,270.3 11,014.5 1,440.4 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.9
         May 26,371.6 16,728.1 13,249.1 10,992.1 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9         June 25,926.2 16,691.6 13,200.4 10,975.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,675.6 16,573.2 13,113.1 10,895.5 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,648.0 16,161.5 12,802.4 10,649.6 1,360.8 792.1 3,359.1 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,487.3 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,041.7 16,241.9 12,803.5 10,640.4 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,680.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,985.6 16,222.0 12,771.6 10,635.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,671.5 4,092.2
         Mar 24,905.6 16,233.6 12,772.9 10,638.7 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,638.6 4,033.4
         Apr 25,042.7 16,233.3 12,767.4 10,647.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,697.2 4,112.3
         May 25,173.8 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.8 4,186.0
         June 25,131.3 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,751.1 4,170.9
         July 25,303.6 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,853.0 4,274.6
         Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,864.2 16,230.3 12,677.6 10,633.4 1,275.9 768.4 3,552.6 1,132.0 2,420.7 4,978.4 4,655.5
2015          Jan 26,918.0 16,395.9 12,754.6 10,701.3 1,276.2 777.1 3,641.2 1,158.0 2,483.2 5,399.4 5,122.8
         Feb 26,850.0 16,413.6 12,779.3 10,717.7 1,276.3 785.3 3,634.3 1,143.4 2,490.9 5,396.3 5,040.1
         Mar 27,253.2 16,508.7 12,837.9 10,767.7 1,276.9 793.3 3,670.8 1,147.9 2,522.9 5,462.2 5,282.3
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,964.3 3,696.6 2,931.8 2,527.7 143.8 260.3 764.8 364.1 400.6 1,209.1 1,058.7
2015          Jan 6,233.0 3,728.6 2,948.2 2,536.5 142.2 269.5 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,190.9
         Feb 6,176.9 3,739.6 2,954.1 2,542.4 142.3 269.4 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,303.4 1,133.9
         Mar 6,265.3 3,748.9 2,967.1 2,546.7 143.7 276.7 781.8 374.0 407.9 1,308.4 1,208.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
855.8 10,836.5 10,221.3 10,262.6 4,047.8 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7 2013          Feb 
867.5 10,915.5 10,288.3 10,326.1 4,090.3 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.0 10,325.1 10,354.6 4,147.6 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.7 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,900.4 10,351.8 10,401.3 4,310.6 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.1 10,348.6 10,399.4 4,304.6 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.2 10,338.5 10,382.8 4,307.7 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,966.6 10,355.6 10,399.0 4,332.6 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.4 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.1 10,350.7 10,394.3 4,364.8 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.1 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,020.7 10,387.2 10,425.8 4,414.7 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,050.7 10,387.6 10,424.2 4,447.5 1,104.4 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,022.8 10,378.1 10,420.0 4,448.9 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,154.6 10,547.5 10,629.3 4,746.2 1,090.1 399.6 2,218.6 2,087.8 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,295.4 10,588.4 10,687.5 4,833.3 1,074.7 389.1 2,209.0 2,093.2 88.3 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,285.4 10,597.6 10,694.0 4,851.5 1,040.3 389.2 2,231.5 2,094.6 86.9          Feb 
990.9 11,351.3 10,633.3 10,741.7 4,906.2 1,041.5 385.3 2,219.7 2,103.3 85.8          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2 2013          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,139.1 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.7 530.9 76.3          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,154.6 3,044.9 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,061.9 1,562.6 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.9 3,062.6 1,569.1 186.3 31.9 671.9 528.7 74.8          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of 
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 417.3 412.0 465.9 2,806.9 2,151.4
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 440.3 434.2 459.6 2,775.5 2,122.0
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 431.3 423.8 459.1 2,747.3 2,102.0
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 444.5 437.7 455.7 2,721.4 2,076.4         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 466.2 459.7 436.0 2,695.8 2,061.8
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 417.1 411.3 434.8 2,656.5 2,031.2
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.5 287.7 404.8 2,586.5 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.8 279.3 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 306.7 295.2 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 293.9 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.9 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9         Dec 217.9 307.4 138.0 96.9 11.5 39.6 16.3 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.7 2,476.3 1,812.4
2015          Jan 300.3 307.7 135.0 97.3 11.3 39.9 18.7 5.4 321.5 311.3 439.2 2,500.6 1,792.8
         Feb 272.0 319.3 142.3 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.2 5.3 358.0 347.9 448.0 2,495.0 1,776.9         Mar 292.4 317.1 139.8 100.3 12.7 39.1 20.0 5.3 360.5 354.3 438.2 2,480.3 1,752.9
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 14.9 173.5 50.7 78.7 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.4 547.1 280.7
2015          Jan 20.7 168.0 44.7 79.1 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.4 565.5 283.0
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 571.7 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 561.2 276.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
61.7 88.1 2,657.0 3,812.7 2,378.2 − 38.3 4,982.2 − 5,119.4 9,018.5 9,757.0 7,529.6 111.1 2013          Feb 
59.2 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.4 2,414.3 − 58.9 4,955.7 − 5,170.4 9,081.9 9,805.9 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.5 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.7 2,390.1 − 43.1 5,122.2 − 5,239.7 9,128.2 9,855.0 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
62.9 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.3 2,377.8 − 54.6 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,856.7 7,467.3 111.9          May
66.1 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.9 2,335.9 − 63.2 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.1 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.1 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.3 2,365.2 − 59.0 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.6 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,309.4 2,340.0 − 62.6 3,953.9 − 5,444.5 9,249.4 9,852.3 7,310.4 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,474.4 2,384.6 − 44.8 4,108.0 − 5,418.6 9,224.2 9,854.7 7,354.6 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,428.5 2,405.2 − 31.4 4,039.0 − 5,427.9 9,235.1 9,866.7 7,337.6 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,392.4 2,422.0 − 30.0 3,981.3 − 5,461.0 9,273.8 9,879.1 7,344.7 106.1          Mar 
37.8 32.6 2,474.0 3,463.5 2,433.5 − 23.1 4,060.2 − 5,498.8 9,301.1 9,903.1 7,324.3 104.5          Apr 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,477.3 2,426.9 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,556.5 9,362.8 9,970.8 7,313.8 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,375.2 2,456.9 − 50.4 4,138.9 − 5,600.8 9,386.0 9,986.6 7,300.5 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,438.4 2,469.0 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,611.4 9,402.4 10,016.6 7,300.4 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
65.2 42.9 2,368.1 3,562.2 2,466.9 − 45.8 4,557.8 − 5,956.4 9,679.3 10,314.6 7,185.2 112.3          Dec 
59.7 42.1 2,398.9 3,905.9 2,558.6 − 88.5 5,006.2 − 6,037.0 9,742.3 10,401.8 7,300.0 110.6 2015          Jan 
52.4 43.3 2,399.3 3,937.2 2,548.6 − 111.8 4,906.4 − 6,065.2 9,741.9 10,417.0 7,311.7 109.1          Feb 
46.5 43.7 2,390.2 3,969.8 2,576.4 − 67.7 5,153.5 − 6,126.3 9,809.7 10,463.0 7,316.4 109.8          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 − 2013          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.1 7.6 529.4 633.2 535.7 − 614.6 1,648.6 267.9 1,557.8 2,402.1 2,426.7 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.1 8.1 546.3 763.5 553.3 − 673.4 1,780.4 270.3 1,586.4 2,424.4 2,453.9 1,888.0 − 2015          Jan 
10.5 8.0 553.2 755.5 550.7 − 677.9 1,716.1 272.4 1,610.2 2,451.9 2,481.7 1,889.6 −          Feb 
11.1 7.9 542.3 760.1 557.2 − 670.2 1,792.9 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.2 2,488.0 1,879.7 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors
Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2012          Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase programme and the Eurosystem’s securitiesthe Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009, includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following other banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of the Euro-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a system and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the accountingsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0 2012          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June
− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5 2012          Oct + 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
value
of the euro banknotes in circulation are allocated on a monthly basis to the has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 euro
ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the
remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference
likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing
sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation”
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro and “credit institutions’ current account holdings”. banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency
residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2014 Aug                29 2,038.7 334.4 249.5 80.9 168.7 24.2 20.9 20.9 −
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 334.4 249.8 81.4 168.4 25.4 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,003.8 334.4 250.1 81.4 168.7 25.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              19 1,988.2 334.4 247.3 81.1 166.1 26.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              26 2,038.2 334.4 248.4 81.2 167.2 26.5 20.5 20.5 −
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 334.5 263.1 84.5 178.6 27.8 20.6 20.6 −
                              10 2,042.7 334.5 263.0 84.3 178.7 28.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              17 2,029.7 334.5 262.4 84.3 178.1 27.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              24 2,032.8 334.5 263.6 84.3 179.3 26.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              31 2,052.1 334.5 262.9 84.3 178.6 27.9 22.3 22.3 −
         Nov                  7 2,029.7 334.5 261.4 83.9 177.5 28.1 22.1 22.1 −
                              14 2,028.2 334.5 263.2 83.8 179.4 28.0 22.6 22.6 −
                              21 2,033.2 334.5 264.4 83.6 180.8 28.1 19.7 19.7 −
                              28 2,053.9 334.5 264.3 83.6 180.6 28.8 18.7 18.7 −
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 334.5 267.5 83.7 183.8 27.5 18.2 18.2 −
                              12 2,034.7 334.5 266.3 81.2 185.1 27.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              19 2,134.8 334.5 265.9 80.3 185.6 27.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              26 2,150.2 334.5 266.1 80.3 185.8 28.7 19.4 19.4 −
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 343.8 273.5 81.5 192.0 28.7 19.7 19.7 −
                                9 2,168.8 343.9 272.6 81.5 191.2 32.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,158.2 343.9 273.0 81.3 191.7 33.2 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 2,159.8 343.9 274.9 81.3 193.6 32.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 2,182.0 343.9 273.7 81.3 192.5 35.5 18.6 18.6 −
2015 Feb                  6 2,150.2 343.9 273.1 79.9 193.2 34.2 19.8 19.8 −
                              13 2,153.1 343.9 273.8 79.7 194.1 36.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              20 2,167.8 343.9 275.7 79.7 195.9 35.4 20.7 20.7 −
                              27 2,155.8 343.9 278.5 79.4 199.1 33.0 22.0 22.0 −
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 343.9 277.4 79.5 197.9 35.1 22.9 22.9 −
                              13 2,142.1 343.8 279.8 80.8 199.0 35.1 24.3 24.3 −
                              20 2,157.8 343.8 279.3 77.4 201.9 33.1 24.9 24.9 −
                              27 2,250.8 343.8 281.4 77.4 204.1 31.2 24.8 24.8 −
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 384.0 306.2 83.5 222.7 37.4 22.3 22.3 −
                              10 2,349.0 384.0 305.3 83.4 221.9 38.4 22.6 22.6 −
                              17 2,344.1 384.0 303.0 83.4 219.6 39.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              24 2,360.8 384.0 303.6 83.4 220.2 39.1 20.3 20.3 −
         May                  1 2,372.6 384.0 304.5 83.4 221.1 38.4 20.7 20.7 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
517.6 131.8 384.9 − − 0.9 − 62.6 559.9 195.4 364.4 26.7 242.9 2014 Aug                29
492.7 111.2 381.4 − − 0.1 0.0 62.4 560.7 195.4 365.3 26.7 238.1          Sep                  5483.1 110.7 372.3 − − 0.2 − 63.5 561.6 195.1 366.5 26.7 237.5                               12
472.3 105.7 366.3 − − 0.3 − 63.3 561.4 194.5 366.9 26.7 236.0                               19
520.2 90.3 429.6 − − 0.3 0.0 66.3 561.8 194.5 367.3 26.7 233.3                               26
513.9 89.1 424.7 − − 0.1 − 67.0 561.9 194.6 367.2 26.7 238.1          Oct                  3
506.8 84.2 422.4 − − 0.1 − 65.7 561.1 194.0 367.0 26.7 235.1                               10
499.2 82.5 416.6 − − 0.1 − 65.6 559.1 191.2 367.9 26.7 234.3                               17
503.9 92.9 410.8 − − 0.2 0.0 60.8 561.2 192.4 368.8 26.7 234.0                               24
527.6 118.2 408.5 − − 1.0 − 59.8 557.1 192.9 364.2 26.7 233.1                               31
502.8 98.2 404.6 − − 0.0 − 57.7 560.5 195.6 365.0 26.7 235.8          Nov                  7
496.7 98.4 398.2 − − 0.1 − 56.0 563.0 198.0 365.0 26.7 237.3                               14
499.0 102.6 396.2 − − 0.0 0.1 61.0 563.4 199.0 364.5 26.7 236.3                               21513.8 114.3 398.8 − − 0.7 − 58.1 570.2 204.2 366.1 26.7 238.8                               28
491.1 98.0 392.9 − − 0.1 − 58.2 574.8 207.5 367.2 26.7 239.7          Dec                  5
484.2 105.2 378.9 − − 0.1 − 54.6 579.9 211.5 368.4 26.7 241.9                               12
579.4 99.0 480.4 − − 0.0 − 58.0 585.9 215.5 370.4 26.7 237.2                               19
592.5 119.2 473.3 − − 0.0 − 58.7 587.5 216.9 370.6 26.7 236.1                               26
629.7 156.1 473.3 − − 0.3 0.0 60.4 592.4 217.2 375.2 26.7 241.0 2015 Jan                  2585.6 112.3 473.3 − − 0.0 0.0 58.4 593.2 218.9 374.3 26.7 235.4                                 9573.8 114.0 459.1 − − 0.7 − 59.0 594.6 220.7 373.9 26.7 234.5                               16
572.1 125.3 445.3 − − 1.6 − 58.7 599.6 224.7 374.9 26.7 232.5                               23
579.6 163.8 415.6 − − 0.2 − 62.1 603.4 227.1 376.3 26.7 238.4                               30
557.1 151.8 404.8 − − 0.5 0.0 64.6 601.0 226.6 374.4 26.7 229.9 2015 Feb                  6500.2 104.5 395.4 − − 0.2 − 116.3 606.5 229.4 377.1 26.7 229.8                               13
502.5 122.1 379.2 − − 1.2 0.0 121.9 610.1 231.5 378.6 26.7 231.0                               20488.7 165.4 323.0 − − 0.3 0.0 124.9 611.6 234.2 377.4 26.7 226.6                               27
470.9 147.9 323.0 − − 0.0 0.0 121.4 613.9 237.1 376.7 26.7 222.8          Mar                  6
465.3 141.8 323.0 − − 0.5 0.0 120.6 624.0 249.4 374.6 26.7 222.4                               13465.6 142.4 323.0 − − 0.2 − 117.7 643.4 268.8 374.6 26.7 223.3                               20
538.3 120.5 417.6 − − 0.2 0.0 121.3 662.6 287.0 375.6 26.7 220.7                               27
521.2 103.6 417.6 − − 0.1 − 124.1 679.3 300.7 378.6 26.7 232.8          Apr                  2
525.9 108.3 417.6 − − 0.1 − 121.0 690.8 312.7 378.1 26.7 234.3                               10
514.1 96.6 417.6 − − 0.0 − 121.7 701.8 325.0 376.8 26.7 232.5                               17
513.3 95.7 417.6 − − 0.0 − 123.6 717.5 339.8 377.7 26.7 232.6                               24
517.3 108.5 408.7 − − 0.0 − 127.1 724.9 350.8 374.1 25.7 229.9          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1 2013          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 
10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2014 Aug                29 2,038.7 971.3 253.7 222.8 30.9 − − 0.0 4.9 − 93.1 63.8 29.3
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 972.6 220.4 193.7 26.7 − − 0.0 4.9 − 98.5 70.7 27.8
                              12 2,003.8 971.9 200.3 179.2 21.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 111.4 80.0 31.4
                              19 1,988.2 970.4 185.5 162.4 23.1 − − 0.0 4.9 − 115.8 86.0 29.8
                              26 2,038.2 970.0 234.1 209.4 24.7 − − 0.0 4.8 − 116.6 87.1 29.5
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 975.1 237.1 206.8 30.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 100.0 69.5 30.5
                              10 2,042.7 974.3 227.8 204.6 23.1 − − 0.1 4.8 − 103.2 72.6 30.7
                              17 2,029.7 972.9 213.9 184.8 29.0 − − 0.0 4.7 − 108.5 75.6 32.9
                              24 2,032.8 971.1 197.2 170.0 27.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 134.0 102.2 31.8
                              31 2,052.1 975.2 250.0 211.6 38.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 93.1 56.8 36.2
         Nov                  7 2,029.7 977.2 225.2 183.1 42.0 − − 0.0 4.4 − 93.7 58.2 35.5
                              14 2,028.2 976.9 212.7 187.0 25.6 − − 0.0 4.5 − 103.4 67.5 35.9
                              21 2,033.2 975.1 197.6 175.5 22.0 − − 0.0 4.8 − 120.8 84.7 36.1
                              28 2,053.9 981.0 244.1 208.3 35.8 − − 0.0 4.7 − 92.3 56.1 36.2
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 988.9 205.8 177.8 28.0 − − 0.0 4.8 − 107.7 71.0 36.8
                              12 2,034.7 992.6 215.2 188.7 26.5 − − 0.0 4.8 − 92.3 64.8 27.5
                              19 2,134.8 1,003.8 284.0 245.1 38.9 − − − 4.9 − 106.8 80.6 26.3
                              26 2,150.2 1,017.2 300.0 256.4 43.5 − − − 4.9 − 93.0 66.4 26.6
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 1,017.1 364.5 302.8 61.7 − − 0.0 6.2 − 71.9 43.9 28.0
                                9 2,168.8 1,006.9 316.1 242.4 73.7 − − 0.0 6.3 − 84.9 56.9 28.0
                              16 2,158.2 1,001.4 288.9 223.3 65.6 − − 0.0 6.9 − 94.7 64.9 29.8
                              23 2,159.8 1,002.3 243.8 189.3 54.5 − − 0.0 5.7 − 114.7 81.0 33.7
                              30 2,182.0 1,004.2 264.5 227.4 36.6 − − 0.6 5.6 − 111.4 76.3 35.2
2015 Feb                  6 2,150.2 1,004.7 269.5 233.7 35.8 − − 0.0 5.4 − 88.4 55.2 33.2
                              13 2,153.1 1,005.6 272.3 226.9 45.4 − − 0.0 5.4 − 91.8 56.0 35.8
                              20 2,167.8 1,005.0 271.4 229.3 42.0 − − 0.0 5.3 − 110.2 70.5 39.7
                              27 2,155.8 1,007.0 272.0 235.0 37.1 − − − 5.3 − 97.4 52.4 45.0
         Mar                  6 2,134.8 1,009.7 254.0 206.6 47.5 − − − 5.3 − 101.5 56.2 45.3
                              13 2,142.1 1,010.8 268.0 222.7 45.2 − − − 5.2 − 101.5 55.8 45.7
                              20 2,157.8 1,010.9 275.2 229.6 45.7 − − 0.0 5.2 − 118.1 67.2 51.0
                              27 2,250.8 1,012.9 356.6 293.0 63.6 − − − 5.4 − 130.0 81.3 48.6
         Apr                  2 2,334.1 1,024.8 349.2 263.3 85.9 − − 0.0 5.6 − 126.6 68.4 58.2
                              10 2,349.0 1,021.0 364.9 276.8 88.0 − − 0.1 5.6 − 132.1 75.0 57.1
                              17 2,344.1 1,018.1 373.6 282.6 90.6 − − 0.4 5.5 − 126.0 67.3 58.7
                              24 2,360.8 1,018.4 355.6 269.4 86.2 − − 0.0 5.5 − 159.8 101.5 58.3
         May                  1 2,372.6 1,026.6 407.8 300.2 107.6 − − 0.0 5.4 − 112.7 50.3 62.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
41.6 1.1 6.1 6.1 − 53.4 217.1 − 301.4 95.3 2014 Aug                29
43.2 0.9 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.7 − 301.4 95.3          Sep                  5
40.6 0.9 7.6 7.6 − 53.4 216.2 − 301.4 95.3                               12
40.9 1.0 6.2 6.2 − 53.4 213.4 − 301.4 95.3                               19
40.3 0.8 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.5 − 301.4 95.3                               26
41.0 0.9 7.3 7.3 − 55.5 221.1 − 315.5 95.3          Oct                  3
39.1 1.2 7.5 7.5 − 55.5 218.4 − 315.5 95.3                               10
36.8 1.1 5.7 5.7 − 55.5 219.7 − 315.5 95.3                               17
36.2 1.1 6.4 6.4 − 55.5 215.7 − 315.5 95.3                               24
39.1 1.3 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 215.9 − 315.5 95.3                               31
40.5 1.3 5.3 5.3 − 55.5 215.8 − 315.5 95.3          Nov                  7
39.7 1.1 6.7 6.7 − 55.5 216.9 − 315.5 95.3                               14
41.1 1.1 6.9 6.9 − 55.5 219.5 − 315.5 95.3                               21
39.9 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 219.5 − 315.5 94.0                               28
39.7 1.5 6.1 6.1 − 55.5 218.5 − 315.5 94.0          Dec                  5
40.5 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 216.9 − 315.5 94.0                               12
46.9 1.3 7.0 7.0 − 55.5 214.9 − 315.5 94.0                               19
47.2 1.3 6.8 6.8 − 55.5 214.8 − 315.5 94.0                               26
46.9 1.3 5.5 5.5 − 56.4 220.9 − 330.9 94.4 2015 Jan                  2
50.8 2.4 5.0 5.0 − 56.4 214.5 − 330.9 94.7                                 9
60.3 1.7 6.5 6.5 − 56.4 215.9 − 330.9 94.7                               16
86.7 1.6 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 216.0 − 330.9 95.2                               23
84.4 1.5 7.3 7.3 − 56.4 220.4 − 330.9 95.2                               30
75.9 1.5 5.7 5.7 − 56.4 216.4 − 330.9 95.5 2015 Feb                  6
71.5 2.0 7.6 7.6 − 56.4 214.2 − 330.9 95.5                               13
65.4 1.9 7.0 7.0 − 56.4 218.9 − 330.9 95.5                               20
62.5 2.2 6.6 6.6 − 56.4 220.1 − 330.9 95.5                               27
57.5 2.1 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 215.6 − 330.9 95.5          Mar                  6
54.9 1.8 7.2 7.2 − 56.4 210.0 − 330.9 95.5                               13
47.9 2.1 7.0 7.0 − 56.4 208.6 − 330.9 95.5                               20
45.0 1.9 7.1 7.1 − 56.4 208.7 − 330.9 95.9                               27
38.8 1.8 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 219.8 − 403.3 96.0          Apr                  2
39.6 1.9 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 216.1 − 403.3 96.0                               10
37.4 1.9 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 214.1 − 403.3 96.0                               17
36.5 1.8 7.7 7.7 − 60.7 215.5 − 403.3 96.1                               24
34.7 2.3 7.1 7.1 − 60.7 216.0 − 403.3 96.1          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0 2013          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.82008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,021.4 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 490.8 333.9 156.9 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2013          June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4         Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,021.4 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 490.8 333.9 156.9 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.4 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.8 15.4 2,105.7 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 523.3 363.3 160.0 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.6 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.8 15.4 2,094.1 1,578.2 1,195.8 382.4 516.0 362.5 153.5 3,698.5 3,276.0 2,681.1 2,397.4         Mar 8,172.9 15.5 2,121.4 1,607.8 1,224.3 383.5 513.5 360.7 152.9 3,708.2 3,283.5 2,690.7 2,400.3
 Changes 3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.6 − 0.5 −257.1 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 208.1 0.4 −115.7 −118.0 − 84.6 − 33.4 2.3 7.1 − 4.8 55.0 40.0 52.3 36.8
2013          July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 27.7 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.2 10.2 9.6 9.6 7.1         Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 52.8 3.6 − 42.8 − 23.3 − 17.4 − 6.0 − 19.5 − 18.5 − 1.0 − 15.6 − 12.7 2.9 − 0.8
2015          Jan 277.5 − 3.8 65.7 36.1 36.3 − 0.2 29.6 26.4 3.3 28.5 22.0 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 12.7 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.9 − 1.2 − 6.7 10.7 12.1 5.8 8.3
         Mar 111.9 0.1 27.6 30.0 28.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.6 9.1 6.5 8.8 3.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.6 578.0 327.8 250.2 415.1 270.2 142.7 144.9 31.9 113.0 1,051.5 805.0 1,055.8 2014
262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7 2013          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6          Sep 
270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 276.6 578.0 327.8 250.2 415.1 270.2 142.7 144.9 31.9 113.0 1,051.5 805.0 1,055.8          Dec 
285.4 588.6 336.7 251.9 423.3 273.4 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,138.4 885.6 1,179.7 2015          Jan 
283.7 594.9 339.8 255.1 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,131.0 880.6 1,122.7          Feb 290.5 592.8 339.0 253.7 424.7 276.1 146.2 148.6 30.5 118.1 1,131.2 872.6 1,196.7          Mar 
Changes 3
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 −420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.0 0.5 − 3.9 14.5 0.9 13.6 83.5 71.9 184.8 2014
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0 2013          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 4.0 − 0.2 4.2 − 12.8 − 17.7 − 17.4          Sep 
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 3.7 − 15.6 − 7.2 − 8.4 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 1.6 0.2 − 1.8 − 31.0 − 33.2 32.9          Dec 
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 0.8 2.5 5.7 0.6 5.1 53.8 49.5 133.2 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.1 − 7.9 − 56.9          Feb 
5.6 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.5 2.6 3.7 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 1.0 − 7.3 74.0          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.62008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.6 3,103.8 1,514.3 981.9 294.5 607.7 531.2 79.7 34.4
2013          June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.6 3,103.8 1,514.3 981.9 294.5 607.7 531.2 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.8 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,112.0 1,530.7 974.7 290.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.8 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.4 3,220.7 3,126.4 1,543.3 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,172.9 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.0 603.9 529.0 84.8 40.8
 Changes 4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.6 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 208.1 − 26.6 − 30.9 4.2 62.7 68.0 106.1 − 35.7 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.4 0.0
2013          July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8
         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 27.7 − 13.1 − 8.4 − 4.7 0.4 − 1.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 4.5 0.6 0.1 0.9 3.2
         Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 52.8 − 23.8 − 4.0 − 19.8 − 1.3 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 3.6 3.8 2.4 2.2 − 1.4 − 2.3
2015          Jan 277.5 53.2 21.8 31.4 13.9 5.9 14.7 − 7.6 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 2.1 2.4
         Feb − 70.0 − 15.0 − 4.3 − 10.6 5.9 14.1 12.4 2.2 3.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7
         Mar 111.9 13.5 0.4 13.1 − 2.7 − 6.4 − 0.6 − 3.6 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.5 1.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 14.2 14.1 3.4 3.6 1,077.3 39.3 535.2 535.5 1,125.6 2014
37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5 2013          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6          Sep 
40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 14.2 14.1 3.4 3.6 1,077.3 39.3 535.2 535.5 1,125.6          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 20.1 14.7 6.8 3.6 1,103.0 43.5 614.3 543.8 1,256.4 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,100.6 40.9 610.1 561.2 1,189.0          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,103.8 42.0 624.5 569.7 1,263.5          Mar 
Changes 4
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −104.9 − 17.6 −134.1 18.9 −417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 1.3 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 63.9 − 0.4 35.6 26.2 178.1 2014
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3 2013          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.7 0.0 − 4.4 0.8 5.7 − 2.6 − 10.9          Sep 
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.0 2.2 3.3 − 6.2 0.0 − 13.7 − 2.2 − 32.1 − 6.0 30.4          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 5.9 0.7 3.4 0.0 7.8 3.5 63.4 4.4 131.3 2015          Jan − 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 9.0 − 5.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 2.6 − 5.6 16.7 − 68.6          Feb − 0.4 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 5.8 3.7 15.1 5.9 74.6          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
 
 Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2014          Oct 1,812 7,807.4 91.3 2,613.3 2,004.9 597.3 3,907.4 374.2 2,767.3 0.5 756.5 133.0 1,062.5
         Nov 1,807 7,891.9 82.5 2,637.8 2,029.0 597.8 3,928.8 377.9 2,775.5 0.5 765.7 132.7 1,110.1         Dec 1,807 7,853.4 113.9 2,551.1 1,950.4 590.7 3,902.4 350.5 2,776.6 0.6 767.4 130.1 1,155.9
2015          Jan 1,805 8,176.3 100.0 2,703.8 2,095.0 595.2 3,962.2 383.7 2,786.9 0.6 782.9 129.1 1,281.2
         Feb 1,805 8,112.3 103.1 2,684.1 2,082.2 589.4 3,971.7 389.7 2,791.5 0.6 782.1 128.2 1,225.1         Mar 1,804 8,223.7 131.2 2,675.6 2,071.4 590.0 3,989.0 389.2 2,796.6 0.5 793.9 128.7 1,299.3
Commercial banks 6
2015          Feb 274 3,209.2 49.7 1,074.5 980.0 91.2 1,129.9 202.4 684.8 0.3 237.9 64.6 890.6
         Mar 273 3,292.5 72.5 1,065.7 968.6 93.0 1,135.5 198.1 686.0 0.3 245.8 65.1 953.6
   Big banks 7
2015          Feb 4 2,094.1 11.9 680.9 630.9 47.2 494.4 109.0 256.1 0.2 126.9 56.5 850.5
         Mar 4 2,140.6 22.6 657.6 606.4 48.4 489.4 101.6 255.9 0.1 129.1 57.1 913.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2015          Feb 162 860.4 17.0 236.6 194.3 41.8 566.5 71.2 393.5 0.1 101.2 6.5 33.8
         Mar 162 881.5 25.0 242.5 199.5 42.4 574.1 73.9 394.5 0.1 105.0 6.4 33.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2015          Feb 108 254.7 20.7 157.0 154.8 2.2 68.9 22.3 35.1 0.0 9.8 1.6 6.4
         Mar 107 270.3 24.8 165.7 162.7 2.2 72.0 22.6 35.5 0.0 11.8 1.6 6.2
Landesbanken
2015          Feb 9 1,088.9 2.5 364.9 260.2 102.5 555.3 62.5 381.3 0.1 109.9 11.6 154.7
         Mar 9 1,100.6 2.3 369.8 264.8 102.7 559.2 63.0 382.4 0.1 112.3 11.6 157.8
Savings banks
2015          Feb 416 1,122.1 14.9 211.9 81.1 130.3 863.9 53.8 670.6 0.1 139.2 14.6 16.9
         Mar 416 1,120.4 15.4 208.3 77.7 130.1 865.6 54.5 670.8 0.1 140.1 14.5 16.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2015          Feb 2 293.3 1.0 159.6 127.3 32.3 66.6 12.7 22.6 0.0 31.1 14.3 51.7         Mar 2 296.9 0.2 160.7 127.6 33.0 67.1 12.7 22.7 0.0 31.5 14.4 54.6
Credit cooperatives
2015          Feb 1,047 786.1 10.3 169.5 55.3 113.9 572.7 32.8 451.3 0.1 88.5 14.5 19.1
         Mar 1,047 785.6 10.8 166.1 52.0 113.9 575.3 33.4 452.2 0.1 89.5 14.5 18.8
Mortgage banks
2015          Feb 17 396.2 0.2 93.6 62.3 30.8 287.1 4.9 211.9 − 70.3 0.6 14.6
         Mar 17 392.5 1.8 91.0 61.8 28.9 284.7 5.0 210.8 − 69.0 0.6 14.3
Building and loan associations
2015          Feb 21 213.1 0.0 63.0 45.3 17.7 144.3 1.5 121.7 . 21.1 0.3 5.4
         Mar 21 213.2 0.2 63.0 45.1 17.9 144.8 1.5 122.2 . 21.1 0.3 5.1
Special purpose banks
2015          Feb 19 1,003.4 24.4 547.0 470.8 70.6 352.0 19.1 247.3 − 84.1 7.8 72.2
         Mar 19 1,022.0 27.9 551.0 473.8 70.5 356.8 21.0 249.6 − 84.6 7.8 78.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2015          Feb 143 928.8 34.4 347.7 304.0 40.8 428.9 71.7 241.8 0.1 111.6 5.6 112.2
         Mar 141 967.2 41.5 366.2 320.8 41.6 435.8 72.7 242.6 0.1 116.2 5.6 118.1
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2015          Feb 35 674.1 13.7 190.7 149.1 38.6 360.0 49.4 206.7 0.1 101.7 4.0 105.8
         Mar 34 696.8 16.7 200.5 158.1 39.4 363.8 50.1 207.1 0.1 104.4 4.0 111.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,720.2 438.0 1,282.2 3,357.3 1,632.0 307.2 720.3 83.1 615.3 535.4 82.4 1,162.0 465.0 1,102.9 2014          Oct 
1,743.6 457.1 1,286.5 3,375.0 1,650.0 308.8 721.4 76.4 614.6 535.1 80.2 1,157.0 466.6 1,149.7          Nov 1,721.1 404.9 1,316.1 3,339.2 1,630.8 297.3 714.3 43.3 617.0 538.7 79.8 1,147.9 464.6 1,180.6          Dec 
1,829.3 513.6 1,315.7 3,389.5 1,679.2 304.7 711.8 74.2 615.9 536.6 77.9 1,182.1 464.4 1,311.0 2015          Jan 
1,806.0 480.1 1,325.9 3,401.4 1,692.5 308.5 709.0 83.9 615.4 537.5 76.0 1,194.6 466.7 1,243.5          Feb 1,847.0 547.6 1,299.3 3,385.3 1,680.0 311.2 707.2 65.7 613.2 536.6 73.7 1,204.4 468.6 1,318.3          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
769.1 284.3 484.7 1,277.4 761.9 174.7 202.4 61.7 113.9 99.0 24.4 146.5 159.0 857.3 2015          Feb 800.4 333.8 466.5 1,262.1 748.1 174.8 203.2 41.9 112.9 98.7 23.1 150.1 159.2 920.6          Mar 
Big banks 7
533.3 212.6 320.7 559.8 314.9 93.6 73.4 61.5 70.1 67.7 7.8 107.2 95.8 798.0 2015          Feb 536.5 236.5 300.0 537.0 294.0 93.5 73.3 40.8 69.7 67.4 6.4 109.7 95.8 861.7          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
136.4 39.7 96.8 578.8 359.0 59.5 101.5 0.3 43.5 31.0 15.4 38.8 54.6 51.7 2015          Feb 148.8 49.1 99.8 586.2 366.4 59.1 102.3 1.1 42.8 31.1 15.5 39.9 54.8 51.9          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
99.3 32.0 67.3 138.8 88.1 21.6 27.5 − 0.3 0.2 1.2 0.5 8.6 7.5 2015          Feb 
115.1 48.3 66.8 139.0 87.7 22.1 27.6 − 0.3 0.2 1.2 0.6 8.7 7.0          Mar 
Landesbanken
317.3 66.5 250.7 300.1 118.1 53.7 113.7 19.1 14.5 10.9 0.1 250.8 58.0 162.7 2015          Feb 321.1 70.0 251.1 302.5 120.5 54.3 113.4 20.4 14.2 10.7 0.1 250.3 58.5 168.3          Mar 
Savings banks
148.3 15.8 132.5 826.2 451.7 24.2 14.8 − 297.9 258.1 37.7 14.4 90.0 43.2 2015          Feb 
148.9 18.4 130.5 822.1 448.9 24.2 14.7 − 297.3 257.7 37.0 14.9 90.1 44.4          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
140.8 37.8 103.0 31.9 10.5 9.1 10.0 2.4 − − 2.2 54.2 15.6 50.8 2015          Feb 
141.2 39.0 102.2 31.4 10.1 9.1 10.0 2.1 − − 2.2 54.8 15.6 53.9          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
101.3 4.2 97.1 582.7 329.5 34.0 20.0 − 188.7 169.0 10.6 8.9 60.2 33.1 2015          Feb 101.7 6.2 95.5 580.8 329.5 33.0 19.7 − 188.4 168.9 10.2 8.6 60.3 34.1          Mar 
Mortgage banks
95.9 9.1 86.9 147.3 8.8 8.5 129.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 116.7 16.3 20.0 2015          Feb 93.0 9.2 83.8 145.8 8.8 8.8 127.9 − 0.1 0.1 . 117.3 16.6 19.8          Mar 
Building and loan associations
23.7 2.6 21.1 162.9 0.5 0.6 160.5 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.8 9.4 14.4 2015          Feb 23.6 3.0 20.6 163.1 0.5 0.6 160.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.9 2.7 9.5 14.4          Mar 
Special purpose banks
209.7 59.8 149.9 73.1 11.5 3.6 57.9 0.6 − − . 600.4 58.2 62.0 2015          Feb 217.1 68.1 149.0 77.6 13.6 6.3 57.7 1.3 − − . 605.7 58.8 62.9          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
240.7 79.8 161.0 499.5 329.9 60.0 77.5 9.9 21.7 21.3 10.4 22.8 48.4 117.4 2015          Feb 271.4 107.3 164.1 500.6 332.2 59.2 77.1 8.5 21.7 21.3 10.3 23.3 48.5 123.4          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
141.5 47.8 93.7 360.7 241.8 38.3 49.9 9.9 21.4 21.1 9.2 22.2 39.8 109.9 2015          Feb 156.3 59.0 97.3 361.6 244.5 37.1 49.5 8.5 21.4 21.1 9.1 22.7 39.8 116.5          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)
Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.52007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2013          Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.4 442.1
         Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.3 2,697.0 0.3 1.8 448.1
         July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
         Oct 15.2 61.8 1,493.6 1,126.5 0.0 2.3 364.8 1.6 3,169.0 2,711.8 0.3 1.2 455.7
         Nov 15.4 52.8 1,486.8 1,121.2 0.0 2.3 363.3 1.6 3,178.9 2,719.7 0.3 0.9 458.1         Dec 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015          Jan 15.2 69.3 1,490.7 1,128.5 0.0 2.7 359.4 1.7 3,191.5 2,725.6 0.4 1.1 464.5
         Feb 15.2 69.7 1,486.0 1,125.7 0.0 3.1 357.2 1.6 3,205.1 2,736.8 0.4 1.3 466.6         Mar 15.2 97.5 1,488.9 1,127.1 0.0 3.2 358.6 1.6 3,212.0 2,738.7 0.3 1.5 471.5
Changes *
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009
− 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011
− 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2013          Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.7
         Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
         July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
         Oct + 0.1 − 19.0 + 5.1 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Nov + 0.2 − 9.0 − 6.9 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.4
         Dec + 3.6 + 28.5 − 60.8 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 11.7 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
2015          Jan − 3.8 − 12.0 + 63.8 + 62.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 26.4 + 15.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 10.5
         Feb − 0.0 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 11.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.1         Mar + 0.1 + 27.8 + 3.0 + 1.4 − + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4 2013          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,131.6 149.1 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,144.5 166.2 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.2 155.7 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
− 26.5 95.2 1,122.7 149.1 973.6 0.0 11.5 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 606.1 68.6 31.1          Oct 
− 26.5 95.1 1,116.1 155.8 960.2 0.0 11.5 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 605.3 66.5 31.1          Nov − 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9          Dec 
− 26.1 93.1 1,137.9 174.9 963.1 0.0 11.3 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 606.6 64.7 30.8 2015          Jan 
− 26.2 92.3 1,133.5 169.2 964.3 0.0 11.3 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 606.1 63.8 30.8          Feb − 25.9 92.3 1,134.4 178.0 956.4 0.0 11.2 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 603.9 63.0 30.7          Mar 
Changes *
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 2013          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 17.1 − 4.4 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 19.2 + 13.8 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5          June
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.6 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 6.7 + 12.1 − − 0.3 + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 6.8 − 13.4 − − 0.0 + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.0 − 28.0 + 23.0 − + 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.4 − 1.2 + 26.1 + 47.1 − 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 2015          Jan 
− + 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.4 − 5.6 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 8.8 − 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.0 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)
Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.92007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2013          Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4         Dec 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
         Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
         July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
         Oct 0.2 1,119.6 878.5 628.7 249.8 8.6 232.5 1.1 738.3 429.8 110.3 319.5 7.7 300.8
         Nov 0.2 1,151.0 907.8 658.2 249.7 8.7 234.5 1.1 749.8 433.9 113.5 320.4 8.3 307.6         Dec 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015          Jan 0.2 1,213.2 966.6 684.2 282.4 10.9 235.7 1.1 770.7 445.3 117.5 327.8 7.0 318.4
         Feb 0.2 1,198.1 956.6 687.3 269.3 9.3 232.2 1.1 766.7 444.5 115.7 328.9 6.6 315.5         Mar 0.3 1,186.6 944.4 654.9 289.5 10.9 231.4 1.1 777.0 447.4 113.2 334.2 7.2 322.4
Changes *
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2013          Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
         Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2
         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
         July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 23.9 + 24.7 + 23.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.9 − 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.2
         Nov + 0.0 + 32.4 + 29.3 + 30.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 6.0
         Dec − 0.0 − 33.1 − 30.7 − 44.4 + 13.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 20.8 − 23.1 − 20.2 − 2.9 − 1.9 + 4.1
2015          Jan + 0.0 + 62.4 + 57.8 + 50.3 + 7.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 20.6 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 17.1 − 12.0 + 2.2 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 3.6 − − 5.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.2
         Mar + 0.0 − 24.0 − 24.5 − 39.9 + 15.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1 2013          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0          Dec 
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
14.6 37.8 597.5 289.0 308.5 220.4 88.2 0.1 260.0 137.5 122.5 62.6 59.9 1.3          Oct 
14.7 37.6 627.5 301.3 326.3 238.4 87.8 0.1 258.6 132.1 126.5 65.7 60.8 1.3          Nov 14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7          Dec 
14.0 35.8 691.4 338.7 352.6 260.2 92.5 0.1 260.9 141.4 119.5 59.2 60.3 0.7 2015          Jan 
14.0 35.7 672.5 310.8 361.7 269.4 92.3 0.1 263.7 143.1 120.7 61.8 58.9 0.8          Feb 14.1 36.1 712.5 369.6 342.9 256.1 86.9 0.1 253.6 131.2 122.4 64.7 57.7 0.9          Mar 
Changes *
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 2013          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.9 − 51.7 − 22.2 − 19.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 8.2 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 − 0.7 − − 0.3 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 30.0 + 12.2 + 17.8 + 18.1 − 0.3 − − 1.4 − 5.4 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 2.1 − 22.0 − 25.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 39.3 − 19.8 − 19.5 − 18.4 − 1.1 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 68.7 + 56.0 + 12.8 + 11.5 + 1.3 − + 35.9 + 26.3 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 2015          Jan 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 20.1 − 28.2 + 8.1 + 8.6 − 0.5 − + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 + 32.7 + 56.4 − 23.8 − 17.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 12.6 − 13.0 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 2.0 + 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.82007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2013          Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0         Dec 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.7 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
         Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5         June 3,147.3 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
         July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.3 220.9 220.3 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.7
         Oct 3,169.0 2,712.1 265.6 212.6 211.8 0.8 53.0 52.5 0.5 2,903.4 2,364.9
         Nov 3,178.9 2,720.0 265.7 214.6 214.1 0.4 51.1 50.7 0.4 2,913.3 2,375.5         Dec 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015          Jan 3,191.5 2,726.0 267.9 214.7 214.0 0.7 53.1 52.8 0.4 2,923.7 2,388.4
         Feb 3,205.1 2,737.1 275.8 218.9 217.8 1.0 57.0 56.7 0.2 2,929.2 2,391.5         Mar 3,212.0 2,739.0 278.1 220.4 219.4 1.0 57.7 57.1 0.6 2,933.9 2,399.1
Changes *
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2013          Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.5
         Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.0 − 4.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.1
         July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
         Oct + 4.1 + 4.7 − 4.7 − 8.3 − 8.5 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 4.1
         Nov + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 9.8 + 10.7
         Dec − 11.7 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 6.8 − 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.6 + 5.1
2015          Jan + 26.4 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.9
         Feb + 13.5 + 11.2 + 8.0 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 3.1
         Mar + 7.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 7.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6 2013          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 534.0 277.8 32.3 245.5 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
2,167.0 251.8 1,915.3 197.8 24.4 538.6 280.7 34.5 246.3 257.9 − 2.1          Oct 
2,175.1 252.6 1,922.5 200.5 24.3 537.7 280.1 33.8 246.3 257.6 − 2.1          Nov 2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1          Dec 
2,175.2 252.5 1,922.7 213.2 24.0 535.3 284.0 32.7 251.3 251.3 − 2.1 2015          Jan 
2,179.6 251.4 1,928.1 212.0 24.1 537.7 283.1 32.7 250.4 254.6 − 2.1          Feb 2,180.6 251.7 1,928.9 218.6 23.8 534.8 281.9 32.3 249.5 252.9 − 2.1          Mar 
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0 2013          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov 
− 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May
− 4.0 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.1 + 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 7.8 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2015          Jan 
+ 4.4 − 1.1 + 5.4 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.4 − −          Feb 
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2013 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Mar 2,356.3 1,179.3 1,160.3 936.4 223.8 1,283.4 320.0 129.1 97.0 59.5 124.2 46.0 68.9 107.1
         June 2,367.1 1,181.3 1,166.6 940.0 226.7 1,288.3 320.9 129.1 98.1 59.9 124.3 47.0 68.7 104.7         Sep 2,380.6 1,187.9 1,177.1 945.6 231.5 1,293.2 322.9 127.1 98.7 60.3 125.9 47.8 69.4 110.2         Dec 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Mar 2,400.3 1,230.0 1,191.6 987.3 204.3 1,305.9 329.6 127.4 99.6 60.9 125.1 48.2 70.0 129.2
 Short-term lending
2013 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Mar 219.9 − 8.6 − 8.6 183.5 4.4 35.4 5.9 12.7 41.5 3.6 6.4 23.8
         June 222.6 − 8.6 − 8.6 186.1 4.3 36.3 6.2 12.8 41.5 4.0 6.6 22.3         Sep 220.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 184.2 4.3 34.5 5.6 12.7 42.9 4.0 6.3 25.6         Dec 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Mar 219.6 − 7.8 − 7.8 184.5 4.0 34.7 6.0 13.0 42.4 3.9 6.3 25.6
 Medium-term lending
2013 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Mar 249.1 − 35.0 − 35.0 175.0 12.3 25.3 5.9 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.4 35.8
         June 248.9 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.2 12.8 24.7 5.4 9.3 16.9 4.1 11.5 35.5         Sep 250.3 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 12.7 24.5 5.6 9.7 16.9 4.2 11.7 35.9         Dec 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Mar 251.6 − 35.3 − 35.3 179.0 13.2 24.6 5.3 10.0 16.4 4.2 11.7 39.4
 Long-term lending
2013 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Mar 1,887.3 1,179.3 1,116.7 936.4 180.3 924.9 303.3 68.4 85.2 37.5 66.1 38.5 51.1 47.5
         June 1,895.6 1,181.3 1,122.8 940.0 182.9 926.1 303.8 68.1 86.5 37.8 66.0 38.9 50.7 46.9         Sep 1,910.0 1,187.9 1,133.4 945.6 187.8 932.4 305.8 68.2 87.5 38.0 66.0 39.6 51.4 48.8         Dec 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Mar 1,929.1 1,230.0 1,148.6 987.3 161.2 942.5 312.4 68.1 88.4 38.0 66.3 40.1 52.1 64.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2014          Q1 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3
         Q2 + 11.2 + 1.3 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.4         Q3 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 4.6 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 3.7         Q4 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 8.3 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 18.2 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 1.3 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 4.1
 Short-term lending
2014          Q1 + 2.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.6         Q3 − 2.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.6
2015          Q1 + 7.8 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.3
 Medium-term lending
2014          Q1 + 1.3 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3         Q3 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3         Q4 + 1.6 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 0.7 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2014          Q1 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Q2 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 2.5 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4         Q3 + 14.2 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7         Q4 + 14.5 + 8.5 + 9.9 + 8.3 + 1.6 + 8.6 + 3.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 2.6
2015          Q1 + 9.7 + 4.3 + 3.4 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5 2013
651.5 192.1 37.1 175.9 387.5 49.4 1,059.4 836.8 222.6 148.0 12.0 13.5 3.5 2014          Mar 
656.5 192.8 39.1 176.4 388.0 49.6 1,065.5 842.3 223.2 148.7 11.8 13.3 3.5          June653.8 192.3 38.0 175.4 389.3 49.1 1,074.2 850.7 223.5 149.3 11.9 13.2 3.5          Sep 644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8          Dec 
645.5 188.8 33.8 173.6 390.9 48.3 1,080.0 858.1 221.9 150.0 11.3 14.4 3.9 2015          Mar 
Short-term lending
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0 2013
54.0 8.9 6.6 12.4 27.8 7.0 35.4 4.2 31.2 1.8 12.0 1.0 0.0 2014          Mar 
56.5 8.8 7.8 12.6 28.0 7.2 35.7 4.2 31.5 1.7 11.8 0.9 0.0          June52.6 8.5 6.3 12.2 27.3 6.9 35.3 4.1 31.2 1.6 11.9 0.8 0.0          Sep 52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0          Dec 
52.6 8.4 5.9 11.1 27.2 6.6 34.4 3.8 30.6 2.1 11.3 0.7 0.0 2015          Mar 
Medium-term lending
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0 2013
66.8 9.9 6.7 20.1 32.1 3.5 73.6 22.6 51.0 45.8 − 0.4 0.0 2014          Mar 
68.8 10.4 7.2 20.5 31.7 3.6 72.2 22.5 49.7 44.6 − 0.5 0.0          June
68.2 9.9 7.2 20.0 32.0 3.6 73.1 22.5 50.6 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
67.5 9.7 7.2 19.1 31.9 3.5 72.1 22.1 50.1 45.0 − 0.5 0.0 2015          Mar 
Long-term lending
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5 2013
530.6 173.3 23.9 143.4 327.6 38.9 950.4 810.0 140.4 100.4 − 12.0 3.5 2014          Mar 
531.2 173.6 24.2 143.3 328.3 38.8 957.6 815.6 142.0 102.3 − 12.0 3.5          June
533.0 173.8 24.5 143.2 330.0 38.6 965.8 824.1 141.7 102.2 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7          Dec 
525.3 170.7 20.7 143.4 331.8 38.2 973.5 832.3 141.2 102.9 − 13.2 3.9 2015          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 5.2 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Q3
+ 8.4 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 4.2 + 6.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2          Q4
+ 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
Short-term lending
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
Long-term lending
− 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 8.3 + 7.9 + 0.4 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 5.7 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − + 0.3 + 0.3          Q4
+ 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.42014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2014          Apr 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 258.2 688.8 28.4 660.4 606.7 72.0 32.4 28.7 4.3
         May 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 262.0 687.0 28.4 658.6 606.0 70.9 31.9 28.6 0.9         June 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 263.7 684.7 28.4 656.3 604.5 70.5 31.4 28.2 1.7
         July 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 264.3 681.1 28.0 653.1 604.4 69.2 31.3 27.9 2.7
         Aug 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 265.6 679.7 28.2 651.5 605.9 68.4 31.3 27.6 2.3         Sep 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 262.0 679.9 28.2 651.7 606.5 69.4 31.2 27.4 2.8
         Oct 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 252.2 676.0 28.1 647.8 606.1 68.6 31.1 27.2 1.9
         Nov 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 250.6 676.1 29.2 646.9 605.3 66.5 31.1 26.6 1.7         Dec 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015          Jan 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 253.1 666.4 28.6 637.8 606.6 64.7 30.8 25.8 3.2
         Feb 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 254.3 664.0 29.3 634.7 606.1 63.8 30.8 23.7 3.6         Mar 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 254.0 662.0 30.8 631.1 603.9 63.0 30.7 23.4 3.6
Changes*
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2014          Apr + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.4
         May + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 + 3.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.4         June − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8
         July + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Aug + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4         Sep + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Oct + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 9.8 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8
         Nov + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2         Dec + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.7 − 6.7 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
2015          Jan + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.6
         Feb + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.3         Mar − 6.0 − 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2014          Apr 178.1 46.4 126.7 78.1 48.6 6.1 42.5 3.5 1.5 30.4 4.7 2.9
         May 183.4 49.2 129.0 80.5 48.4 6.1 42.4 3.6 1.6 29.9 4.7 0.0
         June 190.1 50.0 135.0 86.6 48.4 6.0 42.4 3.5 1.6 29.5 4.7 0.9
         July 187.1 47.4 134.6 86.5 48.0 5.9 42.2 3.5 1.7 29.5 4.7 1.7
         Aug 189.7 51.1 133.4 85.3 48.1 5.9 42.1 3.4 1.8 29.5 4.7 1.1
         Sep 189.2 47.8 136.1 88.3 47.8 5.7 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.4 4.6 1.6
         Oct 178.4 44.6 128.4 80.6 47.9 5.8 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.8
         Nov 182.6 46.6 130.7 82.3 48.3 6.4 42.0 3.5 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.5
         Dec 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015          Jan 184.5 50.7 127.6 84.0 43.6 7.4 36.1 3.8 2.4 29.1 4.8 2.2
         Feb 186.8 52.4 128.0 85.4 42.7 8.0 34.7 3.8 2.6 29.0 2.9 2.4
         Mar 187.3 52.9 127.8 84.9 42.9 9.1 33.8 3.8 2.7 28.9 2.8 2.4
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2014          Apr − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2
         May + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.9         June + 7.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 2.8 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Aug + 2.6 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Sep − 0.6 − 3.4 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Oct − 10.7 − 3.1 − 7.7 − 7.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Nov + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         Dec − 0.3 + 4.1 − 5.1 + 1.2 − 6.3 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
2015          Jan − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.4 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2         Mar + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.72014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2014          Apr 2,879.1 1,385.1 820.3 180.1 640.2 22.2 618.0 603.2 70.5 2.0 24.0 1.4
         May 2,888.8 1,397.0 820.0 181.5 638.6 22.4 616.2 602.4 69.3 2.0 23.8 0.9         June 2,876.1 1,392.8 813.4 177.1 636.2 22.4 613.9 601.1 68.9 1.9 23.5 0.8
         July 2,886.8 1,407.6 810.9 177.8 633.1 22.1 610.9 600.9 67.5 1.9 23.2 1.0
         Aug 2,901.9 1,421.0 811.9 180.3 631.6 22.3 609.4 602.4 66.6 1.8 22.9 1.3         Sep 2,903.4 1,427.1 805.8 173.7 632.1 22.4 609.6 603.1 67.5 1.8 22.7 1.2
         Oct 2,918.9 1,449.9 799.7 171.6 628.1 22.3 605.8 602.6 66.7 1.8 22.6 1.1
         Nov 2,933.8 1,471.3 796.0 168.3 627.7 22.8 604.9 601.8 64.6 1.8 22.0 1.2         Dec 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2015          Jan 2,944.1 1,487.2 791.9 169.0 622.8 21.2 601.6 602.8 62.3 1.8 21.0 1.1
         Feb 2,950.9 1,497.1 790.3 169.0 621.3 21.3 600.0 602.3 61.2 1.8 20.9 1.2         Mar 2,944.4 1,495.9 788.2 169.1 619.1 21.7 597.4 600.1 60.2 1.8 20.6 1.2
Changes*
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2014          Apr + 11.8 + 15.5 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 9.7 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5         June − 12.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1
         July + 10.6 + 14.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Aug + 15.1 + 13.4 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Sep + 1.6 + 6.1 − 6.1 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Oct + 15.5 + 22.8 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 15.0 + 21.5 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1         Dec + 2.0 − 4.3 + 5.0 + 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 12.6 + 21.8 − 6.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 6.6 + 9.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Mar − 6.5 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2014          Apr 1,008.4 430.5 555.8 112.1 443.6 9.4 434.3 7.5 14.7 2.0 17.5 1.4
         May 1,008.7 432.0 554.7 113.3 441.3 9.6 431.7 7.4 14.6 2.0 17.5 0.9
         June 996.5 427.9 546.4 108.1 438.3 9.5 428.9 7.5 14.7 1.8 17.2 0.8
         July 1,000.1 434.5 543.7 108.7 435.0 9.3 425.6 7.5 14.5 1.8 17.2 1.0
         Aug 1,004.8 438.0 544.5 111.5 433.0 9.5 423.5 7.5 14.8 1.8 17.1 1.3
         Sep 1,011.6 449.5 538.4 105.8 432.6 9.3 423.3 7.5 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.2
         Oct 1,014.9 458.3 532.8 104.2 428.6 9.5 419.1 7.6 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.1
         Nov 1,008.1 456.6 529.2 100.9 428.2 10.6 417.7 7.4 14.9 1.8 16.7 1.2
         Dec 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015          Jan 1,013.7 467.2 524.8 102.7 422.1 10.3 411.9 6.8 14.8 1.8 16.2 1.1
         Feb 1,008.7 464.6 522.4 102.3 420.2 10.3 409.9 6.8 14.7 1.8 16.2 1.2
         Mar 1,008.0 465.9 520.4 102.7 417.7 10.4 407.2 7.0 14.7 1.8 16.0 1.2
Changes*
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2014          Apr + 4.2 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         May + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5         June − 12.5 − 4.0 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July + 3.6 + 6.5 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
         Aug + 4.7 + 3.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep + 6.8 + 11.5 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct + 3.3 + 8.9 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov − 6.8 − 1.7 − 3.7 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1         Dec + 1.3 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 3.9 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
2015          Jan + 5.7 + 10.1 − 4.3 − 1.5 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Feb − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Mar − 0.7 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits
Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2014          Oct 1,904.0 991.5 958.8 172.9 652.7 133.2 32.8 266.9 251.1 17.0 219.5 14.7
         Nov 1,925.8 1,014.8 983.0 174.0 673.1 135.9 31.8 266.9 251.1 16.8 219.5 14.8
         Dec 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015          Jan 1,930.4 1,020.0 990.3 176.0 678.7 135.6 29.7 267.1 252.9 26.4 184.6 41.9
         Feb 1,942.3 1,032.5 1,002.7 176.8 689.2 136.7 29.8 267.9 253.2 26.6 184.7 41.9
         Mar 1,936.4 1,030.0 999.4 172.2 690.1 137.0 30.6 267.8 253.4 27.0 184.5 41.9
Changes*
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2014          Oct + 12.1 + 14.0 + 12.3 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Nov + 21.8 + 23.2 + 24.2 + 1.0 + 20.4 + 2.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Dec + 0.7 − 5.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 2.3 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 0.2
2015          Jan + 6.9 + 11.7 + 10.2 + 2.6 + 5.7 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Feb + 11.8 + 12.5 + 12.4 + 0.8 + 10.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Mar − 5.8 − 2.5 − 3.3 − 4.6 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2014          Oct 178.4 11.2 2.6 3.6 4.9 0.1 14.8 48.7 11.2 14.8 22.5 0.2 14.1
         Nov 182.6 10.6 2.3 3.3 5.0 0.1 14.8 44.0 10.8 10.3 22.7 0.2 14.1
         Dec 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015          Jan 184.5 12.7 4.1 3.0 5.5 0.1 14.6 42.4 13.0 12.9 15.8 0.7 14.0
         Feb 186.8 8.9 2.7 2.7 3.5 0.1 14.6 46.7 12.7 17.0 16.3 0.7 14.0
         Mar 187.3 9.2 2.9 2.8 3.4 0.1 14.6 49.9 14.3 18.6 16.3 0.7 13.9
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2014          Oct − 10.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec − 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.1 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 6.8 + 0.4 − 0.0
2015          Jan − 2.2 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 2.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 201314.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
15.7 67.4 199.5 12.8 186.6 595.0 585.6 9.5 50.5 0.0 5.4 − 2014          Oct 
15.8 67.4 199.5 12.3 187.2 594.4 585.1 9.3 49.7 0.0 5.3 −          Nov 14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 −          Dec 
14.2 66.4 200.7 11.0 189.7 596.0 586.5 9.5 47.4 0.0 4.8 − 2015          Jan 
14.6 66.7 201.2 11.1 190.1 595.5 586.0 9.5 46.5 0.0 4.7 −          Feb 14.4 66.4 201.4 11.3 190.1 593.1 583.6 9.5 45.5 0.0 4.6 −          Mar 
Changes*
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − − 0.2 − 2014          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Dec 
− 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2015          Jan 
+ 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.0 − − 0.1 −          Feb 
− 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 201348.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 2014
41.9 19.7 11.2 6.7 4.3 0.4 76.7 11.1 51.0 13.7 0.8 0.0 2014          Oct 
44.2 21.8 11.4 6.7 4.3 0.4 83.8 11.7 57.2 14.1 0.8 −          Nov 48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 −          Dec 
41.6 20.1 10.1 6.9 4.6 0.4 87.8 13.4 58.0 15.5 0.9 − 2015          Jan 
44.6 22.6 10.1 7.1 4.7 0.4 86.5 14.3 55.5 15.8 0.9 −          Feb 44.1 21.9 10.0 7.3 4.8 0.4 84.1 13.8 53.5 15.9 0.9 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014
− 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2014          Oct 
+ 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 7.0 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          Nov + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 6.4 − 5.3 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2015          Jan 
+ 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 1.3 + 1.0 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Feb − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.62014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2014          Nov 614.6 605.3 527.7 399.6 77.7 64.5 9.2 7.4 0.3 80.2 66.5 51.8 13.7
         Dec 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 3.4 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015          Jan 615.9 606.6 529.2 397.3 77.5 64.3 9.3 7.4 0.3 77.9 64.7 50.6 13.2
         Feb 615.4 606.1 530.0 396.6 76.1 62.8 9.3 7.5 0.2 76.0 63.8 50.1 12.2         Mar 613.2 603.9 529.1 394.2 74.8 61.4 9.3 7.4 0.2 73.7 63.0 49.7 10.7
Changes*
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2014          Nov − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0
         Dec + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1
2015          Jan − 1.1 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.6
         Feb − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.0
         Mar − 2.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 1.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up toand including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non-
maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.12014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2014          Nov 1,123.8 290.1 25.9 355.2 73.3 86.5 2.3 27.1 5.2 1,010.2 1.1 0.2 33.2 1.1
         Dec 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015          Jan 1,147.9 286.0 26.4 381.2 80.6 95.0 1.9 27.5 5.2 1,025.4 0.8 0.2 34.2 1.2
         Feb 1,159.2 279.2 28.4 394.9 91.9 107.7 1.9 27.3 5.4 1,024.2 0.8 0.2 35.4 1.2         Mar 1,168.8 268.5 28.7 403.2 95.7 113.0 2.1 29.6 5.2 1,026.1 0.9 0.2 35.7 1.2
Changes*
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2014          Nov − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0         Dec − 9.7 − 3.7 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 4.1 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1
2015          Jan + 33.7 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 27.2 + 11.4 + 11.5 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 21.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 −
         Feb + 11.3 − 6.8 + 2.0 + 13.7 + 11.4 + 12.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.3 −         Mar + 9.6 − 10.7 + 0.2 + 8.4 + 3.7 + 5.3 + 0.2 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015          Jan 21 212.9 45.6 0.0 17.3 18.5 87.5 17.2 21.0 1.9 22.1 157.5 5.0 2.8 9.4 7.4
         Feb 21 213.1 45.3 0.0 17.7 18.2 87.7 17.3 21.1 1.9 21.7 157.9 5.0 2.8 9.4 7.2
         Mar 21 213.2 45.3 0.0 17.9 17.9 88.5 17.3 21.1 2.0 21.6 158.2 4.8 2.7 9.5 8.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Jan 12 148.6 28.2 − 10.1 13.2 68.5 14.7 9.1 1.3 18.6 103.7 4.8 2.8 6.4 4.7         Feb 12 148.7 28.2 − 10.4 13.0 68.7 14.7 9.1 1.3 18.5 104.1 4.7 2.8 6.4 4.6         Mar 12 148.5 28.1 − 10.3 12.8 69.3 14.7 9.0 1.3 18.1 104.3 4.7 2.7 6.4 5.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Jan 9 64.4 17.3 0.0 7.2 5.4 19.0 2.6 11.9 0.6 3.5 53.8 0.2 − 3.0 2.6         Feb 9 64.4 17.2 0.0 7.3 5.2 19.1 2.6 12.0 0.7 3.2 53.8 0.3 − 3.0 2.6         Mar 9 64.6 17.2 0.0 7.5 5.1 19.2 2.6 12.1 0.7 3.5 53.9 0.2 − 3.0 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015          Jan 2.6 0.0 0.5 3.8 2.4 3.2 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.4 14.7 8.1 0.8 0.0
         Feb 2.4 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.4 3.1 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.3 15.0 8.3 0.8 0.0
         Mar 2.6 0.0 0.7 4.5 2.6 3.7 1.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.7 15.3 8.4 0.9 ... 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Jan 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.1 10.3 4.9 0.6 0.0
         Feb 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.4 2.3 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.0 10.4 4.8 0.6 0.0         Mar 1.7 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.7 2.8 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 10.6 4.8 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Jan 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.3 0.2 0.0         Feb 0.9 0.0 0.4 1.3 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.4 0.2 0.0         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.4 1.3 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.6 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.62014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2014          May 56 207 1,766.9 478.5 465.8 154.9 310.9 12.7 570.9 454.3 9.3 445.0 116.6 717.6 443.0
         June 56 206 1,741.9 483.2 469.0 148.3 320.7 14.3 584.6 469.5 9.0 460.5 115.1 674.1 430.4
         July 56 206 1,828.9 511.1 496.3 137.7 358.6 14.8 603.0 484.9 13.0 471.9 118.1 714.8 428.6
         Aug 56 206 1,876.9 539.9 525.2 170.6 354.5 14.7 564.0 454.2 14.1 440.1 109.8 773.0 468.6         Sep 56 206 1,826.4 503.6 488.5 154.1 334.4 15.2 615.9 500.5 13.7 486.8 115.4 706.9 487.0
         Oct 56 205 1,910.0 525.1 509.5 154.7 354.9 15.6 609.9 494.0 13.5 480.5 115.9 775.0 509.7
         Nov 56 205 1,982.6 540.6 525.7 173.6 352.1 14.9 616.5 499.1 14.0 485.1 117.3 825.5 549.8         Dec 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015          Jan 54 202 2,269.7 609.8 593.0 222.4 370.7 16.8 656.5 532.1 14.6 517.5 124.4 1,003.3 714.1
         Feb 53 202 2,152.9 589.9 573.2 208.7 364.5 16.7 666.9 539.4 14.7 524.7 127.5 896.1 626.0
Changes *
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2014          June − − 1 − 24.4 + 5.5 + 3.9 − 6.6 + 10.5 + 1.6 + 13.5 + 15.0 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.5 − 43.4 − 12.6
         July − − + 74.4 + 21.9 + 21.5 − 10.6 + 32.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 4.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 40.1 − 1.8
         Aug − − + 38.9 + 23.9 + 24.0 + 32.9 − 8.9 − 0.1 − 42.7 − 33.7 + 1.1 − 34.8 − 8.9 + 57.6 + 40.0
         Sep − − − 80.5 − 51.9 − 52.1 − 16.5 − 35.5 + 0.2 + 39.6 + 35.9 − 0.4 + 36.2 + 3.7 − 68.2 + 18.4
         Oct − − 1 + 82.2 + 20.6 + 20.1 + 0.6 + 19.6 + 0.4 − 6.3 − 6.7 − 0.2 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 67.9 + 22.7
         Nov − − + 73.4 + 15.4 + 16.0 + 19.0 − 3.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 5.4 + 1.7 + 50.5 + 40.1
         Dec − − − 75.7 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 27.6 − 29.6 + 1.4 − 32.1 − 33.9 − 0.1 − 33.8 + 1.8 − 42.8 + 2.2
2015          Jan − 2 − 3 + 294.7 + 38.7 + 39.0 + 21.1 + 17.9 − 0.4 + 39.0 + 38.9 + 0.7 + 38.2 + 0.1 + 217.1 + 162.1
         Feb − 1 − − 122.8 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 13.6 − 8.0 − 0.2 + 6.5 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.5 − 107.4 − 88.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2014          May 32 72 404.9 166.4 141.9 77.5 64.4 24.5 177.2 140.9 24.7 116.1 36.3 61.3 −
         June 32 71 410.4 169.0 145.5 84.8 60.7 23.5 181.7 145.9 24.7 121.2 35.8 59.7 −
         July 31 70 403.1 167.3 146.0 86.6 59.4 21.2 172.2 137.5 21.4 116.1 34.7 63.7 −
         Aug 31 70 407.3 169.4 148.8 89.7 59.1 20.5 170.8 136.6 21.5 115.1 34.2 67.1 −         Sep 30 66 399.3 166.3 146.7 90.3 56.4 19.6 169.1 136.1 21.5 114.6 33.1 63.9 −
         Oct 29 64 393.2 160.0 143.0 88.7 54.3 17.0 173.6 139.5 21.5 118.0 34.0 59.6 −
         Nov 29 64 395.0 155.5 138.1 84.7 53.4 17.4 174.5 140.1 21.4 118.7 34.3 65.1 −         Dec 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015          Jan 28 63 410.8 164.8 147.7 86.7 61.0 17.1 181.3 148.0 22.5 125.5 33.4 64.7 −
         Feb 28 63 405.8 161.7 146.7 85.2 61.5 15.0 183.5 150.7 22.4 128.3 32.8 60.6 −
Changes *
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2014          June − − 1 + 5.7 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 3.7 − 1.0 + 4.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 9.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 10.2 − 9.1 − 3.3 − 5.8 − 1.1 + 3.9 −
         Aug − − + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 3.4 −
         Sep − 1 − 4 − 11.8 − 5.5 − 4.2 + 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 3.2 −
         Oct − 1 − 2 − 6.4 − 6.5 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 4.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.0 − 4.3 −
         Nov − − + 1.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 5.4 −
         Dec − 1 − 1 − 8.2 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 −2015          Jan − − + 13.8 + 6.5 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 −
         Feb − − − 5.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.5 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.6 − 4.1 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2015
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,011.4 663.0 349.1 313.9 348.4 25.8 20.9 4.9 322.6 134.1 40.3 581.2 452.3 2014          May
1,003.6 668.2 351.1 317.1 335.4 23.1 18.7 4.5 312.3 134.3 41.0 563.1 436.7          June
1,103.3 732.0 371.2 360.8 371.4 22.8 18.3 4.5 348.6 133.6 41.6 550.4 434.8          July
1,093.1 727.8 370.2 357.6 365.3 23.7 19.3 4.4 341.6 139.0 41.7 603.0 473.2          Aug 1,027.4 691.8 364.7 327.1 335.6 22.5 18.1 4.4 313.1 139.3 42.1 617.7 493.4          Sep 
1,077.6 733.8 390.9 342.8 343.9 22.1 17.7 4.5 321.7 133.3 41.9 657.2 517.3          Oct 
1,099.5 753.2 411.7 341.5 346.3 21.8 17.3 4.4 324.5 132.7 42.9 707.6 555.5          Nov 1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5          Dec 
1,172.6 800.9 443.0 357.9 371.8 23.5 18.4 5.2 348.3 133.2 46.4 917.4 718.3 2015          Jan 
1,161.1 786.5 436.9 349.6 374.6 24.1 18.9 5.2 350.5 139.4 47.8 804.6 625.6          Feb 
Changes *
− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014
− 7.3 + 5.6 + 2.0 + 3.6 − 12.9 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 18.1 − 15.6 2014          June
+ 91.5 + 59.2 + 20.1 + 39.0 + 32.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 32.8 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 17.0 − 1.9          July
− 16.4 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 6.7 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 9.6 + 5.5 + 0.1 + 49.7 + 38.4          Aug − 87.0 − 48.1 − 5.6 − 42.5 − 39.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 37.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 20.2          Sep 
+ 49.4 + 41.4 + 26.2 + 15.1 + 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.3 + 39.0 + 23.9          Oct 
+ 22.2 + 19.3 + 20.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 50.9 + 38.2          Nov − 65.6 − 20.5 + 4.6 − 25.1 − 45.1 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 43.9 − 4.2 + 2.4 − 8.2 + 2.0          Dec 
+ 94.4 + 42.7 + 26.7 + 16.0 + 51.7 + 2.9 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 48.8 + 4.8 + 1.2 + 194.2 + 160.7 2015          Jan 
− 15.5 − 16.2 − 6.1 − 10.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 6.2 + 1.4 − 114.8 − 92.7          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
316.4 186.7 95.6 91.1 129.7 18.8 16.7 2.1 110.9 20.5 28.5 39.4 − 2014          May
322.8 189.7 106.4 83.2 133.1 18.6 15.2 3.4 114.5 20.4 27.3 39.9 −          June
315.1 184.0 97.8 86.3 131.1 20.4 15.4 5.0 110.7 20.4 26.8 40.9 −          July
311.3 178.6 98.5 80.1 132.7 19.9 14.8 5.1 112.8 20.3 28.2 47.5 −          Aug 
304.5 173.6 99.1 74.6 130.9 20.5 15.2 5.3 110.4 19.4 27.6 47.8 −          Sep 
302.4 175.5 99.4 76.1 126.9 19.7 14.3 5.5 107.2 16.1 26.4 48.2 −          Oct 
304.2 179.1 100.6 78.5 125.2 20.6 14.5 6.1 104.6 16.1 26.3 48.4 −          Nov 
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 −          Dec 
311.9 183.0 104.6 78.4 128.9 19.7 14.4 5.4 109.2 19.4 26.5 53.0 − 2015          Jan 
310.6 183.8 105.1 78.7 126.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 108.7 17.8 26.7 50.8 −          Feb 
Changes *
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
+ 6.5 + 3.1 + 10.8 − 7.7 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 2014          June
− 9.1 − 6.5 − 8.7 + 2.2 − 2.6 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 −          July
− 4.8 − 6.0 + 0.7 − 6.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 6.4 −          Aug 
− 9.7 − 6.7 + 0.6 − 7.3 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 −          Sep 
− 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 −          Oct 
+ 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 −          Nov 
− 9.1 − 6.7 + 0.5 − 7.2 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 −          Dec 
+ 9.7 + 6.6 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 2.5 − 2015          Jan 
− 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.3 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2015
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance
Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2009 10,530.2 210.6 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.02011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.02012 
8 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 
9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015          Jan 10,800.3 108.0 107.5 225.3 117.8 0.0         Feb ......
         Mar 11,103.4 111.0 110.6 261.8 151.3 0.0         Apr  
p 11,079.8 110.8 110.3 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance
German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2009 2,507,906 23.8 50,158 49,971 50,297 326 02010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 02011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 12012 
8 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015          Jan 2,921,579 27.1 29,216 29,041 74,678 45,637 1         Feb .......
         Mar 3,012,093 27.1 30,121 29,947 89,373 59,426 6         Apr  
p 3,017,869 27.2 30,179 30,004 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Special purpose Regional institutions
Maintenance
Regional banks banks and build- of credit cooperatives
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and and credit ing and loan
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks cooperatives Mortgage banks associations beginning in 1 
2009 11,165 7,885 1,461 18,040 9,400 652 1,3682010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,914 556 1,4092011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 10,230 601 1,5312012 
8 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 5,262 248 871
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,479 239 906
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2015          Jan 5,907 4,940 1,519 9,741 5,819 212 905
         Feb .......
         Mar 6,128 5,095 1,622 9,891 5,922 212 1,076
         Apr  p 6,182 5,039 1,608 9,926 5,917 220 1,112
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build-
associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and depo- money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are sits with building and loan associa- of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but tions) with agreed maturities of up Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of suchperiod not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 to 2 years to banks in non-euro-
years requirements area countries to 2 years institution beginning in 
1 
2009 1,473,296 6,814 309,908 572,127 145,7592010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,7282011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,1532012 
8 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015          Jan 1,932,264 1,264 305,854 600,771 81,428         Feb . . . . .         Mar 1,958,611 1,719 361,779 602,551 87,427         Apr  
p 1,965,955 2,498 351,053 602,245 96,119
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of allowance. 8The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, was 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012 ,i t
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve has stood at 1%. 9Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance,
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years is 1%. including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required reserves of the
4Article
5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2015
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2015 Apr                  1 103,587 103,587 0.05−−−7
         Apr                  8 108,258 108,258 0.05−−−7
         Apr                15 96,559 96,559 0.05−−−7
         Apr                22 95,737 95,737 0.05−−−7
         Apr                29 108,485 108,485 0.05−−−7
         May                  6 95,233 95,233 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2015 Feb                26 54,037 54,037 2 ... − − − 91
         Mar                25 97,848 97,848 0,05−−− 1,281
         Mar                26 19,330 19,330 2 ... − − 91
−
         Apr                30 25,322 25,322 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2014          Oct 0.00 − 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.18 0.26 0.34
         Nov − 0.01 − 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.18 0.26 0.33
         Dec − 0.03 − 0.01 0.02 0.08 0.18 0.25 0.33
2015          Jan − 0.05 − 0.04 0.01 0.06 0.15 0.22 0.30
         Feb − 0.04 − 0.03 0.00 0.05 0.13 0.19 0.26
         Mar − 0.05 − 0.04 − 0.01 0.03 0.10 0.15 0.21
         Apr − 0.07 − 0.08 − 0.03 0.00 0.07 0.12 0.18
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 
1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Mar 
0.97 95,257 1.92 227,604 0.45 85,751 3.01 20,226
         Apr 0.95 94,627 1.91 226,848 0.45 86,699 2.98 19,598
         May 0.92 94,570 1.89 226,619 0.46 87,856 2.95 19,903
         June 0.91 95,671 1.87 226,527 0.44 84,165 2.92 19,989
         July 0.87 95,197 1.85 225,989 0.41 85,704 2.87 19,674
         Aug 0.84 94,384 1.84 225,881 0.39 86,373 2.83 19,536
         Sep 0.81 93,703 1.82 225,992 0.39 83,870 2.81 19,601
         Oct 0.79 92,778 1.81 225,657 0.37 83,587 2.78 19,663
         Nov 0.76 92,016 1.80 225,585 0.37 83,312 2.73 19,554
         Dec 0.70 92,021 1.77 227,145 0.36 81,096 2.74 19,152
2015          Jan 0.69 89,436 1.75 226,468 0.34 79,508 2.67 18,930
         Feb 0.67 89,570 1.73 226,183 0.32 79,398 2.60 18,974
         Mar 0.65 89,298 1.72 225,564 0.32 78,649 2.54 19,496
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Mar 
3.22 5,707 3.06 28,267 3.92 980,208 7.75 58,723 4.97 77,679 4.97 307,181
         Apr 3.17 5,744 3.03 28,198 3.90 981,947 7.53 57,688 4.91 76,672 4.99 309,107
         May 3.17 5,764 3.01 28,197 3.88 984,889 7.51 56,479 4.94 75,911 4.98 309,887
         June 3.17 5,762 2.99 28,112 3.86 986,700 7.59 59,098 4.92 76,099 4.96 308,827
         July 3.08 5,812 2.96 28,148 3.83 989,997 7.51 56,579 4.89 76,766 4.94 309,761
         Aug 3.09 5,667 2.94 28,220 3.82 994,510 7.36 55,731 4.86 77,128 4.91 309,772
         Sep 3.09 5,630 2.91 28,295 3.80 997,116 7.54 58,107 4.83 77,166 4.89 308,303
         Oct 3.05 5,766 2.87 28,278 3.77 1,000,934 7.36 56,716 4.79 77,707 4.87 308,423
         Nov 2.98 5,631 2.84 28,396 3.75 1,004,378 7.25 54,676 4.77 77,140 4.84 308,879
         Dec 3.04 5,175 2.82 28,209 3.72 1,010,155 7.14 56,678 4.78 76,938 4.84 304,381
2015          Jan 3.02 5,257 2.79 28,086 3.69 1,008,805 7.21 55,838 4.75 76,660 4.79 303,663
         Feb 2.95 5,114 2.76 27,985 3.67 1,011,133 7.23 55,248 4.74 76,165 4.77 304,217
         Mar 2.96 5,186 2.74 27,861 3.64 1,012,358 7.27 57,466 4.71 76,459 4.75 303,955
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Mar 
3.23 133,290 2.84 126,844 3.22 582,771
         Apr 3.17 132,664 2.83 130,113 3.21 583,996
         May 3.14 133,191 2.81 130,069 3.20 586,337
         June 3.11 138,116 2.76 129,524 3.18 582,780
         July 2.97 133,446 2.72 129,959 3.15 583,339
         Aug 2.96 131,893 2.71 130,271 3.14 585,897
         Sep 2.98 132,902 2.65 129,887 3.11 584,473
         Oct 2.90 130,017 2.60 131,515 3.07 586,281
         Nov 2.88 132,058 2.57 131,532 3.05 588,938
         Dec 2.80 128,984 2.52 128,693 3.02 574,766
2015          Jan 2.78 129,832 2.51 129,360 2.98 575,197
         Feb 2.76 132,518 2.49 128,329 2.96 577,596
         Mar 2.79 131,998 2.46 127,655 2.93 577,173
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the
month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Mar 
0.37 942,554 0.69 7,426 0.98 583 1.33 1,496 0.72 530,731 0.92 77,451
         Apr 0.36 953,725 0.68 8,300 1.03 808 1.29 1,523 0.73 529,024 0.91 77,285
         May 0.36 964,096 0.66 7,869 0.92 690 1.33 1,895 0.72 528,416 0.88 77,128
         June 0.35 963,948 0.65 7,904 1.02 595 1.36 1,420 0.70 528,104 0.84 76,049
         July 0.30 972,397 0.53 8,497 0.87 691 1.26 1,493 0.66 527,278 0.82 76,712
         Aug 0.30 982,182 0.54 6,962 0.96 600 1.11 1,293 0.61 527,851 0.83 77,648
         Sep 0.29 976,579 0.52 7,217 0.87 611 1.16 1,224 0.60 527,990 0.81 78,170
         Oct 0.27 990,310 0.51 7,406 0.98 560 1.04 1,104 0.56 527,680 0.79 77,990
         Nov 0.26 1,013,535 0.52 7,410 0.90 616 1.18 1,098 0.54 527,234 0.77 77,625
         Dec 0.26 1,007,245 0.35 8,589 0.81 570 1.14 1,168 0.52 530,301 0.75 76,202
2015          Jan 0.25 1,017,775 0.56 7,241 0.87 817 1.09 1,129 0.51 528,559 0.73 77,361
         Feb 0.24 1,030,216 0.56 5,901 0.77 665 1.10 1,035 0.46 529,391 0.69 76,071
         Mar 0.21 1,027,380 0.40 7,247 0.79 676 1.02 978 0.43 528,482 0.64 74,767
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Mar 
0.17 313,232 0.22 22,601 0.67 525 1.03 389
         Apr 0.17 315,372 0.26 26,114 0.68 576 1.04 345
         May 0.16 318,469 0.25 27,178 0.60 432 0.91 390
         June 0.14 314,270 0.18 24,006 0.54 313 1.02 615
         July 0.12 320,536 0.18 17,300 0.53 335 1.06 436
         Aug 0.12 326,545 0.16 15,252 0.48 188 0.82 186
         Sep 0.11 336,903 0.16 12,441 0.34 279 1.13 281
         Oct 0.10 345,504 0.17 13,388 0.48 608 0.74 292
         Nov 0.09 343,396 0.14 12,311 0.52 1,448 0.52 486
         Dec 0.09 344,691 0.16 14,634 0.47 731 1.55 725
2015          Jan 0.09 337,455 0.16 12,106 0.42 377 0.56 349
         Feb 0.08 333,728 0.17 11,357 0.78 387 0.57 399
         Mar 0.07 337,420 0.17 13,580 0.36 561 0.49 467
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Mar 
2.06 4,627 3.50 1,162 2.89 2,841 2.32 2,832 3.68 694 2.86 1,427
         Apr 2.02 4,931 3.47 1,092 2.91 2,814 2.23 2,924 3.64 778 2.88 1,368
         May 1.96 4,047 3.52 1,023 2.84 2,136 2.26 2,277 3.74 789 2.75 1,213
         June 2.04 4,245 3.46 947 2.77 2,325 2.29 2,615 3.62 712 2.72 1,346
         July 1.88 4,952 3.33 1,196 2.71 2,713 2.15 3,073 3.50 888 2.66 1,470
         Aug 2.14 3,449 3.51 799 2.59 1,996 2.24 2,089 3.66 622 2.57 1,314
         Sep 1.93 4,709 3.48 859 2.51 2,586 2.02 2,858 3.61 632 2.42 1,400
         Oct 1.80 4,726 3.26 972 2.58 2,521 1.94 2,869 3.50 694 2.47 1,437
         Nov 1.98 3,301 3.21 847 2.46 2,215 1.99 2,175 3.42 619 2.35 1,221
         Dec 1.68 5,108 2.95 1,178 2.36 3,050 1.87 3,235 3.11 870 2.34 1,696
2015          Jan 1.89 4,266 3.07 1,055 2.45 2,383 2.07 2,734 3.28 778 2.32 1,329
         Feb 1.59 3,425 3.07 828 2.24 1,982 1.84 1,916 3.31 567 2.08 1,213
         Mar 1.72 4,380 3.07 1,169 2.25 3,238 1.88 2,735 3.24 870 2.16 1,717
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2014          Mar 6.19 6.12 5,954 5.72 832 4.99 2,702 7.51 2,420
         Apr 6.26 6.20 5,613 5.44 395 4.92 2,606 7.59 2,612
         May 6.34 6.25 5,665 5.33 497 5.02 2,520 7.59 2,648
         June 6.26 6.24 5,571 5.17 406 5.00 2,438 7.51 2,727
         July 6.31 6.23 5,983 5.28 414 4.96 2,704 7.57 2,865
         Aug 6.21 6.14 6,277 5.21 486 4.86 2,782 7.47 3,009
         Sep 6.08 5.98 6,207 5.02 543 4.77 2,836 7.37 2,828
         Oct 6.07 6.03 6,460 5.03 392 4.71 2,962 7.41 3,106
         Nov 5.97 5.88 5,730 5.02 472 4.71 2,657 7.23 2,601
         Dec 5.67 5.62 4,969 4.49 515 4.67 2,328 6.94 2,126
2015          Jan 6.11 6.06 5,774 5.19 375 4.71 2,534 7.36 2,865
         Feb 5.94 5.90 5,536 5.14 256 4.63 2,459 7.08 2,821
         Mar 5.62 5.61 6,656 5.16 312 4.41 3,115 6.81 3,229
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Mar . 4.23 261 3.41 53 4.75 138 3.84 70
         Apr . 3.99 248 2.15 52 4.63 133 4.14 63
         May . 4.32 220 3.57 22 4.64 129 3.97 69
         June . 4.21 215 3.43 28 4.64 121 3.76 66
         July . 3.85 299 2.68 102 4.79 128 3.82 69
         Aug . 4.42 193 3.33 20 4.74 120 4.11 53
         Sep . 4.12 203 2.79 27 4.66 116 3.65 60
         Oct . 3.96 1,018 2.72 86 4.52 454 3.66 478
         Nov . 4.07 791 3.23 26 4.57 381 3.62 384
         Dec . 3.83 635 3.13 25 4.52 302 3.20 308
2015          Jan . 3.75 682 2.76 102 4.37 276 3.51 304
         Feb . 3.49 528 3.14 28 4.30 230 2.84 270
         Mar . 3.48 472 2.90 29 3.99 229 3.01 214
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Mar 2.82 2.75 16,442 2.75 2,449 2.36 2,266 2.73 6,455 2.94 5,272
         Apr 2.85 2.75 17,947 2.69 2,754 2.40 2,574 2.71 7,202 3.02 5,417
         May 2.73 2.66 16,015 2.70 2,259 2.33 2,229 2.63 6,506 2.84 5,021
         June 2.65 2.58 15,767 2.49 2,436 2.31 2,091 2.55 6,359 2.79 4,881
         July 2.55 2.50 19,296 2.50 2,866 2.21 2,638 2.48 7,957 2.65 5,835
         Aug 2.52 2.45 16,207 2.59 2,398 2.17 2,018 2.40 6,422 2.55 5,369
         Sep 2.39 2.34 16,831 2.44 2,127 2.08 2,063 2.31 6,907 2.44 5,734
         Oct 2.34 2.29 18,118 2.38 2,543 2.07 2,197 2.22 7,383 2.40 5,995
         Nov 2.29 2.23 16,479 2.42 2,176 1.99 2,185 2.15 6,376 2.33 5,742
         Dec 2.22 2.17 18,743 2.26 2,640 1.98 2,095 2.12 7,778 2.24 6,230
2015          Jan 2.22 1.96 19,896 2.29 2,537 1.95 2,076 2.05 7,114 1.78 8,169
         Feb 2.05 1.99 17,048 2.33 2,128 1.89 1,810 1.88 6,616 2.03 6,494
         Mar 1.95 1.91 21,520 2.26 2,644 1.91 2,253 1.79 8,073 1.91 8,550
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Mar . 2.69 7,808 2.69 954 2.31 1,152 2.66 3,125 2.90 2,577
         Apr . 2.73 8,786 2.61 1,159 2.35 1,336 2.65 3,499 3.07 2,792
         May . 2.60 7,592 2.61 923 2.24 1,110 2.58 3,109 2.80 2,450
         June . 2.53 7,151 2.41 901 2.20 1,017 2.50 2,955 2.76 2,278
         July . 2.44 9,007 2.45 1,163 2.14 1,371 2.42 3,718 2.61 2,755
         Aug . 2.39 7,432 2.54 900 2.08 992 2.33 3,015 2.52 2,525
         Sep . 2.28 7,574 2.44 810 1.97 1,014 2.21 3,065 2.41 2,685
         Oct . 2.23 8,249 2.41 987 1.95 1,107 2.15 3,358 2.38 2,797
         Nov . 2.13 7,782 2.32 889 1.81 1,310 2.06 2,959 2.29 2,624
         Dec . 2.10 8,525 2.28 998 1.82 1,059 2.04 3,493 2.21 2,975
2015          Jan . 1.78 10,249 2.23 1,002 1.81 1,080 1.97 3,527 1.54 4,640
         Feb . 1.91 8,049 2.28 842 1.68 951 1.78 3,247 2.02 3,009
         Mar . 1.81 9,926 2.20 1,103 1.65 1,099 1.69 3,805 1.85 3,919
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Mar 
9.33 45,617 9.34 38,706 14.58 4,313 4.39 68,638 4.41 68,379
         Apr 9.20 43,618 9.27 37,048 15.35 3,587 4.38 66,730 4.39 66,493
         May 9.21 42,626 9.22 36,563 15.42 3,566 4.39 66,148 4.41 65,901
         June 9.26 44,696 9.30 38,374 15.43 3,657 4.35 69,615 4.37 69,358
         July 9.20 42,604 9.21 36,390 15.36 3,630 4.17 65,960 4.19 65,707
         Aug 9.08 41,864 9.14 35,283 15.34 3,721 4.13 65,743 4.14 65,562
         Sep 9.16 44,311 9.23 37,656 15.31 3,783 4.17 66,516 4.18 66,287
         Oct 9.06 42,611 9.09 36,051 15.32 3,770 4.14 62,839 4.16 62,600
         Nov 9.00 40,795 8.92 34,390 15.32 3,788 4.03 64,435 4.05 64,185
         Dec 8.98 42,863 9.01 36,198 15.30 3,816 3.95 63,192 3.97 62,988
2015          Jan 9.01 41,798 8.95 35,383 15.32 3,800 3.93 63,695 3.94 63,497
         Feb 9.03 41,290 8.93 34,874 15.30 3,788 3.84 66,274 3.86 66,045
         Mar 8.99 43,132 8.98 36,571 15.27 3,818 3.82 66,465 3.84 66,233
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Mar 3.01 8,295 3.54 1,018 2.80 1,121 1.91 37,918 2.53 1,289 2.77 4,529
         Apr 2.95 8,017 3.54 1,087 2.73 1,156 1.83 44,756 2.34 1,752 2.87 4,473
         May 3.06 7,005 3.64 919 2.63 1,102 1.74 36,580 2.19 1,457 2.66 3,829
         June 2.97 7,708 3.62 897 2.59 1,098 1.65 43,000 2.31 2,259 2.42 5,386
         July 2.82 8,292 3.36 1,336 2.55 1,355 1.61 48,992 2.56 2,124 2.58 5,078
         Aug 2.77 6,172 3.26 1,080 2.47 1,156 1.46 36,472 2.22 1,864 2.40 4,379
         Sep 2.77 7,503 3.24 1,178 2.35 1,248 1.57 44,139 2.37 1,608 2.22 5,639
         Oct 2.70 8,199 3.21 1,286 2.29 1,260 1.53 45,100 2.59 2,975 2.18 6,336
         Nov 2.82 7,996 3.14 1,057 2.16 1,117 1.52 33,405 2.42 1,520 2.02 5,095
         Dec 2.78 7,949 2.97 1,584 2.12 1,709 1.61 48,843 1.99 2,990 2.01 10,718
2015          Jan 2.64 7,596 3.10 1,203 1.39 3,038 1.41 45,358 1.87 2,212 1.82 7,077
         Feb 2.77 7,328 3.06 1,044 1.98 1,258 1.26 36,166 1.68 1,322 1.95 5,401
         Mar 2.70 8,424 2.97 1,568 1.95 1,648 1.49 39,856 1.61 2,122 1.71 8,534
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Mar 2.81 1,000 2.72 145 2.70 320 2.27 5,618 2.74 408 2.66 994
         Apr 2.66 1,161 2.73 152 2.60 340 2.09 9,522 2.31 658 2.98 1,495
         May 2.86 862 2.71 118 2.48 358 2.23 5,063 2.60 477 2.64 984
         June 2.87 952 2.67 109 2.46 344 2.07 4,950 2.33 1,055 2.22 1,518
         July 2.61 1,318 2.55 196 2.44 461 2.05 8,769 2.64 786 2.85 1,477
         Aug 2.79 776 2.46 127 2.32 326 1.90 4,212 2.61 854 2.41 815
         Sep 2.68 920 2.52 129 2.23 361 1.97 6,190 3.13 488 2.09 1,535
         Oct 2.52 1,188 2.42 139 2.22 369 1.81 9,300 3.58 803 2.38 1,697
         Nov 2.64 794 2.36 93 2.00 341 1.69 4,649 2.24 618 2.12 1,049
         Dec 2.55 1,050 2.17 196 1.96 493 1.72 8,019 1.93 1,194 1.85 3,329
2015          Jan 2.43 1,150 2.37 147 1.13 2,235 1.71 8,834 1.76 764 1.45 2,758
         Feb 2.65 794 2.28 98 1.74 473 1.68 4,579 2.11 164 1.68 1,166
         Mar 2.47 980 2.57 142 1.68 536 1.80 6,664 1.73 643 1.53 2,835
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and
Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.32007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.52008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.82009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.42012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.12013 2,236.3 2,164.2 540.7 318.4 283.8 224.6 670.4 63.6 62.7 72.12014 2,427.0 2,350.3 522.3 392.4 293.1 230.4 781.5 66.1 64.5 76.7
2013          Q1 2,196.6 2,128.7 560.3 300.2 279.4 225.3 637.3 61.7 64.4 67.9
         Q2 2,195.8 2,127.1 554.5 302.8 279.8 224.8 638.8 62.1 64.2 68.7         Q3 2,214.6 2,144.2 547.3 308.4 283.1 224.5 654.7 62.8 63.4 70.4         Q4 2,236.3 2,164.2 540.7 318.4 283.8 224.6 670.4 63.6 62.7 72.1
2014          Q1 2,296.8 2,223.5 542.3 336.3 286.8 226.0 703.1 65.5 63.4 73.3
         Q2 2,340.9 2,267.0 538.6 353.5 288.1 226.9 731.3 65.5 63.3 73.9         Q3 2,378.3 2,303.2 530.3 373.5 289.0 227.7 753.1 65.7 64.0 75.1         Q4 2,427.0 2,350.3 522.3 392.4 293.1 230.4 781.5 66.1 64.5 76.7
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,741.0 1,694.6 382.9 271.4 256.9 211.1 462.4 59.2 50.9 46.4
2014 1,884.2 1,835.3 363.9 334.3 265.3 215.8 542.7 61.4 52.0 48.9
2013          Q1 1,720.0 1,676.4 403.5 259.1 253.2 212.5 437.7 57.5 52.9 43.6
         Q2 1,716.4 1,672.3 397.9 259.9 253.6 211.9 438.5 57.9 52.7 44.1
         Q3 1,727.7 1,682.3 390.1 264.3 256.2 211.3 450.1 58.5 51.7 45.4
         Q4 1,741.0 1,694.6 382.9 271.4 256.9 211.1 462.4 59.2 50.9 46.4
2014          Q1 1,790.4 1,743.4 382.0 288.8 259.6 212.2 488.3 61.1 51.4 47.0
         Q2 1,823.4 1,776.1 378.0 303.1 260.9 212.9 509.0 61.0 51.2 47.4
         Q3 1,853.3 1,805.0 371.7 319.3 262.0 213.4 525.7 61.1 51.7 48.3
         Q4 1,884.2 1,835.3 363.9 334.3 265.3 215.8 542.7 61.4 52.0 48.9
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 495.3 469.5 157.8 47.0 27.0 13.5 208.1 4.4 11.8 25.7
2014 542.8 515.0 158.5 58.1 27.8 14.7 238.8 4.6 12.5 27.8
2013          Q1 476.6 452.3 156.9 41.1 26.2 12.8 199.6 4.2 11.6 24.3
         Q2 479.4 454.8 156.6 43.0 26.2 13.0 200.2 4.2 11.6 24.6
         Q3 486.9 461.9 157.2 44.1 26.8 13.2 204.6 4.3 11.7 25.0
         Q4 495.3 469.5 157.8 47.0 27.0 13.5 208.1 4.4 11.8 25.7
2014          Q1 506.4 480.1 160.3 47.5 27.2 13.8 214.8 4.5 12.0 26.3
         Q2 517.5 491.0 160.6 50.4 27.2 14.0 222.3 4.5 12.1 26.5
         Q3 525.0 498.2 158.6 54.2 27.1 14.2 227.4 4.5 12.2 26.8
         Q4 542.8 515.0 158.5 58.1 27.8 14.7 238.8 4.6 12.5 27.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial surance corporations and pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pen-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market sion funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. 1Including registered bonds, funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from
borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupatio-
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Including participation certificates nal pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
(“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013 2,236.3 16.9 81.7 197.7 1,792.9 1,516.1 276.8 70.5 76.6
2014 2,427.0 17.3 85.6 202.7 1,886.7 1,597.9 288.8 73.3 161.4
2013          Q1 2,196.6 21.4 77.1 169.7 1,740.7 1,463.3 277.4 71.8 115.9
         Q2 2,195.8 17.8 80.3 172.1 1,757.4 1,480.6 276.8 71.3 96.8
         Q3 2,214.6 16.5 81.7 177.0 1,771.9 1,495.8 276.1 70.8 96.7
         Q4 2,236.3 16.9 81.7 197.7 1,792.9 1,516.1 276.8 70.5 76.6
2014          Q1 2,296.8 16.3 83.3 191.3 1,826.3 1,540.1 286.2 72.0 107.5
         Q2 2,340.9 16.2 83.8 184.1 1,843.6 1,557.5 286.1 72.3 141.0
         Q3 2,378.3 17.6 84.3 188.0 1,857.4 1,570.7 286.7 72.6 158.4
         Q4 2,427.0 17.3 85.6 202.7 1,886.7 1,597.9 288.8 73.3 161.4
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,741.0 16.9 77.5 188.7 1,337.8 1,061.4 276.4 68.7 51.3
2014 1,884.2 17.3 81.2 193.4 1,400.1 1,111.7 288.4 71.4 120.8
2013          Q1 1,720.0 21.4 73.0 162.3 1,305.9 1,029.0 276.9 70.0 87.3
         Q2 1,716.4 17.8 76.2 164.5 1,317.4 1,041.0 276.4 69.5 70.9
         Q3 1,727.7 16.5 77.6 169.1 1,326.3 1,050.6 275.7 69.0 69.1
         Q4 1,741.0 16.9 77.5 188.7 1,337.8 1,061.4 276.4 68.7 51.3
2014          Q1 1,790.4 16.3 79.0 182.8 1,365.2 1,079.4 285.8 70.2 76.9
         Q2 1,823.4 16.2 79.5 175.8 1,376.7 1,091.1 285.6 70.4 104.8
         Q3 1,853.3 17.6 80.0 179.5 1,386.1 1,099.9 286.2 70.7 119.3
         Q4 1,884.2 17.3 81.2 193.4 1,400.1 1,111.7 288.4 71.4 120.8
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 495.3 − 4.2 8.9 455.1 454.6 0.5 1.8 25.3
2014 542.8 − 4.4 9.3 486.6 486.1 0.5 2.0 40.6
2013          Q1 476.6 − 4.0 7.4 434.8 434.3 0.4 1.8 28.6
         Q2 479.4 − 4.1 7.6 440.1 439.6 0.4 1.8 25.9
         Q3 486.9 − 4.1 7.9 445.6 445.1 0.4 1.8 27.5
         Q4 495.3 − 4.2 8.9 455.1 454.6 0.5 1.8 25.3
2014          Q1 506.4 − 4.2 8.5 461.1 460.6 0.5 1.9 30.6
         Q2 517.5 − 4.3 8.3 466.9 466.4 0.5 1.9 36.2
         Q3 525.0 − 4.3 8.5 471.2 470.8 0.5 1.9 39.1
         Q4 542.8 − 4.4 9.3 486.6 486.1 0.5 2.0 40.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial maining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and “shares and other
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corpo-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as rations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus comprise company pen-from 2013 are partially estimated. 1Including deposits retained on ceded business. sion schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual
2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing pro- Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal
visions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance sche- supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for themes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in the European System of self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between total assets and the re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2015
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales
Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5252012 54,952 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,370 − 1,139 − 42,017 − 3,573 44,450 56,0922013 − 9,340 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 92,275 23,033 − 25,778 − 12,708 61,521 − 32,3742014 68,533 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 100,493 49,539 − 12,128 − 11,951 73,618 18,994
2014          May 32,168 28,566 11,336 − 1,127 18,357 3,602 2,591 1,764 − 966 1,793 29,576
         June 1,652 − 5,765 − 9,400 − 4,686 8,321 7,417 2,811 − 2,240 − 1,632 6,683 − 1,159
         July 3,087 − 2,955 − 2,229 5,062 − 5,788 6,042 9,896 32 − 1,640 11,504 − 6,809
         Aug 10,406 14,890 4,695 − 1,327 11,523 − 4,485 − 5,222 − 2,744 − 1,666 − 812 15,628         Sep 7,891 − 7,661 − 4,017 − 218 − 3,426 15,551 15,169 7,579 − 373 7,963 − 7,279
         Oct 5,342 − 2,321 − 6,304 − 1,626 5,609 7,663 6,756 − 5,699 − 981 13,436 − 1,414
         Nov 20,323 2,177 − 4,561 − 305 7,044 18,145 10,445 8,392 − 660 2,713 9,877         Dec − 23,629 − 23,897 − 7,257 227 − 16,867 268 − 4,942 − 15,489 27 10,520 − 18,687
2015          Jan 23,198 12,020 9,062 2,258 700 11,178 1,533 11,589 − 736 − 9,320 21,665
         Feb 18,624 8,157 4,938 5,576 − 2,357 10,467 25,502 − 4,119 681 28,940 − 6,879         Mar 10,347 − 5,223 − 3,851 2,007 − 3,379 15,570 25,138 1,999 12,589 10,550 − 14,791
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales
Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 17,426 5,120 12,306 16,126 10,259 5,867 1,3002013 29,243 10,106 19,137 24,322 11,991 12,331 4,9212014 45,491 18,778 26,713 33,307 17,078 16,229 12,184
2014          May 11,714 868 10,846 4,994 − 7,328 12,322 6,720
         June 11,563 9,015 2,548 430 168 262 11,133
         July 3,399 1,770 1,629 6,776 3,182 3,594 − 3,377
         Aug − 1,413 291 − 1,704 − 2,860 − 2,003 − 857 1,447         Sep 4,140 4,218 − 78 − 3,667 1,111 − 4,778 7,807
         Oct − 1,951 1,221 − 3,172 − 8,030 − 4,565 − 3,465 6,079
         Nov − 270 245 − 515 2,412 2,047 365 − 2,682         Dec 11,881 189 11,692 12,527 7,310 5,217 − 646
2015          Jan 735 78 657 6,696 7,111 − 415 − 5,961
         Feb 3,393 117 3,276 − 3,057 − 5,160 2,103 6,450         Mar − 589 49 − 638 − 6,349 8,522 − 14,871 5,760
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2014          Aug 109,326 75,365 932 940 54,900 18,594 2,172 31,789 −
         Sep 101,795 60,749 4,805 1,218 37,935 16,792 8,843 32,204 −
         Oct 123,390 69,634 2,072 1,771 54,826 10,965 6,850 46,907 −
         Nov 105,190 67,032 2,191 315 50,578 13,948 6,956 31,202 −
         Dec 98,708 66,890 731 928 50,249 14,981 6,515 25,303 −
2015          Jan 139,925 90,524 3,485 795 63,247 22,996 6,550 42,851 −
         Feb 129,489 87,976 3,401 1,493 64,175 18,907 7,601 33,912 −
         Mar 128,867 81,088 3,531 1,598 56,183 19,775 11,000 36,779 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2014          Aug 21,235 8,481 717 410 1,715 5,639 463 12,291 −
         Sep 39,315 16,184 2,937 952 3,856 8,439 7,704 15,427 −
         Oct 35,987 9,295 1,419 609 4,042 3,225 4,826 21,865 −
         Nov 32,395 15,177 1,117 212 8,119 5,728 3,878 13,340 −         Dec 27,575 11,748 731 858 2,963 7,195 3,729 12,098 −
2015          Jan 44,986 19,854 3,185 400 9,064 7,205 2,400 22,733 −
         Feb 34,715 15,495 2,581 887 4,767 7,260 3,704 15,516 −         Mar 31,221 12,771 2,374 1,548 1,548 7,301 6,717 11,733 −
Net sales  6 
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2014          Aug 16,022 4,579 − 1,287 437 595 4,834 − 1,109 12,552 −
         Sep − 3,467 − 2,745 493 − 1,208 − 1,082 − 949 1,166 − 1,888 −
         Oct − 4,570 − 7,639 − 281 − 1,069 35 − 6,325 − 1,655 4,724 −
         Nov 5,589 − 3,094 1,248 − 3,078 − 444 − 818 312 8,372 −         Dec − 27,860 − 12,169 − 734 − 1,623 − 4,150 − 5,662 523 − 16,214 − 122
2015          Jan 10,747 17,476 1,453 − 284 9,886 6,421 1,547 − 8,277 −
         Feb 11,007 8,697 − 601 − 708 11,970 − 1,964 4,979 − 2,669 − 1,250         Mar − 5,487 − 3,480 2,318 298 − 3,224 − 2,871 1,958 − 3,965 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2015
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,4222014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2014          Sep 3,138,149 1,254,343 121,095 91,204 573,834 468,209 233,168 1,650,639 7,919         Oct 3,133,579 1,246,703 120,815 90,135 573,869 461,885 231,513 1,655,363 7,919
         Nov 3,139,168 1,243,609 122,062 87,057 573,424 461,066 231,825 1,663,734 7,919         Dec 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015          Jan 3,122,055 1,248,922 122,781 85,150 579,295 461,695 233,890 1,639,243 7,797
         Feb 3,133,061 1,257,618 122,180 84,442 591,265 459,731 238,838 1,636,605 6,547         Mar 3,127,575 1,254,139 124,498 84,741 588,041 456,859 240,796 1,632,640 6,547
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2015 
1,162,945 579,203 44,233 40,237 263,600 231,133 46,938 536,804 1,954    less than 2
634,650 273,940 35,052 21,465 138,646 78,774 39,564 321,146 1,292 2 to less than 4
464,272 181,265 24,576 11,487 96,263 48,938 41,138 241,869 146 4 to less than 6
276,195 86,906 10,646 4,928 40,624 30,709 23,140 166,149 266 6 to less than 8
234,359 52,046 7,359 4,353 21,641 18,692 12,479 169,836 1,362 8 to less than 10
94,249 27,593 2,390 2,003 10,474 12,726 9,965 56,691 549 10 to less than 15
62,955 10,942 30 156 5,095 5,661 7,317 44,697 10 15 to less than 20
197,949 42,246 213 110 11,697 30,225 60,256 95,449 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2014          Sep 175,138 1,488 1,621 125 23 − − 29 − 125 − 127 1,401,240         Oct 176,375 1,237 563 − 780 − − 15 − 27 − 63 1,389,691
         Nov 176,551 176 235 − − − 35 17 − 111 1,483,086         Dec 177,097 546 178 1 625 − − 11 13 − 260 1,478,063
2015          Jan 177,103 6 73 11 13 − 0 − 30 − 61 1,595,237
         Feb 177,200 97 87 1 64 − 0 − 20 − 35 1,690,516         Mar 177,159 − 41 43 − 78 − − 47 − 16 − 99 1,773,480
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 
official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2014          Nov 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 1.1 2.5 138.40 113.23 474.80 9,980.85
         Dec 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 1.0 2.4 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015          Jan 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.8 2.3 140.04 116.78 509.65 10,694.32
         Feb 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.7 2.2 140.18 116.47 543.06 11,401.66         Mar 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.6 2.1 140.52 118.05 567.47 11,966.17
         Apr 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.7 2.0 139.85 116.16 543.36 11,454.38
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,609 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,667 115,031 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,093 23,229 − 3,4222013 123,276 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,939 117,189 771 100 116,418 31,838 6,086
2014 127,129 88,804 4,177 − 471 1,431 944 84,627 38,324 132,773 969 − 1,753 131,804 40,077 − 5,6422014          Sep 9,253 3,068 − 3,343 − 22 − 3,578 156 6,411 6,186 12,194 1,450 1,110 10,744 5,076 − 2,940         Oct 9,558 7,187 − 1,264 − 76 − 71 − 1,403 8,452 2,371 11,288 861 200 10,427 2,171 − 1,729
         Nov 17,509 12,854 − 290 − 40 − 826 287 13,145 4,654 18,301 − 357 − 1,202 18,658 5,856 − 792         Dec 8,926
p)9,846 p) 100 p)−2 0 p)−3 3 p) 316 p)9,746 − 920 9,862 − 1,329 − 1,696 11,191 776 − 936
2015          Jan 23,837 21,924 3,817 − 69 3,058 433 18,106 1,913 22,381 2,405 1,434 19,976 479 1,456         Feb 25,786 19,185 4,085 − 20 3,661 386 15,100 6,601 23,346 1,001 355 22,345 6,246 2,440         Mar 23,611 14,363 1,673 − 43 669 433 12,690 9,248 23,144 1,969 1,450 21,175 7,798 467
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 1.51 0.61 −14.95 39.31 15.19 − 13.00 − 7.22 14.39 − 9.13
Debt securities − 2.65 0.18 − 1.63 1.76 − 0.58 1.52 0.29 0.10 − 3.53
short-term debt securities − 2.61 1.56 1.62 0.78 − 0.38 1.79 − 0.13 − 0.44 0.40
long-term debt securities − 0.03 − 1.39 − 3.24 0.98 − 0.20 − 0.27 0.42 0.54 − 3.93
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.87 − 1.27 − 1.88 0.70 − 1.10 − 0.26 1.05 0.06 − 2.74
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10
Financial corporations . − 2.14 − 1.26 − 0.09 − 0.25 − 0.37 0.05 − 0.43 − 0.52
General government . 0.07 − 0.57 0.38 − 0.31 0.08 0.66 0.80 − 2.12
Debt securities of the rest of the world 2.22 1.44 0.26 1.06 0.53 1.78 − 0.76 0.04 − 0.80
Loans 20.32 39.05 45.69 10.37 − 7.51 17.01 2.57 15.84 10.27
short-term loans 9.78 55.02 39.94 9.81 7.55 14.34 6.28 16.19 3.14
long-term loans 10.54 −15.96 5.75 0.56 − 15.06 2.68 − 3.71 − 0.35 7.13
Memo item
to domestic sectors 19.11 31.97 42.21 9.07 0.33 14.54 6.08 7.58 14.02
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 28.03 7.75 0.41 8.47 1.89 5.05 12.62
Financial corporations 9.73 1.92 14.36 1.27 − 0.13 6.12 4.23 2.57 1.45
General government 0.50 0.21 − 0.18 0.05 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05
to the rest of the world 1.21 7.09 3.47 1.30 − 7.83 2.47 − 3.51 8.26 − 3.75
Equity and investment fund shares 36.58 20.85 3.90 7.92 6.97 8.56 − 2.78 9.04 − 10.93
Equity 36.77 13.20 14.28 6.47 4.62 7.39 − 0.60 7.92 − 0.44
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 8.70 − 1.62 2.99 1.05 − 0.93 − 0.69 2.77 − 2.76
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95
Financial corporations . − 0.95 3.78 − 0.04 − 0.06 0.02 0.10 0.47 3.19
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 13.73 9.07 2.95 2.83 2.46 7.96 − 1.54 0.18
Other equity 1 38.27 − 9.23 6.83 0.52 0.74 5.86 − 7.87 6.69 2.14
Investment fund shares − 0.20 7.65 −10.38 1.45 2.35 1.17 − 2.18 1.13 − 10.50
Money market fund shares 0.03 − 0.15 0.23 0.22 − 0.27 0.48 − 0.16 − 0.01 − 0.08
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 0.22 7.80 −10.61 1.23 2.62 0.68 − 2.02 1.14 − 10.41
Insurance technical reserves 1.34 2.82 2.95 0.70 0.76 0.72 0.72 0.77 0.75
Financial derivatives 0.72 6.49 6.01 1.56 0.62 − 2.80 − 0.38 − 0.25 9.44Other accounts receivable 87.14 174.79 −66.76 76.27 26.46 − 3.91 − 22.83 − 15.08 − 24.94
Total 141.93 244.79 −24.79 137.87 41.93 8.11 − 29.64 24.81 − 28.08
External financing
Debt securities 18.72 12.78 1.26 − 0.49 0.94 1.18 − 6.30 2.05 4.32
short-term securities − 1.58 − 1.12 −11.63 − 1.24 − 4.13 − 2.75 − 6.35 − 1.65 − 0.88
long-term securities 20.30 13.90 12.89 0.75 5.07 3.93 0.05 3.70 5.20
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 5.29 5.26 1.24 0.21 2.47 1.78 − 0.14 1.15
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10
Financial corporations . 3.04 5.12 0.06 0.75 2.34 1.12 0.25 1.41
General government . − 0.05 0.00 − 0.04 0.00 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
Households . 1.50 0.20 0.81 0.01 0.11 0.32 − 0.07 − 0.16
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 7.48 − 4.00 − 1.73 0.73 − 1.29 − 8.08 2.19 3.17
Loans 6.09 49.36 38.16 − 12.32 4.94 25.72 27.66 − 17.93 2.71
short-term loans 7.80 42.81 1.34 3.46 − 4.02 20.57 14.18 − 12.54 − 20.87
long-term loans − 1.71 6.55 36.82 − 15.78 8.96 5.16 13.48 − 5.39 23.58
Memo item
from domestic sectors −15.68 17.57 57.77 − 9.16 − 9.48 29.24 20.90 − 7.76 15.39
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 28.03 7.75 0.41 8.47 1.89 5.05 12.62
Financial corporations − 8.18 9.35 19.22 1.24 − 9.61 20.36 8.84 − 4.04 − 5.95
General government −16.37 −21.62 10.52 − 18.16 − 0.27 0.41 10.17 − 8.78 8.72
from the rest of the world 21.77 31.74 −19.61 − 3.16 14.42 − 3.52 6.76 − 10.17 − 12.68
Equity 12.74 15.94 23.88 3.79 7.73 2.31 2.57 5.05 13.95
Listed shares of domestic sectors . − 4.57 − 1.62 2.09 − 7.00 3.33 − 0.32 0.72 − 5.35
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95
Financial corporations . − 5.02 0.92 2.03 − 3.98 4.41 − 0.01 − 2.49 − 0.98
General government . − 0.98 0.05 − 0.07 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
Households . − 8.21 2.80 − 2.90 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.47 0.90 1.57
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 7.90 10.37 − 2.27 8.38 − 2.71 2.18 3.58 7.32
Other equity 1 9.44 12.60 15.13 3.96 6.35 1.69 0.70 0.75 11.99
Insurance technical reserves 7.69 6.00 6.00 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 8.09 3.72 16.75 1.68 − 4.03 2.28 2.46 2.47 9.55
Other accounts payable 18.75 31.21 3.99 28.07 − 0.35 − 2.08 − 1.28 17.35 − 10.00
Total 72.07 119.00 90.04 22.22 10.73 30.91 26.61 10.49 22.04
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 413.7 411.8 406.4 394.6 411.8 372.5 359.0 389.9 406.4
Debt securities 51.9 48.6 47.5 49.4 48.6 50.4 50.9 51.1 47.5
short-term debt securities 3.6 5.1 6.8 5.5 5.1 6.9 6.8 6.4 6.8
long-term debt securities 48.3 43.5 40.8 43.9 43.5 43.4 44.1 44.7 40.8
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 24.6 22.9 25.8 24.6 24.4 25.5 25.6 22.9
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6
Financial corporations . 13.8 12.7 14.1 13.8 13.5 13.6 13.2 12.7
General government . 6.1 5.7 6.5 6.1 6.2 6.9 7.7 5.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 24.0 24.6 23.6 24.0 26.0 25.4 25.5 24.6
Loans 411.5 456.6 506.7 462.4 456.6 472.0 478.8 496.6 506.7
short-term loans 291.4 351.7 392.5 342.7 351.7 364.7 372.2 389.5 392.5
long-term loans 120.1 104.9 114.2 119.7 104.9 107.4 106.5 107.1 114.2
Memo item
to domestic sectors 284.8 316.7 359.0 316.4 316.7 331.3 337.4 344.9 359.0
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 255.4 227.0 227.4 235.9 237.8 242.8 255.4
Financial corporations 80.9 82.9 97.2 83.0 82.9 89.0 93.2 95.8 97.2
General government 6.3 6.5 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.3
to the rest of the world 126.7 139.8 147.7 146.0 139.8 140.8 141.4 151.7 147.7
Equity and investment fund shares 1,627.2 1,786.9 1,881.1 1,702.0 1,786.9 1,788.5 1,811.8 1,849.1 1,881.1
Equity 1,498.2 1,648.8 1,745.6 1,566.4 1,648.8 1,647.6 1,669.9 1,703.9 1,745.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 275.4 262.2 251.9 275.4 266.3 266.0 254.6 262.2
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2
Financial corporations . 5.7 10.0 5.2 5.7 5.7 5.5 5.7 10.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 64.5 74.3 61.4 64.5 67.6 75.7 74.2 74.3
Other equity 1 1,229.3 1,308.9 1,409.1 1,253.1 1,308.9 1,313.8 1,328.1 1,375.1 1,409.1
Investment fund shares 129.0 138.1 135.5 135.6 138.1 140.9 141.9 145.2 135.5
Money market fund shares − 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.1 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.2
Non-MMF investment fund shares 129.0 137.0 134.4 134.2 137.0 139.3 140.4 143.9 134.4
Insurance technical reserves 43.3 46.1 49.2 45.4 46.1 46.9 47.6 48.4 49.2
Financial derivatives 18.0 16.8 22.8 17.6 16.8 14.0 13.6 13.3 22.8Other accounts receivable 824.2 893.2 873.4 874.5 893.2 874.2 859.8 866.4 873.4
Total 3,389.7 3,660.0 3,786.9 3,545.8 3,660.0 3,618.5 3,621.5 3,714.9 3,786.9
Liabilities
Debt securities 130.9 138.9 150.9 137.5 138.9 142.5 138.0 143.1 150.9
short-term securities 14.6 13.4 1.8 17.6 13.4 10.7 4.4 2.7 1.8
long-term securities 116.3 125.4 149.1 119.9 125.4 131.8 133.6 140.4 149.1
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 51.6 60.7 51.4 51.6 55.3 58.0 59.2 60.7
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7 4.6
Financial corporations . 31.3 40.3 30.4 31.3 34.9 36.7 38.4 40.3
General government . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . 15.6 15.8 15.7 15.6 15.7 16.2 16.0 15.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 87.3 90.2 86.1 87.3 87.2 80.0 83.9 90.2
Loans 1,342.0 1,429.9 1,447.1 1,415.1 1,429.9 1,447.8 1,476.9 1,460.7 1,447.1
short-term loans 429.0 486.9 487.6 491.2 486.9 506.8 519.8 509.4 487.6
long-term loans 913.0 943.0 959.6 923.9 943.0 941.0 957.1 951.2 959.6
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,065.3 1,115.6 1,149.3 1,119.7 1,115.6 1,141.6 1,159.5 1,150.5 1,149.3
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 255.4 227.0 227.4 235.9 237.8 242.8 255.4
Financial corporations 821.7 826.2 827.5 836.2 826.2 844.2 853.7 848.5 827.5
General government 46.1 62.0 66.4 56.6 62.0 61.5 68.0 59.2 66.4
from the rest of the world 276.7 314.3 297.9 295.3 314.3 306.2 317.5 310.1 297.9
Equity 2,127.9 2,433.5 2,535.1 2,265.7 2,433.5 2,443.3 2,464.9 2,425.1 2,535.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 567.9 554.2 525.0 567.9 565.0 569.4 538.5 554.2
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9 252.2
Financial corporations . 120.3 121.2 113.0 120.3 124.4 125.6 116.7 121.2
General government . 31.2 32.2 28.0 31.2 30.5 32.0 30.5 32.2
Households . 146.6 148.7 137.3 146.6 149.6 151.2 142.4 148.7
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 674.8 735.7 594.2 674.8 684.2 696.5 678.5 735.7
Other equity 1 1,132.8 1,190.9 1,245.2 1,146.5 1,190.9 1,194.2 1,198.9 1,208.1 1,245.2
Insurance technical reserves 237.5 243.5 249.5 242.0 243.5 245.0 246.5 248.0 249.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 40.2 37.3 54.0 45.1 37.3 39.5 42.0 44.4 54.0
Other accounts payable 957.5 980.5 1,015.1 967.7 980.5 960.2 957.4 993.5 1,015.1
Total 4,835.9 5,263.5 5,451.7 5,073.1 5,263.5 5,278.4 5,325.7 5,314.7 5,451.7
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 74.42 66.59 83.80 10.20 29.08 13.04 19.19 17.01 34.57
Currency − 0.05 10.80 13.58 3.81 0.07 5.27 3.52 3.99 0.80
Deposits 74.47 55.79 70.22 6.39 29.01 7.77 15.67 13.01 33.77
Transferable deposits 90.08 89.41 73.84 16.37 28.95 8.42 19.91 11.88 33.62
Time deposits − 5.21 − 9.78 8.83 − 4.94 1.47 2.37 1.31 0.94 4.20
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) −10.39 −23.85 −12.45 − 5.04 − 1.40 − 3.03 − 5.56 0.19 − 4.05
Debt securities −17.39 −17.81 −18.00 − 2.39 − 2.47 − 2.12 − 2.52 − 7.47 − 5.89
short-term debt securities − 0.26 − 0.36 − 0.67 − 0.28 − 0.20 0.11 − 0.08 − 0.39 − 0.32
long-term debt securities −17.13 −17.45 −17.33 − 2.11 − 2.28 − 2.24 − 2.44 − 7.09 − 5.57
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . −14.86 −15.08 − 2.61 − 2.53 − 2.27 − 2.64 − 5.92 − 4.25
Non-financial corporations . 1.24 0.02 0.75 − 0.07 0.09 0.27 − 0.11 − 0.23
Financial corporations . −12.46 −12.52 − 2.31 − 1.79 − 1.77 − 2.25 − 4.92 − 3.58
General government . − 3.64 − 2.58 − 1.05 − 0.67 − 0.60 − 0.65 − 0.89 − 0.44
Debt securities of the rest of the world . − 2.94 − 2.93 0.22 0.06 0.15 0.12 − 1.56 − 1.64
Equity and investment fund shares − 3.51 9.63 36.87 − 2.15 − 3.89 8.19 10.69 7.55 10.43
Equity − 0.08 − 0.41 12.17 − 3.05 − 4.36 3.44 3.79 1.00 3.94
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . − 5.63 4.61 − 3.49 − 4.89 0.51 2.07 0.25 1.79
Non-financial corporations . − 5.29 2.69 − 2.88 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.44 0.85 1.55
Financial corporations . − 0.35 1.93 − 0.61 − 0.76 0.66 1.63 − 0.60 0.23
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 2.99 3.70 0.18 0.50 1.91 0.65 0.08 1.06
Other equity 1 2.58 2.24 3.86 0.26 0.03 1.02 1.06 0.68 1.10
Investment fund shares − 3.42 10.04 24.70 0.90 0.47 4.75 6.91 6.55 6.49
Money market fund shares 0.46 − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.02 0.14 − 0.20 − 0.16 − 0.10 0.12
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 3.88 10.34 25.04 0.92 0.33 4.95 7.07 6.65 6.37
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.62 26.02 14.79 5.87 6.42 3.69 3.70 3.66 3.74
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 26.68 29.45 30.68 7.92 7.50 15.71 6.56 4.31 4.10
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.37 19.07 30.26 0.08 3.39 7.05 6.68 5.35 11.17
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 17.22 13.09 −21.11 11.80 − 7.51 0.27 − 8.09 4.15 − 17.44
Total 147.41 146.05 157.28 31.33 32.51 45.83 36.22 34.56 40.67
  External financing
Loans 15.65 11.26 19.89 8.75 0.50 0.37 5.93 9.39 4.21
short-term loans − 1.16 − 3.31 − 1.98 0.04 − 1.44 0.83 0.50 − 1.26 − 2.04
long-term loans 16.81 14.57 21.87 8.70 1.94 − 0.46 5.43 10.65 6.25
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.59 18.19 24.16 8.34 3.64 0.75 5.75 9.31 8.35
Consumer loans − 0.99 − 0.30 1.03 1.69 − 1.19 1.46 0.13 1.33 − 1.90
Entrepreneurial loans − 1.95 − 6.64 − 5.29 − 1.28 − 1.95 − 1.84 0.04 − 1.25 − 2.24
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 15.17 12.60 18.87 8.31 2.07 − 0.99 6.10 9.60 4.17
Loans from other financial institutions 0.48 − 1.30 1.02 0.43 − 1.57 1.35 − 0.17 − 0.21 0.05
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 − 0.05 0.00 0.00 − 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.36 − 0.22 0.38 0.02 − 0.47 0.19 − 0.02 0.30 − 0.09
Total 17.01 11.03 20.27 8.76 0.03 0.56 5.91 9.69 4.12
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,847.6 1,914.0 1,997.6 1,884.9 1,914.0 1,926.8 1,945.9 1,963.0 1,997.6
Currency 104.4 115.2 128.8 115.2 115.2 120.5 124.0 128.0 128.8
Deposits 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,868.8 1,769.8 1,798.8 1,806.3 1,821.9 1,835.0 1,868.8
Transferable deposits 818.3 907.8 981.4 878.8 907.8 916.0 935.9 947.8 981.4
Time deposits 255.9 245.9 254.7 244.4 245.9 248.2 249.5 250.5 254.7
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 669.0 645.1 632.6 646.5 645.1 642.1 636.5 636.7 632.6
Debt securities 200.1 179.0 162.2 182.0 179.0 177.7 176.4 168.9 162.2
short-term debt securities 3.1 2.7 2.1 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.4 2.1
long-term debt securities 197.0 176.3 160.1 179.2 176.3 174.9 173.6 166.5 160.1
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 116.9 102.4 119.8 116.9 115.1 112.9 107.1 102.4
Non-financial corporations . 14.2 14.1 14.4 14.2 14.2 14.7 14.5 14.1
Financial corporations . 90.7 78.7 92.5 90.7 89.4 87.4 82.6 78.7
General government . 12.0 9.6 12.9 12.0 11.5 10.9 10.0 9.6
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 62.0 59.8 62.2 62.0 62.7 63.4 61.8 59.8
Equity and investment fund shares 820.2 885.9 951.4 857.2 885.9 901.6 923.4 928.9 951.4
Equity 446.8 487.6 508.9 467.8 487.6 496.3 502.8 497.2 508.9
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . 167.4 169.7 156.5 167.4 170.5 171.5 163.0 169.7
Non-financial corporations . 140.4 142.1 131.7 140.4 143.3 144.9 136.2 142.1
Financial corporations . 26.9 27.6 24.8 26.9 27.1 26.6 26.9 27.6
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 55.8 64.0 52.7 55.8 57.9 60.6 63.2 64.0
Other equity 1 255.7 264.4 275.3 258.7 264.4 267.9 270.7 271.0 275.3
Investment fund shares 373.4 398.3 442.5 389.4 398.3 405.3 420.6 431.7 442.5
Money market fund shares 23.7 4.4 4.0 4.3 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.0 4.0Non-MMF investment fund shares 349.7 393.8 438.5 385.1 393.8 401.0 416.5 427.7 438.5
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 273.3 291.3 306.1 286.8 291.3 295.0 298.7 302.4 306.1
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 809.1 847.3 879.7 837.8 847.3 863.9 871.1 875.6 879.7
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 677.0 708.8 739.0 696.2 708.8 715.8 722.5 727.8 739.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 37.1 36.7 36.3 36.8 36.7 36.7 36.7 36.5 36.3
Total 4,664.5 4,863.0 5,072.4 4,781.7 4,863.0 4,917.5 4,974.7 5,003.1 5,072.4
  Liabilities
Loans 1,538.5 1,548.9 1,569.1 1,548.5 1,548.9 1,549.3 1,555.2 1,564.6 1,569.1
short-term loans 71.5 66.4 64.6 68.7 66.4 67.2 67.7 66.5 64.6
long-term loans 1,467.0 1,482.5 1,504.5 1,479.9 1,482.5 1,482.0 1,487.5 1,498.1 1,504.5
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,072.7 1,092.2 1,116.6 1,088.4 1,092.2 1,093.0 1,098.8 1,108.7 1,116.6
Consumer loans 194.3 188.7 188.7 190.2 188.7 190.1 189.9 190.6 188.7
Entrepreneurial loans 271.4 268.0 263.8 270.0 268.0 266.2 266.5 265.2 263.8
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,456.4 1,458.4 1,457.4 1,463.5 1,473.1 1,477.6
Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 90.5 91.5 92.1 90.5 91.9 91.7 91.5 91.5
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 14.9 15.0 15.3 16.2 15.0 16.0 15.8 16.7 15.3
Total 1,553.4 1,563.9 1,584.4 1,564.8 1,563.9 1,565.3 1,571.0 1,581.2 1,584.4
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2008 − 0.5 − 14.7 − 1.5 + 9.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 74.5 − 38.0 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 14.4 − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2 − 104.8 − 82.2 − 20.4 − 6.2 + 3.9 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 23.3 − 27.1 − 13.0 + 1.4 + 15.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.6 − 14.7 − 5.7 + 4.7 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 p + 4.2 − 4.5 − 2.8 + 5.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
2014 pe + 19.4 + 12.8 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
2013          H1  p + 7.8 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 6.2 + 3.9 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  p − 3.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          H1  pe + 13.2 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 6.3 + 11.6 + 1.9 − 4.1 − 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2008 1,666.4 1,010.8 543.1 127.8 1.5 65.1 39.5 21.2 5.0 0.1
2009 1,784.1 1,079.7 585.3 133.7 1.3 72.6 43.9 23.8 5.4 0.1
2010 2,073.7 1,318.9 632.1 139.2 1.3 80.5 51.2 24.5 5.4 0.1
2011 p 2,101.8 1,327.9 646.9 143.4 1.3 77.9 49.2 24.0 5.3 0.0
2012 p 2,179.8 1,372.8 675.9 147.5 1.2 79.3 49.9 24.6 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,166.0 1,376.6 656.7 150.0 1.3 77.1 49.0 23.4 5.3 0.0
2014 pe 2,170.0 1,383.6 653.0 151.1 1.4 74.7 47.6 22.5 5.2 0.0
2013          Q1 p 2,168.8 1,373.0 668.1 149.3 1.2 78.8 49.9 24.3 5.4 0.0
         Q2 p 2,169.3 1,380.8 657.4 149.0 1.1 78.3 49.8 23.7 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,150.6 1,366.3 650.1 149.6 1.1 77.1 49.0 23.3 5.4 0.0
         Q4 p 2,166.0 1,376.6 656.7 150.0 1.3 77.1 49.0 23.4 5.3 0.0
2014          Q1 pe 2,154.4 1,373.9 648.2 149.8 1.2 75.8 48.4 22.8 5.3 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,162.0 1,382.5 646.6 150.5 1.1 75.6 48.3 22.6 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,162.7 1,378.7 649.0 150.8 1.1 75.1 47.9 22.5 5.2 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,170.0 1,383.6 653.0 151.1 1.4 74.7 47.6 22.5 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Including ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2008 1,111.8 585.9 412.4 113.4 1,112.3 592.5 189.1 68.5 51.4 210.8 − 0.5 1,003.1
2009 1,090.8 554.5 415.6 120.6 1,165.3 625.2 197.8 64.8 56.2 221.2 − 74.5 974.1
2010 1,110.4 556.2 426.2 128.1 2 1,215.3 634.7 203.5 63.3 58.9 2 254.8 2 − 104.8 986.5
2011 p 1,179.5 598.9 442.2 138.3 1,202.7 634.6 208.2 67.1 61.2 231.7 − 23.3 1,045.8
2012 p 1,217.8 624.1 454.3 139.5 1,215.2 645.6 212.7 63.2 62.1 231.7 + 2.6 1,082.9
2013 p 1,249.4 642.5 465.4 141.6 1,245.3 666.8 217.6 56.3 62.8 241.8 + 4.2 1,112.2
2014 pe 1,293.8 665.9 481.6 146.3 1,274.4 691.6 223.9 50.6 63.1 245.2 + 19.4 1,152.0
as a percentage of GDP
2008 43.5 22.9 16.1 4.4 43.5 23.2 7.4 2.7 2.0 8.2 − 0.0 39.2
2009 44.4 22.6 16.9 4.9 47.4 25.4 8.1 2.6 2.3 9.0 − 3.0 39.7
2010 43.1 21.6 16.5 5.0 2 47.2 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 2 9.9 2 − 4.1 38.3
2011 p 43.7 22.2 16.4 5.1 44.6 23.5 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.6 − 0.9 38.7
2012 p 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.2 23.5 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.4 + 0.1 39.4
2013 p 44.5 22.9 16.6 5.0 44.3 23.7 7.7 2.0 2.2 8.6 + 0.1 39.6
2014 pe 44.6 22.9 16.6 5.0 43.9 23.8 7.7 1.7 2.2 8.4 + 0.7 39.7
Percentage growth rates
2008 + 2.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 7.9 + 9.8 . + 2.8
2009 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.4 + 9.3 + 5.0 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.2 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.8 + 15.1 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 8.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 9.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.1 − 5.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.6 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.3 − 10.8 + 1.0 + 4.3 . + 2.7
2014 pe + 3.6 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 3.3 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.4 . + 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and ceived from the 2010 frequency auction, which are deducted from other expenditure
social contributions plus customs duties. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds re- in the national accounts. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.7
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2012          Q1 p 174.2 142.9 2.5 193.1 51.9 75.6 28.0 7.0 3.4 − 18.9 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.9 293.1 − 18.2
         Q2 p 190.7 150.4 2.7 180.6 53.0 68.1 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 10.1 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.5 282.2 + 14.3
         Q3 p 178.3 147.5 4.3 183.0 53.9 66.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 4.7 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.8 286.2 − 3.4
         Q4 p 199.4 159.4 5.0 212.2 59.0 73.5 6.8 15.7 14.8 − 12.8 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 313.6 316.3 − 2.7
2013          Q1 p 178.0 148.6 2.6 187.8 53.7 74.9 22.5 6.0 2.9 − 9.8 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.3 294.9 − 13.6
         Q2 p 193.8 155.3 4.8 185.0 54.7 68.7 14.2 8.5 8.0 + 8.8 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 302.0 292.7 + 9.4
         Q3 p 183.8 151.8 2.4 192.3 55.2 70.9 20.1 11.6 3.2 − 8.5 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.4 299.9 − 9.5
         Q4 p 204.7 164.2 4.6 207.5 60.8 71.0 10.0 15.4 8.3 − 2.8 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.9 316.2 + 5.7
2014          Q1 p 188.1 153.6 2.0 193.8 56.7 77.8 20.1 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 295.9 304.9 − 8.9
         Q2 p 193.2 157.4 2.2 188.3 56.9 71.9 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 4.9 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.6 299.1 + 5.5
         Q3 p 186.3 157.5 3.4 188.0 57.0 70.8 12.2 11.3 4.0 − 1.7 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 297.2 300.0 − 2.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.4
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.2 − 0.3 338.1 335.9 + 2.2 218.8 219.0 − 0.2
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.8 − 2.9 82.1 86.4 − 4.3 58.9 56.5 + 2.4
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.5 − 0.6
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.2 94.1 − 1.9 63.2 61.2 + 2.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,6152012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,4982013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 ... 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 ... ... 6,433
2014          Mar . 51,512 27,439 21,628 2,445 . . 2,2132015          Mar . 53,793 28,387 22,756 2,651 . . 2,144
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,5172012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
2014          Mar 55,358 30,269 12,165 11,028 5,436 1,640 14,797 10,889 3,908 6 8,255 1,673 357 3,8462015          Mar 57,970 32,505 12,987 12,148 5,858 1,512 14,684 10,744 3,940 11 8,470 1,875 426 4,177
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2014: 53.5:44.5:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2014: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205
         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659
         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495
         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529
         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 ... ... ...
2014          Mar 3,061 962 1,667 1,157 536 571 135 166 . 845 510 318 . . .
2015          Mar 3,019 1,155 1,803 720 831 642 139 161 . 953 575 347 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 
p 269,050 189,069 78,947 265,661 226,485 15,971 + 3,389 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356
         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328
         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256
         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue
Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 
p 203,050 189,100 10,500 205,374 65,662 33,094 34,217 13,065 13,068 10,617 10,015 − 2,325
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 
p 25,910 25,831 25,455 3,558 10,264 5,938 939 1,212 + 456
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,900
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,851 4,440 400,200 21 382,690 945,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,605 4,440 356,800 102 408,863 982,4002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,791,241 4,440 426,700 70 284,331 1,075,7002013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 266,051 1,106,4002014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 
p 1,826,587 4,440 430,300 16 263,431 1,128,400
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,766,737 4,440 399,000 91 348,206 1,015,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,780,759 4,440 410,900 92 317,827 1,047,500
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,772,862 4,440 430,400 92 277,630 1,060,300
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,791,241 4,440 426,700 70 284,331 1,075,700
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 1,802,340 4,440 430,600 20 258,880 1,108,400
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 1,806,613 4,440 425,500 23 284,950 1,091,700
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 1,794,764 4,440 424,100 28 273,896 1,092,300
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 266,051 1,106,400
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 1,809,545 4,440 437,900 21 240,884 1,126,300
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 1,821,827 4,440 439,700 16 253,971 1,123,700
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 1,818,189 4,440 429,900 16 272,033 1,111,800
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 1,826,587 4,440 430,300 16 263,431 1,128,400
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks
Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,605 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,307 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,241 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,802,340 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,587 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 1,806,613 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,700 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 1,794,764 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 280,055 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 p 1,809,545 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,641 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,821,827 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,727 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,818,189 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,628 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,826,587 27,951 429,632 259,186 2,375 703,811 1,187 287,443 16 110,546 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
State government
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,571 1,975 283,601 .... 154,545 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 p 540,545 261 309,346 .... 132,432 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 p 542,959 1,098 314,024 .... 128,920 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 p 546,951 856 322,362 .... 125,452 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 p 555,182 0 326,186 .... 130,293 5 98,697 . 1
Local government11
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 138,370 . − . . 423 . 134,898 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 137,102 . − . . 523 . 133,530 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 137,625 . − . . 523 . 134,053 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 p 140,046 . − . . 1,046 . 135,659 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 p 140,414 . − . . 1,046 . 136,027 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 p 140,817 . − . . 1,046 . 136,430 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 p 141,278 . − . . 1,296 . 136,641 11 3,330 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2013   2014
  2012   2013   2014   2012   2013   2014   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.3 107.5 109.0 1.4 0.2 1.4 0.9 1.1 2.5 3.3 0.1 1.2 0.8Construction 104.1 103.8 107.6 0.1 − 0.3 3.7 − 0.4 1.8 2.7 11.8 2.1 0.6 2.5Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 101.6 101.6 103.0 − 2.3 0.0 1.4 0.3 1.3 0.8 2.4 1.0 1.2 1.3Information and communication 116.8 118.2 120.7 5.3 1.2 2.2 1.2 1.1 1.2 2.3 2.2 2.6 1.7Financial and insuranceactivities 102.8 101.3 100.7 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 2.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.6Real estate activities 101.3 101.9 103.0 − 2.0 0.5 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.2 1.4 0.7Business services 
1 102.8 103.8 106.2 0.6 0.9 2.4 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.9 1.7 2.4 2.5
Public services, education and
health 102.2 102.1 103.3 1.0 − 0.1 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.7 1.0 0.8 1.3Other services 100.7 99.1 99.7 0.1 − 1.6 0.6 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 0.8 − 0.3 0.6 1.1
Gross value added 104.0 104.1 105.7 0.5 0.1 1.5 0.3 0.7 1.2 2.6 0.9 1.3 1.3Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.8 0.4 0.1 1.6 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.0 103.8 105.0 0.7 0.8 1.2 1.0 2.0 0.7 1.0 0.8 1.1 1.7
Government consumption 101.9 102.7 103.8 1.2 0.7 1.1 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.3 1.5
Machinery and equipment 102.9 100.5 104.8 − 3.0 − 2.4 4.3 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 7.9 3.6 4.1 2.4Premises 109.1 109.0 112.9 0.6 − 0.1 3.6 0.7 2.6 2.2 13.2 1.5 − 0.1 1.8Other investment 
4 106.9 108.2 109.5 0.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 0.7 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 1.4 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.8
Domestic demand 102.1 102.7 104.0 − 0.9 0.7 1.3 0.9 2.3 1.0 2.4 1.2 0.4 1.0Net exports 
6 . . . 1.3 − 0.5 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 0.0 0.3 − 0.1 0.8 0.7
Exports 111.1 112.8 117.2 2.8 1.6 3.9 1.9 1.6 4.3 3.9 2.2 4.6 4.7Imports 107.1 110.5 114.2 − 0.0 3.1 3.4 3.1 5.2 4.9 3.6 3.0 3.1 3.7
Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.8 0.4 0.1 1.6 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,539.5 1,571.5 1,604.7 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.4 3.3 1.8 2.1 1.8 2.1 2.4
Government consumption 521.3 541.2 561.5 3.1 3.8 3.7 3.3 4.6 3.2 3.5 4.0 3.8 3.6Machinery and equipment 181.7 177.9 185.6 − 2.2 − 2.1 4.3 0.1 0.2 0.3 7.9 3.6 4.1 2.4Premises 273.9 279.2 293.4 3.4 1.9 5.1 2.7 4.6 4.2 15.1 3.0 1.4 3.2Other investment 
4 95.6 98.8 102.1 2.1 3.3 3.3 3.2 2.7 3.3 3.0 3.3 3.3 3.5
Changes in inventories 5 − 23.9 − 22.3 − 32.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,588.2 2,646.2 2,714.4 0.8 2.2 2.6 2.6 3.7 2.3 3.9 2.7 1.7 2.1Net exports 161.7 163.3 189.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,262.9 1,280.1 1,326.2 4.4 1.4 3.6 1.9 1.0 3.8 3.3 1.6 4.4 4.9Imports 1,101.1 1,116.9 1,136.7 2.1 1.4 1.8 1.3 3.1 2.6 1.7 1.1 1.7 2.6
Gross domestic product 
2 2,749.9 2,809.5 2,903.8 1.9 2.2 3.4 2.8 2.7 2.9 4.5 2.8 2.9 3.2
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 103.4 104.7 105.7 1.5 1.2 0.9 1.3 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.0 1.0 0.7Gross domestic product 102.7 104.8 106.6 1.5 2.1 1.7 2.3 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.6Terms of trade 97.1 98.5 99.8 − 0.5 1.5 1.3 1.8 1.5 1.7 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,389.7 1,428.3 1,481.1 3.8 2.8 3.7 2.6 2.8 2.8 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.6Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 665.7 671.6 691.9 − 3.3 0.9 3.0 4.7 1.3 4.5 7.3 − 0.3 3.6 0.9
National income 2,055.3 2,099.9 2,172.9 1.4 2.2 3.5 3.2 2.3 3.3 5.0 2.5 3.6 2.8
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,822.2 2,881.9 2,972.2 1.9 2.1 3.1 3.0 2.3 2.8 4.3 2.3 3.1 2.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2015. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2011 106.7 107.0 95.6 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.82013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.82014
r 107.9 108.5 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
 
2014          Q1 r 105.2 88.0 99.0 108.4 106.8 113.3 102.4 99.9 111.0 106.2 108.0 122.5
         Q2 r 107.1 110.5 85.8 109.4 107.4 115.5 98.1 100.1 112.4 106.7 112.1 121.9
         Q3 r 107.9 116.4 86.6 109.4 107.2 114.8 97.0 102.8 111.1 110.6 115.1 114.6
         Q4 r 111.6 118.9 99.6 112.1 103.6 122.8 104.7 106.1 110.7 111.2 125.3 119.0
2015          Q1 x,p 105.4 86.1 103.3 108.4 106.7 113.7 103.6 99.2 110.6 108.7 108.0 121.6
 
2014          Mar r 115.2 105.2 98.6 118.8 114.8 127.6 112.5 105.8 120.4 115.8 123.7 136.7
         Apr r 106.7 108.6 88.5 108.8 107.6 113.4 98.2 101.3 112.1 105.2 108.2 122.5
         May r 105.0 107.6 85.7 107.2 105.7 112.8 94.6 98.2 110.2 103.5 108.9 120.3
         June r 109.6 115.3 83.2 112.2 108.8 120.2 101.6 100.8 115.0 111.5 119.3 123.0
         July r,2 110.9 119.2 84.9 113.1 110.4 120.4 97.0 102.7 114.7 111.3 114.6 129.8
         Aug r,2 99.7 111.8 85.0 99.9 101.9 99.1 83.5 100.5 103.9 105.3 106.3 83.8
         Sep r 113.1 118.2 89.9 115.3 109.3 124.9 110.5 105.2 114.8 115.2 124.3 130.2
         Oct r 113.7 120.0 98.4 114.8 111.0 120.6 108.2 109.8 116.8 114.5 116.3 125.9
         Nov r 115.7 120.7 98.4 117.3 109.5 128.1 111.9 108.5 119.0 116.3 123.4 134.4
         Dec r 105.3 116.0 101.9 104.3 90.3 119.7 93.9 100.0 96.3 102.7 136.1 96.6
2015          Jan x 98.4 72.3 105.3 101.2 102.4 101.8 95.5 97.4 105.6 101.4 96.8 106.9
         Feb x 102.6 79.9 100.6 106.1 103.7 112.7 103.0 94.6 108.1 106.8 105.0 124.1
         Mar x,p 3 115.3 3 106.2 104.0 118.0 114.0 126.5 112.3 105.5 118.2 117.8 122.2 133.9
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.5 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.7 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 r + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
 
2014          Q1 r + 4.0 + 14.4 − 5.7 + 4.1 + 4.1 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 5.4 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 9.0
         Q2 r + 1.0 + 1.6 − 4.7 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.7 − 1.4 + 5.2
         Q3 r + 0.5 − 0.9 − 4.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 4.2 + 2.6 + 0.5
         Q4 r + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.8
2015          Q1 x,p + 0.3 − 2.1 + 4.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.7
 
2014          Mar r + 2.9 + 13.2 − 9.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 2.0 + 2.8 + 5.2 − 1.6 + 1.3 + 6.7
         Apr r + 1.6 + 3.5 − 6.2 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 4.0 + 4.4 + 4.0 − 3.0 + 3.7
         May r + 1.4 + 0.7 − 2.6 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 3.1 − 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.0 + 8.8
         June r + 0.1 + 0.8 − 5.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 3.1 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.5 − 2.9 + 3.4
         July r,2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 6.8 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 5.8 + 1.3 + 19.0
         Aug r,2 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 4.8 − 1.8 + 0.7 − 4.9 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 20.0
         Sep r + 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.8 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.0 + 1.6
         Oct r + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 4.6
         Nov r − 0.3 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.2
         Dec r + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 0.5
2015          Jan x + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 2.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 + 3.0 + 0.5 − 0.7
         Feb x + 0.2 − 6.4 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.9 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.7
         Mar x,p 3 + 0.1 3 + 1.0 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 1.2 − 2.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, the results of the total annual survey in the construction sector by the Federal
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Statistical Office (on average + 4%). xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Sur-
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by vey or the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
a change in holiday dates. 3Preliminary; preadjusted on the basis of estimations to

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2014          Mar 120.5 + 0.6 113.1 − 2.0 126.8 + 2.0 112.6 + 2.8 112.7 + 1.4 112.6 + 3.4
         Apr 112.4 + 5.9 105.6 + 2.5 118.1 + 8.5 107.0 + 4.7 108.1 + 7.1 106.6 + 3.8
         May 107.2 + 1.8 102.2 − 0.7 111.0 + 3.3 105.7 + 4.5 98.1 − 0.4 108.5 + 6.4
         June 113.1 − 2.4 105.7 + 1.2 118.9 − 5.6 108.5 + 6.1 104.9 − 3.1 109.7 + 9.5
         July 116.6 + 7.1 106.4 + 2.1 124.0 + 11.0 114.7 + 2.8 97.9 − 1.2 120.5 + 4.0
         Aug 100.3 + 0.5 94.5 − 1.3 102.9 + 0.7 110.5 + 6.6 94.2 + 2.8 116.3 + 7.8
         Sep 111.9 − 0.4 101.8 − 0.2 118.9 − 0.6 112.4 + 0.4 109.0 − 2.2 113.6 + 1.2
         Oct 115.0 + 3.4 107.1 − 0.5 120.5 + 6.1 114.6 + 2.3 108.4 − 1.5 116.7 + 3.5
         Nov 114.7 + 0.1 104.2 − 1.7 122.4 + 1.2 113.3 + 0.4 104.9 − 2.4 116.3 + 1.4
         Dec 112.7 + 4.5 92.6 + 2.7 128.9 + 5.7 97.7 + 3.1 92.9 + 5.1 99.4 + 2.4
2015          Jan 112.8 + 0.5 107.3 − 1.4 116.8 + 2.4 111.6 − 2.9 104.8 + 3.6 114.0 − 4.8
         Feb 111.9 − 0.4 101.7 − 2.4 118.0 + 0.7 119.8 + 2.0 101.4 + 4.8 126.2 + 1.3
         Mar p 124.9 + 3.7 113.0 − 0.1 134.1 + 5.8 118.4 + 5.2 112.6 − 0.1 120.5 + 7.0
From the domestic market
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.5 + 4.6 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.8 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2014          Mar 
116.8 + 1.0 108.2 − 4.4 126.8 + 6.2 107.9 + 1.3 113.0 − 1.1 106.1 + 2.2
         Apr 107.7 + 5.1 104.1 + 2.6 112.8 + 7.7 99.0 + 3.7 107.6 + 5.2 96.0 + 3.1
         May 103.9 + 3.8 101.3 + 0.1 107.9 + 8.2 95.4 + 0.2 93.0 − 2.7 96.3 + 1.3
         June 105.2 − 1.2 101.9 − 0.6 109.3 − 2.6 99.9 + 3.1 106.6 + 3.5 97.6 + 3.1
         July 108.5 + 1.8 104.0 + 0.0 113.1 + 3.3 108.3 + 3.4 101.6 + 2.6 110.7 + 3.7
         Aug 
97.9 − 2.3 94.0 − 2.6 100.9 − 2.7 103.0 + 1.6 95.8 + 3.2 105.5 + 1.1
         Sep 102.2 − 3.6 96.8 − 4.1 107.1 − 3.7 105.3 + 0.2 112.3 − 1.1 102.8 + 0.7
         Oct 109.0 + 3.4 102.0 − 1.5 116.3 + 8.6 106.7 + 1.1 110.7 − 5.6 105.3 + 3.8
         Nov 105.9 − 3.4 100.2 − 4.9 112.1 − 2.3 102.6 − 1.8 106.3 − 2.1 101.3 − 1.7
         Dec 97.2 + 3.4 87.8 − 0.1 108.0 + 6.2 88.4 + 4.6 84.8 + 4.2 89.7 + 4.8
2015          Jan 105.6 − 1.1 103.0 − 3.6 108.5 + 1.0 104.2 + 0.9 103.2 + 0.8 104.5 + 0.9
         Feb 104.9 − 1.2 96.7 − 5.8 112.2 + 2.7 110.5 + 1.7 100.6 + 0.4 114.0 + 2.1
         Mar p 121.1 + 3.7 108.0 − 0.2 136.1 + 7.3 110.2 + 2.1 107.9 − 4.5 111.0 + 4.6
From abroad
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.6 + 25.3 99.6 + 4.2
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.5 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.7 − 0.5 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.6 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2014          Mar 123.5 + 0.2 118.9 + 0.8 126.8 − 0.5 116.7 + 4.1 112.4 + 3.7 118.2 + 4.3
         Apr 116.3 + 6.7 107.3 + 2.5 121.3 + 8.9 113.8 + 5.5 108.6 + 8.9 115.6 + 4.3
         May 109.9 + 0.4 103.2 − 1.5 112.9 + 0.5 114.6 + 7.9 102.5 + 1.5 118.8 + 10.1
         June 119.5 − 3.3 110.1 + 3.2 124.9 − 7.1 115.8 + 8.3 103.5 − 8.3 120.0 + 14.5
         July 123.1 + 11.2 109.3 + 4.6 130.8 + 15.8 120.2 + 2.3 94.7 − 4.5 128.9 + 4.1
         Aug 102.2 + 2.7 95.1 + 0.3 104.1 + 2.9 117.0 + 10.7 92.8 + 2.4 125.4 + 13.1
         Sep 119.7 + 1.9 107.7 + 4.2 126.1 + 1.0 118.5 + 0.6 106.2 − 3.1 122.7 + 1.7
         Oct 119.8 + 3.3 113.1 + 0.6 123.1 + 4.7 121.3 + 3.1 106.4 + 2.7 126.4 + 3.2
         Nov 121.9 + 2.8 108.9 + 2.0 128.7 + 3.2 122.5 + 2.2 103.7 − 2.6 129.0 + 3.6
         Dec 125.3 + 5.3 98.3 + 5.7 141.8 + 5.4 105.7 + 1.9 100.0 + 5.8 107.6 + 0.7
2015          Jan 118.7 + 1.9 112.3 + 1.1 122.0 + 3.1 118.0 − 5.5 106.2 + 6.1 122.0 − 8.6
         Feb 117.6 + 0.3 107.6 + 1.6 121.5 − 0.6 127.8 + 2.3 102.1 + 8.7 136.6 + 0.7
         Mar p 127.9 + 3.6 118.8 − 0.1 132.9 + 4.8 125.5 + 7.5 116.7 + 3.8 128.5 + 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 99.7 + 1.4 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.8 + 2.9 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.0 102.2 + 2.5 112.9 + 13.2 96.1 − 3.7
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.5 − 0.3 107.7 + 5.4 118.5 + 5.0 103.3 + 7.5
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.5 + 4.2 140.7 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.4 111.7 + 3.7 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.5 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.2 126.8 − 1.0 90.5 − 3.4 109.9 − 1.6 121.8 + 0.0 104.0 − 3.3
 
2014          Feb 102.2 + 4.1 112.8 + 11.9 134.0 + 23.6 114.3 + 9.6 66.9 − 11.5 91.7 − 4.2 106.4 + 2.0 85.3 − 3.0
         Mar 138.8 + 5.9 146.4 + 9.8 165.2 + 9.1 147.9 + 12.6 105.2 + 1.6 131.2 + 1.9 141.1 + 8.7 125.9 + 1.4
         Apr 134.0 + 8.5 133.3 + 2.5 170.1 + 17.3 121.6 − 3.0 95.9 − 16.1 134.7 + 15.1 125.4 + 6.5 128.3 + 6.2
         May 127.7 + 1.8 130.9 − 3.3 157.1 + 10.5 122.9 − 12.5 103.0 − 3.5 124.5 + 7.6 120.3 − 5.4 123.5 + 5.6         June 132.1 − 9.5 140.0 − 11.2 163.1 − 10.4 133.1 − 15.9 114.8 + 6.3 124.3 − 7.4 131.7 − 13.0 120.1 − 4.6
         July 136.5 − 4.1 139.8 − 1.5 143.9 − 9.0 147.3 + 3.5 109.4 + 0.6 133.2 − 6.9 139.6 + 4.9 130.4 − 10.5
         Aug 121.5 − 1.9 122.5 − 1.3 127.0 − 12.3 130.7 + 7.9 89.5 − 3.1 120.5 − 2.4 124.9 + 4.7 115.8 − 3.4         Sep 121.8 − 3.3 130.0 − 4.3 149.0 − 2.6 128.9 − 2.9 96.2 − 13.3 113.5 − 2.2 123.3 − 5.5 109.3 − 1.1
         Oct 113.6 − 3.3 129.3 + 0.5 152.0 + 7.5 129.4 − 3.9 84.6 − 1.2 98.0 − 7.9 119.1 − 4.9 92.6 − 7.3
         Nov 99.4 − 6.8 113.0 − 5.5 130.2 + 5.9 116.7 − 11.9 68.2 − 9.1 85.8 − 8.4 109.0 − 11.5 77.2 − 7.3         Dec 101.7 − 4.3 122.1 + 1.8 154.4 + 12.8 115.2 − 5.0 78.9 − 4.8 81.4 − 12.0 109.5 − 3.6 72.6 − 16.1
2015          Jan 95.4 + 2.5 102.0 − 4.2 122.7 + 8.7 100.6 − 11.2 65.7 − 10.9 88.8 + 11.4 104.3 − 5.8 75.4 + 12.4
         Feb 104.9 + 2.6 113.5 + 0.6 136.7 + 2.0 105.7 − 7.5 90.9 + 35.9 96.3 + 5.0 103.6 − 2.6 93.4 + 9.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail tradeclothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 
2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices inprices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.0 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.1 105.1 + 2.5 102.2 + 0.6 99.0 − 0.4 104.6 + 0.9 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.4 109.0 + 3.7 103.1 + 0.9 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.2 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 3 108.6 + 2.3 103.1 + 1.8 111.7 + 2.5 105.1 + 1.9 95.0 − 0.4 102.7 + 0.4 110.8 + 7.5 107.2 + 2.6
 
2014          Mar 111.2 + 2.9 104.9 + 1.9 115.8 + 3.6 110.0 + 11.9 86.2 − 9.9 111.7 + 3.5 109.2 + 4.0 119.1 + 4.8
         Apr 108.5 + 1.6 102.4 + 1.0 113.6 + 4.8 104.6 − 4.3 82.6 − 2.9 108.6 + 0.5 109.6 + 8.0 113.4 + 2.0
         May 107.7 + 0.2 101.9 + 0.0 111.7 + 1.4 106.7 + 2.8 83.9 + 1.1 104.0 − 3.5 106.7 + 5.9 110.1 + 0.3
         June
107.1 + 2.7 101.4 + 2.4 113.9 + 3.5 102.0 + 1.4 83.0 − 1.8 99.8 − 1.3 109.3 + 10.5 111.5 + 1.5
         July 107.8 + 1.5 102.6 + 1.2 112.3 + 0.4 102.8 + 0.3 89.6 + 4.9 100.3 − 2.7 114.2 + 7.5 109.0 + 2.7         Aug 105.9 + 2.5 100.8 + 2.0 108.8 + 0.8 106.0 + 9.2 84.1 − 3.9 100.0 + 2.0 106.5 + 7.6 100.1 + 2.6         Sep 104.9 + 0.3 99.3 − 0.2 106.2 + 2.6 106.9 − 6.7 91.2 − 2.7 99.7 − 2.1 108.2 + 6.6 106.4 + 1.1
         Oct 112.2 + 2.7 106.4 + 2.5 113.7 + 2.6 114.9 − 2.0 98.9 + 2.6 109.1 + 0.3 114.5 + 7.9 115.6 − 0.1
         Nov 113.6 + 1.4 108.3 + 1.7 113.0 + 0.8 109.2 − 1.0 110.2 + 4.0 111.8 + 1.5 116.2 + 9.4 112.2 − 0.1         Dec 128.5 + 4.9 123.3 + 5.4 129.2 + 4.0 125.6 + 5.1 149.3 + 5.8 108.6 + 5.0 127.6 + 9.7 101.1 + 3.4
2015          Jan 102.2 + 2.9 98.7 + 4.0 105.0 + 3.6 91.5 + 1.9 103.8 + 5.3 91.8 + 4.2 111.8 + 6.4 95.4 + 3.7
         Feb 98.4 + 2.3 94.3 + 3.2 102.1 + 1.4 84.6 + 2.7 85.8 + 4.1 91.7 + 1.4 109.1 + 6.3 101.5 + 5.6
         Mar 112.5 + 1.2 106.6 + 1.6 115.3 − 0.4 108.2 − 1.6 89.6 + 3.9 114.7 + 2.7 118.3 + 8.3 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2014 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2010 41,020 + 0.3 28,008 + 1.0 8,421 18,693 675 5,025 503 429 3,239 1,076 7.7 359
2011 41,571 + 1.3 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 42,033 + 1.1 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 42,281 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 r 42,638 r + 0.8 8 30,205 8 + 1.7 8 8,859 8 20,336 8 770 8 5,030 ... 8 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2012          Q1 41,564 + 1.3 28,967 + 2.7 8,630 19,367 758 4,943 201 82 3,075 999 7.3 472
         Q2 41,948 + 1.1 29,223 + 2.5 8,706 19,510 771 4,983 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 42,226 + 1.1 29,416 + 2.1 8,776 19,604 798 5,006 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 42,394 + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,834 + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 42,198 + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459         Q3 42,482 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471         Q4 42,611 + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1
r 42,140 r + 0.7 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 r 42,582 r + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,828 20,251 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 9 6.6 487
         Q3 r 42,834 r + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,895 20,341 799 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 r 42,994 r + 0.9 8 30,646 8 + 1.8 8 8,956 8 20,652 8 797 8 5,021 ... 8 45 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 10 42,415 10 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
2011          Dec 41,888 + 1.3 29,046 + 2.7 8,656 19,402 782 5,021 140 72 2,781 814 6.6 4672012          Jan 41,538 + 1.4 28,916 + 2.9 8,620 19,330 755 4,944 206 82 3,085 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,513 + 1.3 28,922 + 2.7 8,610 19,352 749 4,909 230 87 3,110 1,029 7.4 473         Mar 41,640 + 1.2 29,082 + 2.7 8,663 19,437 756 4,935 167 78 3,028 956 7.2 491         Apr 41,802 + 1.1 29,199 + 2.6 8,698 19,505 763 4,964 83 71 2,964 893 7.0 499         May 41,973 + 1.1 29,289 + 2.4 8,724 19,548 778 5,002 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 42,069 + 1.0 29,280 + 2.2 8,733 19,519 790 5,032 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 42,103 + 1.1 29,255 + 2.3 8,737 19,478 804 5,038 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 42,208 + 1.1 29,477 + 2.0 8,793 19,645 801 4,986 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 42,367 + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,463 + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,483 + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 42,237 + 0.8 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,808 + 0.7 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb 41,809 + 0.7 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448         Mar 41,885 + 0.6 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463         Apr 42,044 + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460         May 42,230 + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457         June 42,321 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459         July 42,375 + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,460 + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,611 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,680 + 0.5 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,690 + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,463 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 
r 42,070 r + 0.6 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb r 42,112 r + 0.7 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456
         Mar r 42,239 r + 0.8 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476
         Apr r 42,445 r + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485
         May r 42,590 r + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,835 20,289 750 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 9 6.6 481
         June r 42,711 r + 0.9 30,175 + 1.9 8,853 20,292 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July r 42,756 r + 0.9 30,121 + 1.8 8,859 20,217 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502
         Aug r 42,785 r + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,903 20,358 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep r 42,961 r + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,991 20,603 812 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct r 43,056 r + 0.9 30,676 + 1.6 8,979 20,641 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517
         Nov r 43,073 r + 0.9 8 30,708 8 + 1.9 8 8,964 8 20,709 8 800 8 5,031 ... 8 51 2,717 834 6.3 515
         Dec r 42,853 r + 0.9 8 30,444 8 + 1.9 8 8,863 8 20,608 8 755 8 5,012 ... 8 36 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan r 42,389 r + 0.8 8 30,258 8 + 1.8 8 8,806 8 20,483 8 748 8 4,857 ... 8 45 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb r 42,382 r + 0.6 8 30,317 8 + 1.8 8 8,811 8 20,527 8 756 8 4,839 ... 8 43 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
         Mar 10 42,474 10 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,843 868 6.5 552
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2012
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- and 2013, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 0.4 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal 0.9 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 30.8 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From May 2014, calculated
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Fed-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located eral Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 
1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 8 111.8 104.0 103.6 120.8 96.8
 
2013          June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 122.2 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 119.4 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 119.2 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 120.8 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 121.3 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 122.3 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 122.4 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 8 119.5 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 119.4 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 120.4 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 121.1 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 118.8 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 117.7 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 113.9 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 111.5 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 108.6 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 104.5 104.2 103.5 111.9 95.5
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 104.2 104.2 102.7 103.1 97.5         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 103.4 103.9 101.0 84.3 96.0
2015          Jan 
r 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 r 105.3 106.1 104.2 103.1 104.4 100.2 71.4 97.7
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 r 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 105.5 104.7 101.6 86.2 97.2
         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 r 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.8 105.3 102.6 86.9 98.9
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 ... ... ... ... 94.0 98.3
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 8 − 7.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 9.2 − 4.2
 
2013          June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug 
+ 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 8 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3         June + 1.0 +
 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July
+ 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 10.1 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 13.8 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 14.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.9 + 1.2
         Dec 
+ 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 15.5 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 35.9 − 0.6
2015          Jan r − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 r + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 − 13.7 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 44.8 + 1.8
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 r + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 11.6 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 33.3 + 0.0
         Mar 
+ 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 r + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.1 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 31.0 + 2.1
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... − 25.5 − 1.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From January 2014 onwards,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2007
969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,540.7 1.8 157.1 3.6 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.4 0.6 1,029.2 2.4 1,579.0 2.5 165.1 5.1 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.5 7.0 1,056.1 2.6 1,564.2 − 0.9 155.7 − 5.7 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 388.0 1.2 1,090.1 3.2 1,605.0 2.6 159.3 2.3 9.9
2011 1,087.7 4.7 728.5 3.7 383.2 − 1.2 1,111.6 2.0 1,666.0 3.8 159.2 − 0.1 9.6
2012 1,131.7 4.0 756.4 3.8 389.4 1.6 1,145.7 3.1 1,699.0 2.0 159.5 0.2 9.4
2013 1,165.5 3.0 777.2 2.8 398.3 2.3 1,175.6 2.6 1,728.5 1.7 157.0 − 1.6 9.1
2014 1,210.2 3.8 804.6 3.5 409.5 2.8 1,214.1 3.3 1,770.4 2.4 165.6 5.5 9.4
2013          Q3 288.1 3.1 196.4 3.1 99.9 2.3 296.3 2.8 436.5 3.1 34.3 1.2 7.8
         Q4 321.9 3.0 214.0 2.6 98.0 1.8 311.9 2.3 434.4 1.7 32.2 0.5 7.4
2014          Q1 281.7 3.9 187.6 3.5 103.8 2.3 291.4 3.1 437.2 2.2 54.9 3.1 12.6
         Q2 295.5 3.9 192.5 3.7 100.2 1.3 292.8 2.9 438.6 2.1 39.0 4.8 8.9
         Q3 299.1 3.8 203.3 3.5 102.4 2.5 305.7 3.2 446.4 2.3 35.5 3.6 8.0
         Q4 333.9 3.7 221.1 3.3 103.1 5.3 324.2 3.9 448.1 3.2 36.2 12.5 8.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2015. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2007 93.9 1.3 93.7 1.5 93.4 1.5 92.9 1.5 95.3 1.4
2008 96.5 2.7 96.4 2.8 96.2 3.0 95.9 3.2 97.6 2.42009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.3 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.3 3.32012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.1 2.72013 107.1 2.4 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.4 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.3 2.8 110.4 2.9 111.2 2.7
2013          Q4 119.6 2.4 119.6 2.4 120.0 2.4 108.1 2.3 118.5 2.2
2014          Q1 102.2 3.1 102.1 3.0 101.9 2.5 109.1 2.5 104.8 3.0
         Q2 103.5 3.2 103.4 3.1 103.6 3.1 110.2 3.3 108.9 2.7         Q3 112.3 2.8 112.2 2.8 112.6 2.8 110.9 2.8 109.6 2.6         Q4 123.1 2.9 123.0 2.8 123.3 2.8 111.2 2.9 121.4 2.5
2015          Q1 104.4 2.1 104.3 2.1 104.2 2.3 111.6 2.3 . .
2014          Sep 103.4 2.9 103.3 2.8 103.7 2.8 111.1 2.8 . .
         Oct 103.6 2.9 103.5 2.9 103.8 2.9 111.2 2.9 . .
         Nov 159.9 2.8 159.7 2.8 160.2 2.8 111.2 2.9 . .
         Dec 105.9 2.9 105.7 2.9 106.0 2.8 111.2 2.9 . .
2015          Jan 104.0 0.9 103.9 0.9 104.0 2.3 111.4 2.3 . .
         Feb 104.0 2.5 103.9 2.5 104.0 2.3 111.4 2.3 . .
         Mar 105.2 3.0 105.1 3.0 104.6 2.3 112.1 2.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2015. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2010 1,748.4 1,077.5 334.5 459.6 213.2 670.9 169.5 170.2 132.6 514.7 1,233.7 657.9 354.8 575.8 147.1 151.4
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.2 176.8 161.1
2012 1,904.5 1,178.1 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.4 189.8 179.1 126.0 561.5 1,343.0 719.5 380.8 623.5 179.5 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.1 635.9 191.5 166.8
2013          Q4 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.1 635.9 191.5 166.8
2014          Q1 1,973.5 1,203.9 388.5 502.5 252.6 769.6 197.1 193.6 142.8 578.2 1,395.3 741.0 384.0 654.3 194.4 164.3
         Q2 1,982.5 1,224.8 394.0 505.9 261.9 757.6 200.9 189.9 123.3 568.7 1,413.8 763.3 395.0 650.5 199.7 162.6         Q3
p 2,043.4 1,263.4 403.1 522.2 267.8 780.0 206.8 190.0 136.0 586.1 1,457.3 793.2 407.0 664.0 200.7 172.0
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 61.6 19.1 26.3 12.2 38.4 9.7 9.7 7.6 29.4 70.6 37.6 20.3 32.9 8.4 8.7
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2013          Q4 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014          Q1 100.0 61.0 19.7 25.5 12.8 39.0 10.0 9.8 7.2 29.3 70.7 37.6 19.5 33.2 9.9 8.3
         Q2 100.0 61.8 19.9 25.5 13.2 38.2 10.1 9.6 6.2 28.7 71.3 38.5 19.9 32.8 10.1 8.2
         Q3 p 100.0 61.8 19.7 25.6 13.1 38.2 10.1 9.3 6.7 28.7 71.3 38.8 19.9 32.5 9.8 8.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2010 1,383.0 814.2 213.9 355.8 189.5 568.8 152.2 135.1 105.4 400.6 982.4 515.3 258.3 467.1 125.4 108.12011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.72012 1,540.6 921.2 258.9 387.9 222.1 619.5 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.8 1,096.8 581.7 286.6 515.1 161.0 116.52013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.7 118.6
2013          Q4 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.7 118.62014          Q1 1,596.1 941.8 260.1 401.1 236.3 654.3 181.1 152.5 110.4 457.3 1,138.8 597.3 290.0 541.5 173.9 121.6
         Q2 1,604.2 956.5 260.9 403.7 245.0 647.7 184.7 147.7 97.0 451.5 1,152.7 617.5 301.8 535.2 177.9 118.2         Q3
p 1,647.8 986.3 265.4 418.1 249.8 661.5 190.7 146.2 102.1 461.3 1,186.5 640.3 310.4 546.2 176.5 125.4
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 58.9 15.5 25.7 13.7 41.1 11.0 9.8 7.6 29.0 71.0 37.3 18.7 33.8 9.1 7.8
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2013          Q4 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014          Q1 100.0 59.0 16.3 25.1 14.8 41.0 11.3 9.6 6.9 28.7 71.4 37.4 18.2 33.9 10.9 7.6
         Q2 100.0 59.6 16.3 25.2 15.3 40.4 11.5 9.2 6.1 28.1 71.9 38.5 18.8 33.4 11.1 7.4
         Q3 p 100.0 59.9 16.1 25.4 15.2 40.1 11.6 8.9 6.2 28.0 72.0 38.9 18.8 33.2 10.7 7.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2010 365.4 263.3 120.6 103.8 23.7 102.1 17.4 35.1 27.2 114.0 251.4 142.6 96.5 108.8 21.7 43.32011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.42012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.22013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.2
2013          Q4 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.22014          Q1 377.4 262.1 128.4 101.4 16.4 115.3 16.0 41.1 32.4 120.9 256.5 143.7 94.0 112.8 20.5 42.7
         Q2 378.3 268.4 133.1 102.2 16.9 109.9 16.2 42.1 26.2 117.2 261.1 145.8 93.2 115.3 21.8 44.4         Q3
p 395.6 277.1 137.7 104.2 18.1 118.5 16.1 43.8 33.9 124.8 270.8 152.9 96.6 117.9 24.2 46.5
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 72.1 33.0 28.4 6.5 27.9 4.8 9.6 7.4 31.2 68.8 39.0 26.4 29.8 5.9 11.9
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.2
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2013          Q4 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014          Q1 100.0 69.5 34.0 26.9 4.3 30.6 4.2 10.9 8.6 32.0 68.0 38.1 24.9 29.9 5.4 11.3
         Q2 100.0 70.9 35.2 27.0 4.5 29.1 4.3 11.1 6.9 31.0 69.0 38.5 24.7 30.5 5.8 11.7
         Q3 p 100.0 70.0 34.8 26.3 4.6 30.0 4.1 11.1 8.6 31.6 68.4 38.7 24.4 29.8 6.1 11.8
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2005 1,077.4 . 150.6 . 14.0 . 6.4 12.0 17.7 72.7 . 6.8 . 3.1 6.9 11.7
2006 1,209.4 10.6 155.0 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.5 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.0 4.4 173.8 15.0 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.7 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 180.1 − 0.3 12.6 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.2 6.6 192.6 3.4 12.4 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 97.0 − 7.1 6.3 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 189.2 − 2.5 12.2 − 0.3 5.0 10.2 18.4 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2012          Q1 379.9 9.0 47.6 − 0.3 12.5 − 1.2 3.9 9.2 16.4 29.0 − 3.8 7.6 − 1.0 0.2 5.0 11.0
         Q2 382.4 7.2 47.1 9.3 12.3 0.2 4.8 9.9 17.0 27.7 10.6 7.2 0.2 1.2 6.5 11.4
         Q3 384.3 7.1 48.7 4.3 12.7 − 0.3 4.8 10.3 17.2 16.6 − 49.8 4.3 − 3.9 1.7 6.2 11.9
         Q4 406.6 3.3 49.1 0.7 12.1 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 24.1 5.8 1.0 0.1 6.4 12.4
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.9 − 1.0 12.5 0.1 5.2 10.4 16.5 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.3 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.2 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.4 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.7 0.2 50.2 9.1 13.2 1.1 3.8 8.8 16.1 30.6 15.4 8.0 1.1 0.0 5.1 10.1
         Q2 386.7 − 1.7 47.9 0.1 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 1.9 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1
         Q3 p 394.7 3.0 49.8 3.9 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.6 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2005 807.7 . 109.5 . 13.6 . 6.5 12.0 17.7 52.3 . 6.5 . 2.9 7.8 11.5
2006 898.7 9.8 114.9 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.7 12.2 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.42007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.8 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.1 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.0 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.0 7.6 144.1 5.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.9 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.2 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.6 140.9 − 2.2 11.8 − 0.2 4.3 10.2 15.5 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.8
2012          Q1 297.1 10.6 38.9 2.7 13.1 − 1.0 4.8 9.7 15.5 25.8 − 0.9 8.7 − 1.0 0.8 5.8 11.0
         Q2 294.0 8.2 35.8 9.8 12.2 0.2 5.4 10.2 15.8 22.0 12.5 7.5 0.3 1.6 6.6 10.2         Q3 292.4 8.3 35.0 4.7 12.0 − 0.4 5.3 10.3 15.0 19.2 − 11.0 6.6 − 1.2 1.7 5.7 10.7         Q4 311.4 3.7 34.3 5.3 11.0 0.2 3.4 10.5 16.6 16.0 14.5 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 11.0
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 34.1 − 0.4 11.7 0.2 4.9 10.3 15.1 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.4 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.6 4.6 − 0.4 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 298.0 0.3 39.1 6.6 13.1 0.8 3.8 8.8 14.3 25.0 10.5 8.4 0.8 0.2 5.2 8.8
         Q2 297.2 − 2.1 36.1 0.7 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 0.3 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3
p 300.0 3.6 36.3 6.4 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 13.1 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2005 269.7 . 41.0 . 15.2 . 6.3 12.0 17.7 20.4 . 7.6 . 3.1 5.3 12.12006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 44.2 9.3 13.3 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.7 8.7 13.4 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 48.2 7.6 14.4 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.2 3.0 48.5 − 3.3 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.2
2012          Q1 82.8 3.1 8.7 − 13.4 10.6 − 1.9 2.9 7.7 20.3 3.2 − 27.2 3.8 − 1.3 − 0.7 4.0 11.9
         Q2 88.4 3.8 11.3 7.8 12.8 0.5 4.1 9.7 20.9 5.7 2.6 6.5 − 0.1 0.7 5.2 14.6         Q3 91.9 3.1 13.7 3.3 14.9 0.0 4.4 11.1 20.6 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5         Q4 95.2 1.9 14.8 − 10.1 15.5 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.7 55.9 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.4 11.1 20.2 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 50.2 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.4 11.9 − 1.7 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 9.8 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3
p 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2014
2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb p
Current account + 119,854 + 185,103 + 211,281 + 32,025 + 65,846 + 90,372 + 35,870 + 8,316 + 13,768 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,897,939 1,923,852 1,951,014 485,923 490,794 504,861 162,124 148,384 157,730
Imports 1,763,667 1,710,211 1,709,715 426,344 429,400 428,653 135,420 137,519 132,497
Balance + 134,274 + 213,641 + 241,301 + 59,580 + 61,394 + 76,208 + 26,704 + 10,865 + 25,233
2 Services
Receipts 610,769 644,400 687,362 171,205 184,224 177,454 63,588 54,508 51,262
Expenditure 555,341 578,871 618,208 151,396 164,260 160,819 56,732 51,698 49,438
Balance + 55,432 + 65,529 + 69,154 + 19,809 + 19,965 + 16,634 + 6,856 + 2,810 + 1,824
3 Primary income
Receipts 602,214 609,462 590,146 158,511 138,186 143,458 58,771 46,375 46,924
Expenditure 539,284 560,479 550,621 172,610 128,976 115,708 43,329 36,970 36,611
Balance + 62,929 + 48,985 + 39,525 − 14,099 + 9,211 + 27,749 + 15,442 + 9,405 + 10,313
4 Secondary income
Receipts 81,270 89,431 93,675 24,902 22,359 25,368 9,507 7,786 7,990
Expenditure 214,047 232,483 232,379 58,166 47,084 55,590 22,640 22,550 31,592
Balance − 132,779 − 143,054 − 138,702 − 33,264 − 24,725 − 30,221 − 13,133 − 14,764 − 23,603
Capital account + 11,927 + 22,947 + 22,297 + 4,329 + 4,331 + 7,354 + 2,972 + 407 + 351 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 224,137 + 435,297 + 282,759 + 89,854 + 81,333 + 66,822 − 42,313 − 20,340 + 16,862 C
1 Direct investment + 6,517 + 23,836 + 25,770 − 4,395 + 22,481 + 5,064 − 27,125 + 5,967 + 4,309
By resident units abroad + 486,089 + 643,825 + 141,033 − 4,037 + 65,396 + 67,237 − 13,480 + 13,625 + 34,302
By non-resident units in the euro area + 479,573 + 619,988 + 115,264 + 359 + 42,915 + 62,173 + 13,645 + 7,659 + 29,993
2 Portfolio investment − 40,128 − 9,033 + 96,836 − 29,449 + 92,215 + 83,578 + 23,143 − 32,024 + 8,867
By resident units abroad + 208,823 + 270,935 + 425,990 + 160,718 + 114,792 + 78,664 + 23,078 + 8,294 + 44,846
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 64,743 + 173,253 + 117,511 + 69,010 + 26,695 + 1,522 + 3,380 − 5,913 + 377
Long-term debt securities + 147,132 + 90,213 + 230,554 + 73,596 + 63,060 + 54,315 − 5,247 + 39,220 + 44,315
Short-term debt securities − 3,052 + 7,467 + 77,926 + 18,111 + 25,038 + 22,827 + 24,945 − 25,013 + 155
By non-resident units in the euro area + 248,951 + 279,971 + 329,154 + 190,166 + 22,578 − 4,915 − 65 + 40,318 + 35,979
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 142,996 + 173,820 + 271,468 + 112,410 + 59,986 + 38,655 + 15,909 + 41,701 + 33,018
Long-term debt securities + 125,068 + 93,500 + 76,355 + 55,395 − 45,569 + 3,335 + 6,436 + 5,001 + 6,256
Short-term debt securities − 19,113 + 12,648 − 18,670 + 22,361 + 8,160 − 46,905 − 22,410 − 6,383 − 3,295
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 33,775 + 35,717 + 49,202 + 16,897 + 18,451 + 8,953 + 2,111 + 5,179 + 6,430
4 Other investment + 208,232 + 380,048 + 107,432 + 106,378 − 50,470 − 32,712 − 41,459 − 658 − 6,944
Eurosystem − 9,061 + 67,172 + 63,654 + 18,703 + 19,002 − 1,333 − 3,163 − 47,323 + 22,985
General government + 3,682 − 13,076 + 10,724 − 4,782 + 331 + 18,071 + 13,964 + 1,827 − 2,084
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 96,511 + 256,400 + 106,094 + 75,903 − 37,586 − 4,594 − 33,169 + 63,201 − 41,626
Enterprises and households + 117,105 + 69,552 − 73,037 + 16,557 − 32,218 − 44,856 − 19,091 − 18,363 + 13,781
5 Reserve assets + 15,742 + 4,730 + 3,521 + 423 − 1,343 + 1,939 + 1,017 + 1,196 + 4,200
Net errors and omissions + 92,357 + 227,248 + 49,179 + 53,500 + 11,156 − 30,905 − 81,155 − 29,063 + 2,743 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
Goods trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total (fob/fob) 
1 items 2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2000 − 36,962 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,370 − 12,722 − 29,931 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,660
2001 − 7,912 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,156 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1172002 + 41,701 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,367 − 4,010 + 8,029 − 2,065 − 29,6612003 + 31,215 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,694 − 18,933 − 31,179 + 5,920 + 47,555 − 445 + 10,4202004 + 100,835 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 16,895 − 30,479 − 119 + 112,832 − 1,470 + 12,116
2005 + 106,140 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 20,965 − 31,175 − 2,334 + 96,432 − 2,182 − 7,374
2006 + 135,939 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 41,571 − 32,320 − 1,328 + 157,134 − 2,934 + 22,5232007 + 169,595 + 201,989 − 922 − 35,032 + 36,483 − 33,845 − 1,597 + 183,158 + 953 + 15,1602008 + 143,317 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,608 + 24,865 − 34,462 − 893 + 121,326 + 2,008 − 21,0972009 + 141,117 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,909 + 55,018 − 35,159 − 1,858 + 117,837 − 3,200 − 21,423
2010 + 145,101 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,477 + 51,101 − 39,669 + 1,219 + 92,759 + 1,613 − 53,560
2011 + 164,552 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,471 + 69,102 − 35,505 + 1,642 + 120,849 + 2,836 − 45,3452012 + 187,345 + 196,579 − 10,694 − 35,905 + 66,811 − 40,139 + 1,427 + 157,461 + 1,297 − 31,3122013 + 182,017 + 207,597 − 5,236 − 44,755 + 60,244 − 41,069 + 1,142 + 207,920 + 838 + 24,7612014 + 219,688 + 229,301 − 6,351 − 39,112 + 66,919 − 37,421 + 2,826 + 243,827 − 2,564 + 21,314
2012          Q2 + 42,538 + 49,797 − 3,096 − 8,079 + 6,359 − 5,538 + 525 + 30,817 + 769 − 12,245
         Q3 + 45,856 + 52,191 − 2,392 − 15,516 + 17,714 − 8,533 + 1,342 + 40,448 + 59 − 6,750         Q4 + 54,761 + 45,332 − 3,422 − 4,435 + 24,962 − 11,099 − 120 + 62,900 − 494 + 8,260
2013          Q1 + 41,192 + 51,585 − 1,335 − 10,480 + 14,868 − 14,781 + 420 + 36,822 + 86 − 4,791
         Q2 + 43,005 + 54,180 + 1,595 − 10,657 + 6,433 − 6,951 + 760 + 58,926 + 72 + 15,160         Q3 + 37,651 + 49,141 − 4,067 − 16,907 + 14,402 − 8,985 + 438 + 48,587 − 785 + 10,499         Q4 + 60,168 + 52,691 − 1,429 − 6,712 + 24,540 − 10,352 − 476 + 63,585 + 1,464 + 3,893
2014          Q1 + 49,521 + 53,324 + 1,177 − 7,203 + 17,538 − 14,138 + 2,182 + 60,008 − 565 + 8,305
         Q2 + 46,692 + 54,760 − 1,105 − 8,031 + 5,806 − 5,843 + 542 + 57,204 − 610 + 9,970         Q3 + 56,215 + 61,097 − 2,693 − 16,591 + 18,790 − 7,082 + 783 + 68,150 + 332 + 11,153         Q4 + 67,260 + 60,120 − 3,729 − 7,287 + 24,785 − 10,358 − 681 + 58,464 − 1,722 − 8,115
2015          Q1 + 60,366 + 59,643 − 2,272 − 6,487 + 22,431 − 15,222 + 264 + 52,983 − 21 − 7,647
2012          Oct + 15,330 + 16,276 − 1,123 − 4,360 + 6,637 − 3,224 + 212 + 15,412 + 176 − 130
         Nov + 18,954 + 17,519 − 787 − 1,960 + 6,428 − 3,033 + 343 + 21,658 − 308 + 2,360         Dec + 20,477 + 11,537 − 1,512 + 1,885 + 11,896 − 4,842 − 675 + 25,831 − 361 + 6,029
2013          Jan + 9,623 + 14,421 − 427 − 3,871 + 4,363 − 5,290 + 173 − 10,275 + 493 − 20,070
         Feb + 11,015 + 16,197 − 1,411 − 3,425 + 4,907 − 6,664 − 113 + 12,821 − 321 + 1,918         Mar + 20,554 + 20,966 + 502 − 3,183 + 5,598 − 2,826 + 360 + 34,275 − 86 + 13,361
         Apr + 15,512 + 19,987 + 498 − 2,425 + 194 − 2,244 + 188 + 20,636 + 56 + 4,937
         May + 11,969 + 16,471 + 1,917 − 4,221 + 1,842 − 2,124 + 268 + 9,952 − 22 − 2,285         June + 15,525 + 17,722 − 820 − 4,010 + 4,398 − 2,584 + 304 + 28,338 + 38 + 12,508
         July + 11,539 + 16,143 − 1,005 − 6,491 + 5,061 − 3,174 + 126 + 4,633 − 654 − 7,032
         Aug + 7,446 + 12,722 − 1,776 − 6,786 + 5,032 − 3,522 + 184 + 24,787 + 425 + 17,157         Sep + 18,666 + 20,276 − 1,285 − 3,629 + 4,309 − 2,289 + 128 + 19,168 − 556 + 374
         Oct + 15,940 + 18,903 − 362 − 5,875 + 5,563 − 2,651 + 514 + 16,097 − 212 − 357
         Nov + 21,585 + 19,822 + 192 − 2,141 + 6,010 − 2,107 + 176 + 21,190 + 407 − 571         Dec + 22,644 + 13,966 − 1,258 + 1,305 + 12,967 − 5,594 − 1,166 + 26,299 + 1,269 + 4,821
2014          Jan + 14,164 + 15,962 − 748 − 2,809 + 5,243 − 4,233 + 1,500 + 1,295 − 375 − 14,369
         Feb + 13,309 + 17,277 − 9 − 2,773 + 5,843 − 7,038 + 433 + 23,490 − 898 + 9,748         Mar + 22,048 + 20,085 + 1,933 − 1,621 + 6,451 − 2,867 + 249 + 35,224 + 708 + 12,927
         Apr + 16,872 + 18,601 − 329 − 1,811 + 3,250 − 3,168 + 194 + 29,427 + 151 + 12,361
         May + 12,252 + 17,921 − 1,532 − 2,343 − 2,333 − 993 − 54 + 12,165 − 631 − 32         June + 17,569 + 18,238 + 756 − 3,877 + 4,890 − 1,682 + 402 + 15,611 − 130 − 2,359
         July + 20,648 + 22,871 − 1,837 − 5,526 + 6,061 − 2,759 − 8 + 18,353 + 431 − 2,287
         Aug + 11,333 + 14,557 − 675 − 6,909 + 5,884 − 2,200 + 439 + 14,135 + 166 + 2,363         Sep + 24,234 + 23,669 − 182 − 4,156 + 6,844 − 2,123 + 352 + 35,662 − 265 + 11,076
         Oct + 22,245 + 23,474 − 1,539 − 5,587 + 6,604 − 2,246 − 109 + 12,335 + 203 − 9,802
         Nov + 19,001 + 18,357 − 480 − 2,536 + 6,608 − 3,427 + 134 + 21,758 + 30 + 2,624         Dec + 26,014 + 18,290 − 1,710 + 836 + 11,573 − 4,685 − 706 + 24,371 − 1,955 − 937
2015          Jan + 15,870 + 15,521 − 1,190 − 2,372 + 6,979 − 4,258 + 27 − 3,722 + 372 − 19,618
         Feb + 16,569 + 19,678 − 872 − 2,372 + 6,838 − 7,575 + 37 + 34,463 + 266 + 17,857         Mar  
p + 27,927 + 24,445 − 210 − 1,743 + 8,614 − 3,388 + 200 + 22,242 − 660 − 5,885
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net acquisition/disposal of
transactions for the account of residents and the deduction of goods returned. non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from
Deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing; the difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3Including freight and current account and the capital account. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2015
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2014
 2015
Ländergruppe/Land  2012  2013  2014 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,095,766 1,093,115 1,133,541 103,925 95,970 90,096 89,938 95,693 107,541
Imports 905,925 898,164 916,636 81,861 78,086 71,152 74,077 76,178 84,510Balance + 189,841 + 194,950 + 216,905 + 22,063 + 17,884 + 18,944 + 15,860 + 19,515 + 23,031
I Exports 751,071 748,156 770,935 69,975 65,793 59,133 62,271 65,284 ...European countries
Imports 629,305 633,706 650,218 57,787 56,030 49,949 50,560 53,009 ...Balance + 121,766 + 114,451 + 120,718 + 12,188 + 9,763 + 9,184 + 11,711 + 12,274 ...
Exports 622,674 623,472 657,163 59,714 56,182 50,787 54,131 56,501 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 504,494 513,463 533,190 47,819 45,796 40,975 41,477 44,191 ...
Balance + 118,180 + 110,009 + 123,973 + 11,895 + 10,386 + 9,811 + 12,654 + 12,310 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 410,039 406,064 417,208 37,725 35,355 32,198 34,245 35,814 ...countries Imports 340,845 344,143 352,575 31,256 30,173 27,023 27,104 29,251 ...
Balance + 69,194 + 61,921 + 64,633 + 6,469 + 5,181 + 5,175 + 7,141 + 6,563 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,591 56,276 56,147 5,173 4,721 4,102 4,315 4,641 ...
Imports 36,419 36,793 36,392 3,266 3,035 2,815 2,772 3,000 ...Balance + 20,172 + 19,484 + 19,755 + 1,906 + 1,686 + 1,288 + 1,542 + 1,641 ...
Belgium and Exports 49,424 47,980 47,676 4,271 3,878 3,794 3,750 3,831 ...Luxembourg Imports 40,528 42,033 42,978 3,874 3,664 3,031 3,169 3,438 ...
Balance + 8,896 + 5,947 + 4,698 + 398 + 214 + 763 + 581 + 393 ...
France Exports 102,911 99,980 101,915 9,233 8,577 7,917 8,600 9,229 ...
Imports 64,035 64,018 67,475 5,851 5,818 5,133 5,218 5,717 ...Balance + 38,875 + 35,962 + 34,441 + 3,382 + 2,759 + 2,784 + 3,382 + 3,513 ...
Italy Exports 55,529 53,247 54,488 4,933 4,640 3,884 4,440 4,727 ...
Imports 47,957 46,930 48,545 4,395 3,973 3,641 3,521 3,945 ...Balance + 7,572 + 6,317 + 5,942 + 538 + 667 + 243 + 919 + 782 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,381 70,970 73,180 6,303 6,374 5,825 6,091 6,064 ...
Imports 85,738 88,680 88,128 7,567 7,614 6,992 6,774 7,057 ...Balance − 15,357 − 17,709 − 14,948 − 1,264 − 1,240 − 1,167 − 683 − 993 ...
Spain Exports 31,047 31,349 34,942 3,300 3,025 2,850 3,073 3,203 ...
Imports 23,206 23,639 24,958 2,216 2,161 1,987 2,000 2,140 ...Balance + 7,841 + 7,709 + 9,984 + 1,084 + 864 + 863 + 1,072 + 1,063 ...
Other EU member Exports 212,635 217,408 239,955 21,989 20,827 18,589 19,886 20,687 ...states Imports 163,649 169,320 180,615 16,563 15,622 13,952 14,373 14,940 ...
Balance + 48,986 + 48,088 + 59,340 + 5,426 + 5,205 + 4,637 + 5,513 + 5,747 ...
of which
United Exports 73,283 75,488 84,140 7,427 7,291 6,594 7,184 7,462 ...Kingdom Imports 42,820 42,513 42,302 3,644 3,575 3,247 3,461 3,053 ...
Balance + 30,462 + 32,975 + 41,838 + 3,784 + 3,716 + 3,347 + 3,723 + 4,409 ...
Exports 128,398 124,684 113,772 10,261 9,611 8,346 8,140 8,782 ... 2 Other European
Imports 124,811 120,242 117,028 9,968 10,234 8,974 9,083 8,818 ... countries
Balance + 3,586 + 4,442 − 3,256 + 293 − 623 − 627 − 943 − 36 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 48,933 46,924 46,270 4,322 3,905 3,376 3,881 4,036 ...
Imports 37,775 38,321 39,339 3,603 3,582 2,965 3,200 3,620 ...
Balance + 11,158 + 8,603 + 6,932 + 719 + 322 + 411 + 682 + 416 ...
II Exports 340,980 341,213 359,131 33,685 29,977 30,774 27,487 30,229 ...Non-European
Imports 276,620 264,459 266,418 24,074 22,055 21,203 23,518 23,168 ... countries
Balance + 64,360 + 76,754 + 92,713 + 9,611 + 7,922 + 9,572 + 3,969 + 7,061 ...
Exports 21,920 21,803 22,602 2,085 1,852 2,023 1,754 1,893 ... 1 Africa
Imports 24,145 23,108 20,190 1,758 1,591 1,601 1,619 1,394 ...
Balance − 2,224 − 1,305 + 2,412 + 327 + 261 + 422 + 135 + 499 ...
Exports 128,703 130,427 135,530 12,576 11,495 11,371 10,756 12,110 ... 2 America
Imports 80,549 75,023 73,699 6,614 5,799 5,830 6,082 6,564 ...
Balance + 48,154 + 55,404 + 61,831 + 5,962 + 5,696 + 5,541 + 4,674 + 5,546 ...
of which
Exports 86,971 89,348 96,077 9,077 8,339 8,019 7,742 8,836 ... United States
Imports 51,070 48,582 48,580 4,285 3,757 3,904 4,204 4,784 ...Balance + 35,901 + 40,766 + 47,497 + 4,791 + 4,582 + 4,116 + 3,538 + 4,052 ...
Exports 179,630 179,038 191,421 18,113 15,826 16,665 14,220 15,474 ... 3 Asia
Imports 167,873 162,960 169,614 15,492 14,356 13,604 15,616 14,971 ...
Balance + 11,757 + 16,077 + 21,807 + 2,622 + 1,471 + 3,061 − 1,396 + 504 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,503 32,754 35,611 3,623 2,839 3,494 2,502 3,046 ...
Imports 8,134 8,921 7,840 682 784 644 617 603 ...Balance + 24,369 + 23,833 + 27,771 + 2,940 + 2,055 + 2,849 + 1,885 + 2,443 ...
Japan Exports 17,138 17,076 16,919 1,584 1,350 1,312 1,390 1,394 ...
Imports 21,910 19,492 19,043 1,722 1,449 1,404 1,519 1,598 ...Balance − 4,772 − 2,416 − 2,125 − 138 − 100 − 92 − 129 − 204 ...
Exports 66,746 66,912 74,504 6,873 6,135 6,274 5,512 5,702 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 78,529 74,544 79,538 7,450 7,059 6,741 7,768 7,269 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 11,783 − 7,633 − 5,035 − 577 − 925 − 466 − 2,256 − 1,567 ...Exports 45,651 45,894 48,563 4,605 4,056 4,216 3,696 3,981 ...
New industrial countries
Imports 37,428 36,672 38,684 3,550 3,228 3,078 3,374 3,244 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 8,223 + 9,222 + 9,879 + 1,055 + 828 + 1,138 + 322 + 737 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,727 9,946 9,578 910 804 715 758 752 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,054 3,368 2,915 210 309 168 201 240 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,672 + 6,578 + 6,662 + 700 + 494 + 548 + 557 + 512 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment Manufacturing intellectual Compensation
Period Total services 1 Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 income of employees
2010 − 27,477 + 1,070 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 8,762 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 + 47,948
2011 − 32,471 + 567 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,823 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,314 + 64,7072012 − 35,905 + 178 − 10,199 − 35,422 + 8,784 + 3,020 + 1,404 − 9,547 + 3,103 + 3,616 + 62,1932013 − 44,755 + 0 − 12,063 − 37,713 + 8,181 + 3,522 − 858 − 6,358 + 3,076 + 1,069 + 57,9792014 − 39,112 − 26 − 13,079 − 36,793 + 6,333 + 4,284 + 2,472 − 2,859 + 2,930 + 1,036 + 65,034
2013          Q3 − 16,907 − 65 − 2,507 − 16,855 + 2,669 + 796 + 295 − 1,092 + 736 − 304 + 15,627
         Q4 − 6,712 + 92 − 3,527 − 7,004 + 2,570 + 1,204 + 1,008 − 1,446 + 717 + 486 + 20,118
2014          Q1 − 7,203 + 111 − 3,566 − 5,708 + 1,294 + 1,114 + 124 − 388 + 753 + 873 + 17,665
         Q2 − 8,031 + 69 − 3,080 − 8,399 + 1,721 + 1,063 + 619 − 351 + 782 + 50 + 6,597         Q3 − 16,591 − 39 − 3,216 − 15,411 + 1,757 + 807 + 171 − 882 + 719 − 275 + 20,061         Q4 − 7,287 − 168 − 3,217 − 7,276 + 1,561 + 1,300 + 1,557 − 1,238 + 677 + 388 + 20,711
2015          Q1 − 6,487 + 51 − 2,816 − 5,798 + 1,713 + 1,316 + 181 − 994 + 868 + 798 + 22,712
2014          May − 2,343 + 11 − 1,019 − 2,370 + 686 + 456 − 29 − 399 + 247 + 36 − 2,113
         June − 3,877 + 60 − 975 − 4,422 + 437 + 163 + 695 + 353 + 252 − 8 + 5,225
         July − 5,526 − 46 − 1,155 − 4,377 + 860 + 246 − 389 − 702 + 237 − 106 + 6,413
         Aug − 6,909 − 1 − 960 − 6,498 + 496 + 332 + 106 − 445 + 250 − 79 + 6,315         Sep − 4,156 + 7 − 1,101 − 4,536 + 402 + 229 + 453 + 265 + 231 − 91 + 7,332
         Oct − 5,587 − 46 − 1,275 − 4,604 + 414 + 334 + 143 − 629 + 259 + 160 + 6,856
         Nov − 2,536 − 21 − 1,082 − 1,913 + 503 + 381 + 159 − 502 + 238 + 126 + 6,894         Dec + 836 − 101 − 860 − 759 + 644 + 584 + 1,255 − 106 + 180 + 103 + 6,961
2015          Jan − 2,372 + 10 − 1,151 − 1,404 + 907 + 172 − 75 − 682 + 283 + 274 + 7,081
         Feb − 2,372 + 35 − 816 − 1,825 + 221 + 381 − 88 − 385 + 280 + 283 + 6,838         Mar − 1,743 + 6 − 850 − 2,569 + 585 + 763 + 344 + 73 + 305 + 242 + 8,793
1Includes fees for processing goods that are not owned by the processor. 2Since side. 3Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not
2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2010 − 39,669 − 24,953 − 4,720 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,085
2011 − 35,505 − 21,001 − 4,475 + 6,718 − 14,504 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 4942012 − 40,139 − 25,752 − 5,451 + 5,206 − 14,387 − 2,952 − 2,952 + 1,427 + 1,743 − 3162013 − 41,069 − 26,176 − 4,106 + 8,199 − 14,893 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 1,142 + 1,111 + 312014 − 37,421 − 24,305 − 5,143 + 11,090 − 13,116 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,826 + 2,736 + 90
2013          Q3 − 8,985 − 5,624 − 802 + 1,459 − 3,361 − 820 − 807 + 438 + 692 − 255
         Q4 − 10,352 − 5,842 − 922 + 1,501 − 4,510 − 815 − 807 − 476 − 430 − 46
2014          Q1 − 14,138 − 11,117 − 1,678 + 2,054 − 3,021 − 870 − 863 + 2,182 + 934 + 1,248
         Q2 − 5,843 − 1,671 − 764 + 5,989 − 4,172 − 869 − 863 + 542 + 811 − 269         Q3 − 7,082 − 3,781 − 1,049 + 1,651 − 3,301 − 870 − 863 + 783 + 725 + 58         Q4 − 10,358 − 7,735 − 1,652 + 1,396 − 2,623 − 866 − 863 − 681 + 266 − 947
2015          Q1 − 15,222 − 12,342 − 2,169 + 1,532 − 2,880 − 886 − 881 + 264 + 11 + 253
2014          May − 993 + 270 − 331 + 2,948 − 1,263 − 290 − 288 − 54 + 353 − 407
         June − 1,682 − 439 − 176 + 1,912 − 1,243 − 289 − 288 + 402 + 291 + 110
         July − 2,759 − 1,775 − 452 + 379 − 984 − 289 − 288 − 8 + 233 − 241
         Aug − 2,200 − 1,383 − 326 + 471 − 817 − 291 − 288 + 439 + 272 + 167         Sep − 2,123 − 623 − 271 + 801 − 1,500 − 290 − 288 + 352 + 220 + 132
         Oct − 2,246 − 1,521 − 371 + 271 − 725 − 289 − 288 − 109 + 130 − 238
         Nov − 3,427 − 2,610 − 491 + 143 − 817 − 289 − 288 + 134 + 388 − 255         Dec − 4,685 − 3,604 − 790 + 981 − 1,081 − 288 − 288 − 706 − 252 − 454
2015          Jan − 4,258 − 3,337 − 1,462 + 752 − 922 − 295 − 294 + 27 − 20 + 47
         Feb − 7,575 − 6,680 − 470 + 234 − 895 − 296 − 294 + 37 + 91 − 54         Mar − 3,388 − 2,325 − 237 + 546 − 1,063 − 295 − 294 + 200 − 60 + 260
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2014
2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 376,169 + 36,997 + 293,211 + 114,705 + 78,048 + 8,964 + 243,826 + 186,774 + 19,781 + 37,272
1 Direct investment + 77,735 + 53,360 + 88,717 + 28,577 + 19,891 + 16,458 + 38,160 + 7,243 + 16,325 + 14,592
Equity + 61,084 + 34,189 + 70,251 + 22,853 + 11,398 + 17,373 + 23,327 + 8,279 + 10,871 + 4,178
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 21,052 + 14,523 + 22,241 + 5,714 + 6,452 + 1,579 + 10,759 + 4,811 + 4,112 + 1,836
Debt instruments + 16,651 + 19,172 + 18,465 + 5,725 + 8,492 − 915 + 14,833 − 1,036 + 5,455 + 10,414
2 Portfolio investment + 109,712 + 143,233 + 149,427 + 41,279 + 29,438 + 35,510 + 55,289 + 12,233 + 19,133 + 23,923
Shares 2 + 11,675 + 19,019 + 10,610 + 4,761 − 563 + 3,328 + 313 − 858 + 2,066 − 895
Investment fund shares 3 + 21,667 + 31,939 + 38,324 + 8,644 + 12,892 + 6,105 + 17,762 + 1,913 + 6,601 + 9,248
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 75,913 + 87,772 + 99,068 + 26,837 + 19,462 + 28,763 + 30,981 + 6,939 + 11,815 + 12,227
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 456 + 4,503 + 1,425 + 1,038 − 2,353 − 2,686 + 6,233 + 4,238 − 1,348 + 3,343
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 24,386 + 24,286 + 31,783 + 10,056 + 9,521 + 6,996 + 11,620 + 4,939 + 4,941 + 1,741
4. Other investment 7 + 163,040 − 184,720 + 25,848 + 35,403 + 18,867 − 48,277 + 138,779 + 161,986 − 20,884 − 2,324
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 66,080 − 56,647 + 76,332 + 45,184 + 1,780 − 2,366 + 39,134 + 78,930 − 11,549 − 28,246
Long-term − 47,912 − 50,495 + 21,176 − 4,485 + 9,844 + 12,562 + 7,417 + 5,763 − 14,066 + 15,720Short-term − 18,169 − 6,152 + 55,156 + 49,669 − 8,064 − 14,928 + 31,718 + 73,167 + 2,517 − 43,966
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 13,394 + 10,049 − 14,629 − 3,314 − 6,408 − 31,615 + 29,066 + 23,515 + 2,678 + 2,873
Long-term + 337 + 910 + 852 − 881 + 773 + 1,738 + 1,132 + 148 + 461 + 523Short-term − 13,731 + 9,139 − 15,481 − 2,432 − 7,181 − 33,353 + 27,934 + 23,367 + 2,217 + 2,350
General government + 49,836 + 7,397 + 14,024 + 1,790 + 5,392 + 4,777 − 278 + 5,118 − 10,110 + 4,714
Long-term + 49,846 + 15,078 − 2,372 + 3,361 + 16 − 1,305 − 3,689 + 268 − 3,503 − 454Short-term − 10 − 7,681 + 16,396 − 1,571 + 5,376 + 6,082 + 3,411 + 4,850 − 6,607 + 5,168
Bundesbank + 192,679 − 145,519 − 49,880 − 8,258 + 18,103 − 19,074 + 70,856 + 54,424 − 1,904 + 18,336
5. Reserve assets + 1,297 + 838 − 2,564 − 610 + 332 − 1,722 − 21 + 372 + 266 − 660
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 218,708 − 170,922 + 49,384 + 57,501 + 9,897 − 49,499 + 190,843 + 190,495 − 14,681 + 15,029
1 Direct investment + 42,110 + 44,385 + 5,508 + 5,859 − 2,625 − 5,968 + 13,915 − 1,686 + 6,064 + 9,537
Equity + 9,959 + 7,499 + 22,527 − 1,363 + 7,927 + 10,841 + 5,822 + 2,179 + 2,129 + 1,514
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 2,552 + 585 + 5,427 − 712 + 2,166 + 968 + 4,089 + 1,366 + 1,621 + 1,102
Debt instruments + 32,150 + 36,886 − 17,020 + 7,222 − 10,551 − 16,809 + 8,093 − 3,865 + 3,934 + 8,024
2 Portfolio investment + 54,951 − 21,263 + 21,680 + 22,808 + 1,328 − 10,735 + 6,251 + 17,156 + 1,954 − 12,859
Shares 2) + 2,281 + 5,024 + 8,328 + 8,250 + 2,743 + 2,946 + 1,893 − 5,965 + 6,393 + 1,465
Investment fund shares 3 − 3,422 + 6,086 − 5,642 + 848 − 2,955 − 3,457 + 4,363 + 1,456 + 2,440 + 467
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 56,198 − 9,467 + 21,410 + 13,637 − 5,550 + 6,441 − 13,624 + 5,125 + 897 − 19,646
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 107 − 22,907 − 2,417 + 73 + 7,090 − 16,665 + 13,619 + 16,540 − 7,776 + 4,855
3. Other investment 7 + 121,648 − 194,044 + 22,196 + 28,834 + 11,194 − 32,796 + 170,677 + 175,025 − 22,699 + 18,350
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 51,508 − 158,237 + 32,495 + 3,422 + 29,893 − 33,557 + 105,534 + 103,408 − 17,899 + 20,025
Long-term − 10,250 − 16,733 − 14,555 − 5,115 − 5,748 − 675 − 9,937 + 420 − 1,673 − 8,684Short-term + 61,758 − 141,504 + 47,050 + 8,537 + 35,640 − 32,882 + 115,470 + 102,988 − 16,226 + 28,708
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 8,668 − 8,583 + 4,141 + 2,098 − 631 − 6,789 + 20,800 + 16,092 + 2,714 + 1,994
Long-term − 56 − 13,790 − 5,331 − 684 − 1,579 − 936 + 506 + 2,010 + 683 − 2,188Short-term + 8,724 + 5,207 + 9,473 + 2,782 + 948 − 5,853 + 20,294 + 14,081 + 2,031 + 4,182
General government − 31,011 − 1,577 − 5,594 + 5,402 − 3,123 − 3,916 + 6,143 + 408 + 473 + 5,262
Long-term + 35,994 + 9,302 − 914 + 1,572 + 203 − 892 − 4,088 − 740 − 3,226 − 122Short-term − 67,005 − 10,878 − 4,680 + 3,829 − 3,326 − 3,023 + 10,231 + 1,149 + 3,698 + 5,383
Bundesbank + 92,482 − 25,647 − 8,846 + 17,913 − 14,945 + 11,466 + 38,200 + 55,117 − 7,986 − 8,930
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 157,461 + 207,920 + 243,827 + 57,204 + 68,150 + 58,464 + 52,983 − 3,722 + 34,463 + 22,242
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
Mio €
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
End of year Gold and drawing within the Portfolio External- position in deposits and (col 1 minus
or month Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col 10) gold claims investment 2 liabilities 3  4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 10,576 93,3722003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 11,869 83,525
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 9,315 83,795
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 7,750 122,5182006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 6,201 98,1882007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 17,304 162,1882008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 31,507 199,268
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 22,253 301,033
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 28,575 496,1202011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 60,867 653,7952012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,9762013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2012          Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 14,028 9,492 30,749 764,133 751,449 61,709 116,048 907,569
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 13,868 9,427 29,669 708,142 695,458 62,999 110,145 864,333
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 13,814 9,339 29,585 732,036 719,352 62,494 138,085 853,354
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 13,772 8,999 29,606 727,807 715,124 63,240 126,443 862,091         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,976
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 13,251 8,701 28,249 629,935 616,937 63,705 420,968 457,619
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 13,375 8,637 29,079 625,570 612,572 62,715 414,303 457,205         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 13,526 8,877 29,590 601,719 588,722 62,445 399,626 452,985
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 13,336 8,760 29,040 620,862 607,866 62,590 414,310 443,123
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 13,272 8,712 28,893 602,185 589,189 61,455 405,918 426,828         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 13,236 8,690 28,618 588,473 575,477 59,589 393,961 404,927
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 12,960 8,690 27,623 589,421 576,469 59,133 398,251 408,914
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 13,018 8,416 28,330 586,580 573,628 57,590 398,868 409,781         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 12,920 8,375 27,337 583,320 570,368 56,873 398,035 398,611
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 12,941 7,981 27,086 574,449 561,497 56,514 421,360 364,089
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 12,962 7,945 27,473 557,441 544,488 56,278 409,079 352,651         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 13,030 8,080 28,388 512,785 500,357 54,153 402,189 314,679
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 389,297 329,020         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 376,533 311,024
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 397,660 295,296
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 400,885 280,003         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 394,597 283,539
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 372,693 287,828
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 374,337 306,987         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 380,316 316,486
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 392,583 289,207
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 399,026 283,943         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 452,699 298,363
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 444,794 299,758         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 436,347 331,509
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 437,825 324,612
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside European monetary respektive country composition), since November 2000 also balances with
union. Up to December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long term debt securities from
to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end- 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, monthly report October 2014, page 24. 5Euro opening
of-month levels are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims from TARGET (in the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents
Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,8922013 779,109 280,526 498,583 319,761 178,822 163,734 15,088 920,620 142,676 777,944 616,341 161,603 94,646 66,9572014 812,778 276,370 536,408 351,186 185,222 170,423 14,799 922,628 148,746 773,882 609,827 164,055 97,641 66,413
2014          Oct 833,063 301,799 531,264 344,021 187,243 172,163 15,080 936,683 147,885 788,798 624,896 163,902 96,542 67,360
         Nov 835,661 306,643 529,018 339,568 189,450 174,558 14,892 943,386 148,893 794,492 628,957 165,536 98,315 67,221         Dec 812,778 276,370 536,408 351,186 185,222 170,423 14,799 922,628 148,746 773,882 609,827 164,055 97,641 66,413
2015          Jan 848,260 305,497 542,763 358,288 184,475 169,656 14,819 943,403 165,356 778,047 618,144 159,903 91,849 68,054
         Feb  
r 860,326 308,542 551,784 362,998 188,786 173,821 14,965 954,324 161,784 792,540 626,223 166,316 97,748 68,568
         Mar 879,842 311,525 568,317 369,316 199,001 184,184 14,817 971,346 164,380 806,966 634,062 172,903 104,731 68,172
Industrial countries 1
 
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,7602012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,1812013 689,637 277,223 412,414 291,000 121,414 108,082 13,332 833,922 141,307 692,615 579,018 113,597 78,921 34,6762014 713,600 271,498 442,103 317,132 124,971 111,871 13,100 835,644 147,572 688,072 572,267 115,805 80,626 35,178
2014          Oct 733,979 296,958 437,021 311,458 125,563 112,246 13,317 850,605 146,719 703,887 587,725 116,162 80,665 35,497
         Nov 736,260 301,731 434,529 306,582 127,947 114,805 13,142 856,754 147,724 709,030 591,697 117,333 81,980 35,353         Dec 713,600 271,498 442,103 317,132 124,971 111,871 13,100 835,644 147,572 688,072 572,267 115,805 80,626 35,178
2015          Jan 748,114 301,076 447,038 322,864 124,174 110,921 13,253 856,554 164,117 692,436 580,710 111,726 75,556 36,170
         Feb  
r 757,657 303,965 453,692 325,408 128,284 114,901 13,383 863,192 157,877 705,314 588,839 116,475 80,474 36,001
         Mar 774,133 307,200 466,933 330,482 136,451 123,237 13,215 874,938 155,132 719,807 597,127 122,680 87,143 35,537
EU member states 1
 
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,6232012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,5072013 582,038 262,788 319,249 232,788 86,461 75,934 10,527 699,765 127,084 572,681 493,383 79,298 52,975 26,3232014 600,437 256,437 344,001 255,518 88,483 77,872 10,611 700,737 133,331 567,406 486,649 80,757 53,878 26,879
2014          Oct 621,010 280,968 340,042 250,053 89,989 79,233 10,756 713,440 136,711 576,730 494,821 81,909 54,787 27,123
         Nov 622,332 286,158 336,174 243,882 92,292 81,755 10,537 722,564 137,831 584,733 501,297 83,436 56,257 27,179         Dec 600,437 256,437 344,001 255,518 88,483 77,872 10,611 700,737 133,331 567,406 486,649 80,757 53,878 26,879
2015          Jan 633,615 285,501 348,115 259,651 88,464 77,756 10,708 722,420 153,817 568,603 490,049 78,554 50,837 27,717
         Feb  
r 640,095 287,264 352,831 261,188 91,643 80,840 10,803 729,804 148,731 581,073 498,450 82,623 55,133 27,490
         Mar 652,046 290,081 361,965 264,638 97,328 86,591 10,737 735,515 144,980 590,536 504,171 86,365 59,491 26,873
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,3312012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,1962013 422,440 196,101 226,339 170,696 55,643 49,469 6,175 593,680 100,922 492,758 439,537 53,221 36,389 16,8322014 444,124 201,453 242,671 186,318 56,353 50,132 6,220 591,186 105,388 485,798 433,325 52,472 35,555 16,918
2014          Oct 451,050 213,120 237,930 181,249 56,681 50,383 6,298 603,879 106,135 497,745 443,418 54,326 37,041 17,285
         Nov 456,701 220,732 235,969 177,609 58,359 52,231 6,128 613,245 109,135 504,110 448,973 55,137 37,810 17,327         Dec 444,124 201,453 242,671 186,318 56,353 50,132 6,220 591,186 105,388 485,798 433,325 52,472 35,555 16,918
2015          Jan 472,002 224,409 247,593 190,290 57,303 51,017 6,286 611,918 123,093 488,825 436,734 52,091 34,508 17,582
         Feb  
r 475,004 224,638 250,366 191,822 58,544 52,165 6,380 606,794 111,603 495,192 440,932 54,260 37,061 17,199
         Mar 480,981 225,938 255,043 193,640 61,403 55,056 6,347 614,817 110,641 504,176 448,266 55,910 39,162 16,748
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,9662012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,6832013 89,466 3,303 86,163 28,759 57,403 55,647 1,756 86,694 1,368 85,325 37,323 48,002 15,723 32,2802014 99,174 4,872 94,302 34,051 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,982 1,174 85,808 37,560 48,248 17,014 31,234
2014          Oct 99,079 4,840 94,238 32,562 61,676 59,914 1,763 86,075 1,166 84,909 37,171 47,737 15,875 31,862
         Nov 99,396 4,912 94,484 32,985 61,499 59,749 1,750 86,629 1,169 85,460 37,260 48,200 16,333 31,868         Dec 99,174 4,872 94,302 34,051 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,982 1,174 85,808 37,560 48,248 17,014 31,234
2015          Jan 100,146 4,421 95,725 35,424 60,301 58,735 1,566 86,849 1,239 85,610 37,433 48,177 16,293 31,884
         Feb  
r 101,946 3,999 97,946 37,590 60,356 58,774 1,582 88,223 1,198 87,025 37,184 49,841 17,274 32,567
         Mar 104,895 3,659 101,236 38,834 62,403 60,801 1,602 88,185 1,227 86,959 36,735 50,223 17,588 32,635
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2014          Apr 1.4831 1.5181 8.5984 7.4656 141.62 8.2506 9.0329 1.2189 0.82520 1.3813
         May 1.4755 1.4951 8.5658 7.4641 139.74 8.1513 9.0298 1.2204 0.81535 1.3732         June 1.4517 1.4728 8.4698 7.4588 138.72 8.2149 9.0914 1.2181 0.80409 1.3592
         July 1.4420 1.4524 8.3940 7.4564 137.72 8.3880 9.2327 1.2150 0.79310 1.3539
         Aug 1.4306 1.4548 8.1965 7.4551 137.11 8.2522 9.1878 1.2118 0.79730 1.3316         Sep 1.4246 1.4196 7.9207 7.4449 138.39 8.1798 9.1929 1.2076 0.79113 1.2901
         Oct 1.4436 1.4214 7.7635 7.4448 136.85 8.3136 9.1797 1.2078 0.78861 1.2673
         Nov 1.4432 1.4136 7.6411 7.4415 145.03 8.4912 9.2384 1.2027 0.79054 1.2472         Dec 1.4928 1.4216 7.6330 7.4402 147.06 8.9802 9.4043 1.2026 0.78830 1.2331
2015          Jan 1.4390 1.4039 7.2269 7.4406 137.47 8.9320 9.4167
3 1.0940 0.76680 1.1621
         Feb 1.4568 1.4199 7.0960 7.4501 134.69 8.6188 9.4901 1.0618 0.74051 1.1350
         Mar 1.4008 1.3661 6.7623 7.4593 130.41 8.6434 9.2449 1.0608 0.72358 1.0838
         Apr 1.3939 1.3313 6.6863 7.4655 128.94 8.5057 9.3254 1.0379 0.72116 1.0779
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange indicative rates. 2Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 3Discontinuation
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference of the minimum exchange rate of EUR 1 = CHF 1.20 on 15 January 2015. 
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
May 2015
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.1 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.5 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.6 85.9 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.2 84.9 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.6 84.3 90.5 87.0 91.3 96.1 85.7 90.0 92.9 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.4 89.6 87.5 95.0 90.7 92.0 95.2 88.2 90.5 93.5 92.0 91.82003 100.7 101.5 100.6 98.7 106.9 101.6 95.4 94.3 97.4 94.7 97.1 96.6 96.82004 104.5 105.3 103.4 102.2 111.5 105.4 95.7 93.1 99.8 95.0 98.5 98.0 98.4
2005 102.9 103.8 101.3 100.2 109.5 102.8 94.5 91.7 98.8 92.8 98.5 96.9 96.7
2006 102.8 103.8 100.7 99.4 109.4 102.2 93.3 90.1 98.3 91.1 98.7 96.5 95.92007 106.3 106.5 102.7 101.1 112.9 104.2 94.2 89.3 102.2 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.12008 109.4 108.7 104.1 104.0 117.1 106.2 94.4 87.9 105.4 90.5 102.3 97.9 97.22009 110.7 109.4 104.9 106.9 119.9 107.2 94.5 88.6 104.5 90.9 101.9 98.0 97.6
2010 103.6 101.8 96.7 99.4 111.6 98.4 92.0 88.2 97.9 87.5 98.9 94.0 92.4
2011 103.4 101.0 94.8 97.4 112.3 97.9 91.7 88.0 97.4 86.8 98.4 93.2 91.82012 97.9 95.8 89.5 92.0 107.2 93.2 89.8 88.0 92.4 84.3 96.1 90.4 89.02013 101.7 99.2 92.8 94.6 112.2 96.5 92.2 88.4 98.1 86.2 98.5 92.3 91.02014 102.3 98.9
p 93.0 p 96.4 114.8 p 97.0 p 92.8 p 89.2 98.5 p 86.8 98.6 92.5 p 91.7
2012          Jan 99.0 96.6 108.2 94.0 96.3 91.0 89.6
         Feb 99.7 97.5 91.0 94.3 108.5 94.5 90.2 87.8 93.5 84.8 96.9 91.4 89.9
         Mar 99.9 97.6 108.8 94.6 97.1 91.4 89.9
         Apr 99.5 97.4 108.6 94.5 96.8 91.2 89.7
         May 98.1 95.9 89.7 93.2 107.4 93.3 89.9 88.0 92.5 84.5 96.1 90.5 89.1
         June 97.3 95.2 106.7 92.8 95.8 90.2 88.8
         July 95.4 93.5 104.4 91.0 95.0 89.2 87.7
         Aug 95.3 93.4 87.6 90.5 104.5 90.9 89.1 88.0 90.5 83.5 95.1 89.2 87.7
         Sep 97.3 95.3 106.7 92.8 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Oct 97.8 95.9 107.4 93.2 96.0 90.2 88.8
         Nov 97.3 95.2 89.5 90.3 106.8 92.6 90.2 88.1 93.1 84.5 96.0 90.1 88.6
         Dec 98.7 96.6 108.4 93.9 96.6 90.6 89.2
2013          Jan 100.4 98.3 110.0 95.1 97.7 91.7 90.2
         Feb 101.7 99.3 92.1 95.4 111.3 96.0 91.5 88.2 96.6 85.8 98.2 92.2 90.6
         Mar 100.3 98.1 109.6 94.7 97.7 91.5 89.8
         Apr 100.5 98.1 109.9 94.6 98.1 91.8 90.0
         May 100.6 98.3 92.4 95.1 110.1 94.9 92.1 88.5 97.7 86.1 98.3 91.9 90.2
         June 101.6 99.3 112.1 96.5 98.5 92.4 91.1
         July 101.6 99.3 112.1 96.5 98.7 92.4 91.1
         Aug 102.3 99.8 92.9 96.1 113.5 97.6 92.3 88.4 98.4 86.2 98.7 92.5 91.6
         Sep 102.1 99.4 113.4 97.3 98.7 92.5 91.5
         Oct 102.9 100.1 114.3 97.8 99.0 92.8 91.7
         Nov 102.7 99.8 93.8 92.0 114.3 97.6 93.0 88.7 99.7 86.9 99.0 92.8 91.8
         Dec 103.9 101.0 115.9 99.0 99.4 93.4 92.5
2014          Jan 103.5 100.6 116.0 98.9 99.3 93.2 92.5
         Feb 103.6 100.7 94.8 p 98.0 116.4 99.1 93.3 88.9 100.3 87.4 99.1 93.2 92.6
         Mar 104.7 101.6 117.6 99.9 99.4 93.7 93.0
         Apr 104.6 101.3 117.1 99.2 99.3 93.6 92.7
         May 103.9 100.4 94.4 p 98.0 116.2 98.1 93.2 89.2 99.6 87.6 99.0 93.2 92.2
         June 103.1 99.6 115.2 97.3 98.7 92.9 91.8
         July 102.7 99.1 114.7 96.8 98.7 92.8 91.6
         Aug 102.0 98.5 92.3 p 95.7 114.1 96.2 92.4 89.0 97.6 86.4 98.5 92.4 91.3
         Sep 100.5 97.0 112.5 94.8 98.2 91.8 90.7
         Oct 99.6 96.1 112.0 94.2 97.7 91.3 90.4
         Nov 99.6 96.1 p 90.5 p 93.8 112.3 94.3 p 92.4 p 89.6 96.6 p 86.0 97.8 91.2 90.4
         Dec 99.7 96.0 113.4 p 94.9 97.7 91.1 p 90.7
2015          Jan 95.9 p 92.4 109.3 p 91.3 95.9 p 89.2 p 88.6
         Feb 94.0 p 90.7 ... ... 107.4 p 89.7 p 90.3 p 89.9 p 90.3 p 83.6 95.4 p 88.5 p 87.9
         Mar 91.4 p 88.2 104.2 p 87.0 p 94.4 p 87.2 p 86.3
         Apr 90.5 p 87.3 102.8 p 85.7 p 94.1 p 86.7 p 85.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 6Euro-area
Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, countries and countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and wage

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2014 see the index attached 
to the January 2015 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2014 and 2015 
and an outlook for 2016
– Europe’s new recovery and resolution regime 
for credit institutions
– Changes in the methodology and classifica -
tions of the balance of payments and the 
international investment position
– Cash withdrawals at the point of sale: motives for use and implications for cash holdingJuly 2014
– Exchange rates and financial stress
– Germany’s statutory health insurance scheme: past developments and future challenges
– Consolidated financial statement statistics as 
a contribution to the extended corporate 
analysis: approach and initial results
– Analyses of the importance of the insurance industry for financial stability
August 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2014
– Ownership structure in the German equity market: general trends and changes in the 
financial crisis
– The reform of financial relations in the Ger -
man federal system
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2013
October 2014
– Methodological changes in the financial 
 accounts – background, approach and se -
lected resultsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
83•

– The German economy in the international 
division of labour: a look at value added 
flows
– Launch of the banking union: the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism in Europe
November 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2013
January 2015
– The role of trade in goods in the develop -
ment of global imbalances
– The Common Credit Assessment System for 
assessing the eligibility of enterprises
February 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2015
– Approaches to strengthening the regulatory 
framework of European monetary union
– The importance of macroprudential policy 
for monetary policy
– German balance of payments in 2014
– Securities holdings statistics for analysing 
holdings of securities in   Germany and Eur -
ope: methodology and results
April 2015
– The evolution of labour market-  r elated gov -
ernment expenditure in Germany
– Structural developments in the German 
banking sector
– Euro coins held for transaction purposes in 
Germany
May 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20152, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2008 to 
2013, June 20142
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
2006 bis 2012 , December 20132, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2010 bis 
2011, May 20142, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20141, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
45/ 2014  
Cross-border liquidity, relationships and mone -
tary policy: evidence from the Euro area inter-
bank crisis
46/ 2014  
Banking market structure and macroeconomic 
stability: are low-income countries special?
01/ 2015  
Employment, hours and optimal monetary 
 policy
02/ 2015  
The term structure of interest rates and the 
macroeconomy: learning about economic 
 dynamics from a FAVAR
03/ 2015  
Centrality-based capital allocations
04/2015  
Financial frictions and global spillovers05/2015  
German and the rest of euro area fiscal policy 
during the crisis
06/2015  
Fiscal austerity, unemployment and family firms07/2015  
Imperfect information about financial frictions 
and consequences for the business cycle
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2015  
86•

