Monthly Report
February 2015
Vol 67  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 13 February 2015.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-  
bank can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,  
by virtue of section  18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
Potential impacts of the fall in oil prices on the real economy  ............................................  12
Causes of the fall in oil prices  .............................................................................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  47
Housing prices in 2014 in Germany  ....................................................................................  55
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  60
The structural development of public finances in Germany −  
results of the disaggregated framework for 2014  ...............................................................  61Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
5

Overview
German economy emerging 
from sluggish phase faster 
than expected
The global economy looks to have expanded in 
the fourth quarter of 2014 at roughly the same 
moderate pace as in the third quarter. Growth 
in the industrialised countries gained a broader 
footing. Real gross domestic product (GDP) in 
the United States did not increase at quite the 
same speed as in the third quarter, when one- 
off effects had played a role. By contrast, initial 
estimates suggest that output growth in the 
euro area gained some momentum, due in part 
to robust impulses from Germany. The under -
lying dynamics in the major emerging market 
economies continued to show a rather dispar -
ate pattern at the end of the year. Whereas 
China and India maintained the, by their stand -
ards, moderate rate of economic growth, eco -
nomic momentum in Russia and Brazil appears 
to have remained weak.
According to an estimate made by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2015, 
global GDP expanded at a similar annual aver -
age rate in 2014 as in 2013. This means that 
the pace of growth of the world economy in 
the past three years was markedly below the 
average of the upturn years 2010 and 2011 and 
the period 2002 to 2007. Given that monetary 
policy has been exceptionally accommodative 
for quite some time and that fiscal policy, espe -
cially in the past year, has had a far smaller 
 retarding effect on growth, there is much to 
suggest that this deceleration is due primarily 
to weaker expansion of potential output in 
both the advanced economies and the emer -
ging and developing countries.
The world economy appears to be maintaining 
its moderate path of expansion in the first 
quarter of 2015. Global growth is likely to have 
been buoyed by the steep slide in oil prices 
which began in mid-2014. According to an IMF calculation, the part of the price slide attribut -
able to supply-  side factors could increase real 
global GDP by between ¼% and ¾% this year. 
This stimulus is likely to primarily benefit oil-  
importing countries, whereas particularly oil-  
producing countries that lack appreciable 
 financial reserves will probably have to make 
perceptible cuts to their absorption.
Developments on the international financial 
markets in the fourth quarter of 2014 were in -
creasingly marked by the expectation of large- 
scale asset purchases by the Eurosystem. This 
expectation was predicated on falling medium 
and long-  term inflation expectations in the 
wake of tumbling oil prices. The prospect of an 
expanded asset purchase programme pushed 
down bond yields across the whole euro area 
apart from Greece, with new lows being tem -
porarily recorded for several countries. As this 
report went to press, yields on ten- year Bunds 
stood at 0.33%. Bond yields outside of the 
euro area also fell amid the abundant liquidity 
supply and falling oil prices. This triggered a 
rally on most equity markets. For example, 
European stock exchanges benefited from a 
high demand for shares, with prices rising by 
approximately 9% on their levels at the end of 
September 2014. The Eurosystem’s asset pur -
chase programme evidently exceeded the ex -
pectations of some market participants in terms 
of both volume and breadth, causing an inten -
sified search for alternative investment oppor -
tunities after its announcement. Furthermore, 
the euro’s depreciation is likely to have boosted 
exporters’ earnings expectations. Measured by 
its weighted average against the currencies of 
19 major trading partners, the euro lost ap -
proximately 5% of its value on balance com -
pared with the end of September 2014. The 
rise in implied stock market volatility and ana -
lysts’ differing assessments are indicative of 
greater stock price uncertainty.Global economy
Financial 
 marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
6

The ECB Governing Council left the key interest 
rates in the euro area at the levels reached fol -
lowing the interest rate cut of 4  September 
2014. On 22  January 2015, the Governing 
Council also decided to lower the interest rate 
for the six remaining targeted longer- term refi -
nancing operations (TLTROs) to that applying to 
the main refinancing rate.
It simultaneously announced an Extended Asset 
Purchase Programme (EAPP). Under the EAPP , 
the Eurosystem will continue to purchase 
covered bonds (CBPP3) and asset- backed 
 securities (ABSPP). From March 2015, it will 
additionally purchase bonds issued by euro-  
area central governments, agencies and Euro -
pean institutions. The monthly purchase vol -
ume under the EAPP is to total €60 billion, and 
this volume of purchases is to be maintained 
until the Governing Council sees a sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is con -
sistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The majority of the ECB Governing Council 
 regarded the EAPP as being necessary to fulfil 
the Eurosystem’s price stability mandate. The 
reasons given for this  assessment were that the 
inflation dynamics and inflation expectations 
were weaker than expected and that the exist -
ing level of monetary accommodation was in -
sufficient to address the increased risks of a 
prolonged period of low inflation.
Last year saw a marked recovery in the growth 
of the broad monetary aggregate M3 despite 
sluggish economic activity, weak inflation 
 dynamics and, latterly, a significant depreci -
ation of the euro. The continued rise in the an -
nual M3 growth rate from 2.5% at the end of 
September to 3.6% at the end of the year was 
due mainly to the money- holding sector’s sus -
tained preference for highly liquid assets, which 
was encouraged by a further decline in interest 
rates. The quarter under review also saw a con -
tinuation of the gradual recovery in lending to 
the private sector that began in the third quar -
ter of 2013. One particularly encouraging sign 
is that the upward movement was again strongly supported by loans to non- financial 
corporations. The pick- up in lending is likely to 
have been due not only to muted growth in 
real economic activity, but also to the extremely 
accommodative monetary policy stance.
On 4 February 2015, the ECB Governing Coun -
cil decided to lift the waiver of minimum credit 
rating requirements for marketable instruments 
issued or guaranteed by Greece. This waiver 
had allowed such instruments to be used in 
 Eurosystem monetary policy operations despite 
the fact that they did not fulfil minimum credit 
rating requirements. The Governing Council 
decision is based on the assessment that it is 
currently not possible to assume a successful 
conclusion of the programme review and is in 
line with existing Eurosystem rules. As a result, 
funding of the Greek banking system shifted 
away from monetary policy refinancing to -
wards emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). This 
consists of short- term assistance provided by 
Eurosystem national central banks to solvent fi -
nancial institutions facing temporary liquidity 
problems. The Greek banks receiving ELA 
should therefore take measures to improve 
their liquidity position. This requirement would 
be contravened by an expansion of liquidity 
needs as a result of purchasing short- term 
Greek government debt in the coming weeks.
Following extended periods of sluggish growth 
during 2014, economic activity in Germany 
 regained considerable momentum even before 
the turn of the year. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP in 
the final quarter of 2014 expanded strongly by 
a seasonally and calendar- adjusted 0.7% com -
pared with the preceding three- month period, 
when only very modest growth had been re -
corded. Given that corporate sentiment did not 
begin to rebound until November, it is remark -
able how quickly and, in particular, how 
strongly economic growth in Germany picked 
up towards the end of last year.
The depreciation of the euro and the slide in oil 
prices, which began in mid-2014 and acceler -Monetary policy
German 
 economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
7

ated at the end of the year, have considerably 
altered some key indicators of the global set -
ting. Despite moderate expectations for global 
economic growth, enterprises consequently 
stepped up their production in the hope of an 
improvement in business. The upward move -
ment was not based solely on export markets, 
however. An especially strong stimulus was 
provided by domestic activity. The background 
to this was the considerable increase in pur -
chasing power due to the decline in energy 
prices; this helped to strongly boost private 
consumption in an environment that had 
 already been buoyed for some time by marked 
pay rises and low unemployment. Investment 
in machinery and equipment is unlikely to have 
provided any impetus in the final quarter of the 
year. By contrast, more was probably invested 
in buildings again.
The labour market in the fourth quarter of 
2014 was characterised by both a stable up -
ward tendency in employment and a marked 
decline in unemployment. One factor in this is 
that firms again recruited more persons from 
among the unemployed. For one thing, there 
was a greater need for labour in the services 
industries, which are booming at present. For 
another, replacements had to be found for 
workers taking up the option of early retire -
ment on a full state pension at the age of 63. 
The rapid increase in the number of vacancies 
reveals that it was not possible to meet the 
growing demand for labour immediately. This, 
along with the other leading indicators for the 
labour market, suggests further increasing 
 employment and decreasing unemployment 
during the next few months.
The 2014 pay round brought employees an 
average year- on- year rise of 3.0% in their 
 negotiated rates of pay. This means that the 
 increases in rates of remuneration negotiated 
by management and labour were the highest 
for almost 20 years.
The key factor shaping price developments at 
all stages of the economy at the current end is the fall in crude oil prices. The countervailing 
trend in domestic wage costs and the marked 
depreciation of the euro against other major 
currencies will probably not become more 
 apparent in the headline rates until the direct 
effects of falling oil prices have run their course. 
The decline in energy import prices accelerated 
perceptibly in the final months of 2014. On an 
average of the fourth quarter, import prices 
were almost one- fifth down on the year. If en -
ergy is excluded, import prices were tending to 
go up slightly, however. Domestic sales prices 
for energy receded more slowly than import 
prices owing to the greater role played in the 
former by electricity and gas  – the prices of 
which did not go down to the same extent as 
those of refined petroleum products. Consumer 
price inflation eased noticeably in the last three 
months of 2014 compared with the preceding 
quarter. It continued to do so at the start of 
2015, and the year-  on- year rate turned nega -
tive. Along with the continued sharp decline in 
energy prices, this was due to an exceptional 
moderation of prices for package holidays. The 
introduction of a general statutory minimum 
wage on 1 January 2015 has had only a mar -
ginal effect on consumer prices to date. Over 
the next few months, the annual rates for con -
sumer prices –  as for import and producer 
prices  – are likely to be negative if crude oil 
prices do not increase further.
The German economy will continue to benefit 
from the economic upturn in the current year. 
In the short term, the pick- up will be driven 
mainly by private consumption. In addition, the 
distinct fall in the euro’s external value will pro -
vide industry with greater sales opportunities 
outside the euro area despite the continued 
moderate global economic momentum. The 
stimulus from the euro’s depreciation in the 
euro- area partner countries could also trigger 
secondary effects via the trade channel. This is 
supported by the broad- based increase in 
 industrial orders in the fourth quarter. Over 
time, improving business prospects and rising 
capacity utilisation could reignite the currently 
stalled recovery in investment. Given the Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
8

brighter overall economic picture, it is under -
standable that current forecasts for economic 
growth in Germany this year are markedly 
higher than the projections made in the au -
tumn of last year.
The situation of public finances in Germany 
 improved in the past year. Initial preliminary 
outturns indicate that the general government 
budget posted a distinct surplus, after having 
been virtually balanced in the two preceding 
years. With cyclical factors largely neutral, a 
similar structural surplus was generated. On 
balance, the year- on- year improvement was at -
tributable to lower interest expenditure, while 
the primary balance (excluding interest expend -
iture) barely changed. The debt ratio fell further 
up to the end of the third quarter, primarily 
owing to nominal GDP growth. The fiscal bal -
ance is likely to deteriorate in the current year, 
but will probably remain in positive territory. 
Social spending will continue to grow signifi -
cantly, and expenditure in other areas such as 
transport infrastructure, education and re -
search is expected to accelerate. From the cur -
rent perspective, the debt ratio is set to con -
tract further.
Achieving a government budget position that is 
at least balanced on average over the business 
cycle would make an important contribution to 
reducing the still high debt ratio to 60% by the 
end of this decade. Not least in view of the fact 
that demographic strains will subsequently in -
tensify, maintaining the moderate structural 
surplus as well would not be an overambitious 
objective. Given the still difficult macroeco -
nomic environment at the European level, 
however, the fiscal plans so far for the general 
government budget seem appropriate. These 
plans envisage a marked structural deterior -
ation this year, chiefly owing to the depletion 
of the social security funds’ reserves. Unex -pected cyclically induced budget developments 
should be tolerated, ie the automatic stabilisers 
should be allowed to take effect. Overall, Ger -
man fiscal policy is making a decisive contribu -
tion to stabilising the situation in the euro area, 
although more resolute efforts could be made 
towards strengthening growth potential within 
the current fiscal framework. By contrast, little 
would be gained from launching a debt-  
financed demand stimulus in Germany, given a 
largely neutral domestic cyclical effect and only 
a limited impact on the rest of the euro area.
Central government closed fiscal year 2014 
without posting any net borrowing for the first 
time since 1969 (ie with a balanced budget). It 
was notably aided in this by the extremely low 
interest rates. While the 2015 budget approved 
at the end of November does not foresee any 
further improvement in the balance compared 
with the actual 2014 figures, various positive 
budget deviations in 2014 are likely to extend 
into this year, and the German economy’s 
 improved growth prospects will additionally 
boost public finances. However, this more 
 favourable outlook should not be misinter -
preted as creating scope for discretionary 
spending. Ballooning demographic burdens 
and rising interest rates are likely in the longer 
term, and various budgetary risks exist at the 
current end. With respect to the many calls for 
and recent announcement of increased invest -
ment, it is important to first critically determine 
the real investment requirements, to realistic -
ally estimate expenditures, including their 
follow- up costs, and to make systematic use of 
cost- cutting opportunities in planning, con -
struction and operation. In the case of public- 
private partnerships, due regard should also be 
given to fairly sharing the economic risk in -
volved. A good infrastructure is important but 
requires neither new public borrowing nor cir -
cumventing the debt brake.Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economy looks to have expanded in 
the fourth quarter of 2014 at roughly the same 
moderate pace as in the third quarter. Growth 
in the industrial countries was broadly based in 
autumn. Real gross domestic product (GDP) 
growth in the United States was not as strong 
as in the third quarter, when one-  off effects 
had played a role. However, the Japanese 
economy appears to have returned to growth 
following the significant contraction in eco -
nomic activity in quarters two and three of the 
year triggered by the consumption tax hike, 
 although GDP figures for the fourth quarter 
were not available as this report went to press. 
According to initial estimates, euro- area growth 
was somewhat stronger than before in the last 
quarter of the year. The major emerging mar -
ket economies (EMEs) continued to show 
 rather disparate underlying trends at the end of 
the year. Whereas economic growth in China 
and India was still moderate by their standards, 
activity in Russia and Brazil probably  remained 
listless.
Annual average global GDP growth for 2014, 
according to an estimate by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2015, remained 
unchanged from a year earlier, amounting to 
3¼% based on purchasing power parities or 
2½% at market exchange rates. The forces of 
growth have shifted inasmuch as GDP growth 
in the advanced economies accelerated, 
 according to the IMF, by ½ percentage point to 
1¾% (in terms of purchasing power parities), 
whereas that of the developing and emerging 
world accelerated more slowly, by ¼ percent -
age point to 4½%. The poorer performance of 
this group is mainly attributable to considerably 
slower growth in the Commonwealth of Inde -
pendent States and in Latin America; by con -
trast, the Asian countries’ strong GDP growth 
matched that of a year earlier. For each of the 
past three years, the global growth rate stood at 3¼%, measured in purchasing power par -
ities, compared with 4¾% on an average of 
the upswing years of 2010 and 2011 or the 
2002 to 2007 period. Given that monetary 
 policy remained exceptionally accommodative 
throughout and that fiscal policy placed much 
less of a brake on growth last year, there is 
much to suggest that this deceleration is due 
primarily to a weaker expansion of potential 
output in both the advanced economies and 
the emerging and developing countries.
The world economy appears to be maintaining 
its moderate path of expansion in the first 
quarter of 2015. One particular sign of this is 
that the global purchasing managers’ indices 
(PMIs) for manufacturing and services went 
back up slightly in January after following a 
downward trajectory –  albeit without falling 
below the expansion threshold – in the second 
half of 2014. The steep oil price slump which 
began in mid-2014 has probably tended to 
buoy global growth. According to an IMF cal -
culation, the part of the price slump attribut -
able to supply-  side factors could increase real 
global GDP this year by between ¼% and 
¾%.1 Irrespective of such model calculations, 
however, it is virtually impossible to forecast 
the strength of the stimulus because of major 
uncertainty surrounding the causes, durability 
and potential impacts of a cheapening of crude 
oil (see the box on pages 12 to 14). This stimu -
lus is likely to primarily benefit oil importing 
countries, whereas, above all, oil producing 
countries that lack appreciable financial re -
serves will probably have to make perceptible 
cuts to their absorption.
Despite the expectation of positive growth 
stimulus from the fall in oil prices, in January 
the IMF lowered its global growth projections Pace of global 
economic growth  remained  moderate in  autumn
Annual 
 economic  performance once again below long- run averageContinuation of global upward trend in winter 2015
1 See R Arezki and O Blanchard, Seven Questions about 
the Recent Oil Price Slump, IMF Blog, posted on 22 De -
cember 2014 at http://blog- imfdirect.imf.org/ 2014/ 12/ 22/
seven- questions- about- the- recent- oil- price- slump/ .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
10

for this year and the next by 0.3 percentage 
point each compared with the autumn fore -
cast, reducing them to 3.5% and 3.7% (meas -
ured in terms of purchasing power parities) 
 respectively. This is a continuation of the chain 
of downward revisions.2 The reason given for 
the latest correction was that the  retarding fac -
tors – particularly weak investment, which is 
connected with the more  cautious assessment 
of medium- term global economic growth  – 
had a more pronounced impact than previously 
predicted. However, it must be borne in mind 
that the IMF’s autumn projection for the euro 
area was already rather optimistic to begin 
with given the set of data available at the time. 
Specifically, the outlook for 2015 and 2016 is 
now being assessed more cautiously for the 
euro area, Japan and several large EMEs, in par -
ticular. The reductions were particularly large in 
the case of Russia, where a recession is now 
expected for this year and next. By contrast, 
the IMF upped its projections for the United 
States markedly (by 0.5 and 0.3 percentage 
point to 3.6% and 3.3%  respectively), noting 
that the upswing there was stronger than pre -
viously expected. This is certainly true of the 
past quarters; as regards the current year, how -
ever, one of the factors to bear in mind is that 
the drastic drop in oil prices could put a per -
ceptible damper on investment by the US oil 
and gas industry. In terms of the correction of 
the global GDP growth projection, the global 
trade projection was revised downward par -
ticularly sharply, by 1.1 percentage points to 
3.8% for 2015. The downward revision is 
mainly associated with the expectation that the 
growth of EMEs’ import demand will fall be -
hind that of the industrial countries for the first 
time in a long while.
The price of crude oil once again fell sharply 
during the period under review. For a barrel of 
Brent, it averaged just under US$50 in January, 
compared with US$112 in June 2014. In the IMF revises 
 projections downward  further despite fall in oil prices
Sharp decline in 
crude oil pricesHow IMF projections of global real GDPgrowth* for each given year haveevolved
Annual percentage growth
2.22.42.62.83.03.23.43.63.8
Sources:  Various  issues  of  the  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO) and updates, January 2010 to January 2015.  * Based on 
market exchange rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
WEO projection rounds2015
201420132012
2011
Memo item
Actual result (as reported in
October 2014 WEO or January
2015 update)
World market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 6 February, or 1 to 9 February 2015 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 1560708090100120140160US dollar basis, 2010 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
Crude oil (Brent)
Industrial
commodities
Food and beverages
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The global growth forecast 
revisions in recent years, Monthly Report, November 2014, 
pp 12-15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
11

Potential impacts of the fall in oil prices on the 
real economy
Since the end of the Second World War, 
 almost every recession in the US economy 
has been preceded by a steep rise in the 
price of crude oil.1 This observation has 
seen the emergence of a broad literature on 
the connection between changes in the 
price of oil and growth in macroeconomic 
activity. However, the focus of this literature is generally on sudden increases in the price 
of crude oil, and less commonly on an 
 abrupt price drop.2
A fundamental problem with these analyses is the endogeneity of the oil price. Not only 
can oil prices infl  uence aggregate output, 
but conversely, they also refl  ect the dynam-ics of aggregate demand. Thus, a slump in the price of crude oil could indicate a global recession, as was the case in 2008-09. Any stimulating effects resulting from the fall in 
prices would then be of minor signifi  cance 
compared with the weakened aggregate 
demand.
A key challenge for empirical research is 
thus to adequately identify oil supply shocks 
that are not impacted by aggregate de-mand themselves.
3 In most cases, supply- 
side factors are seen as the driving force 
behind the recent slump in prices (see box 
on pages 16 and 17). At least for this part of the price reduction, the isolated effects of a change in the oil price are therefore signifi  -cant, as will be discussed below. Along with the root cause, the price drop’s persistence is also a key determinant of the magnitude 
of the real economic effects. The longer it 
lasts, the greater the impact ought to be on 
the consumption and investment decisions 
of economic agents.
A fall in prices evidently shifts the terms of 
trade in favour of oil- importing economies 
and away from oil exporters. This is equiva-
lent to an international redistribution of in-come; in terms of global income, it is a 
zero- sum game. Whether global aggregate output changes through this channel in the short term depends on the extent to which 
the marginal propensity to spend differs 
 between the oil- importing and oil- exporting economies. Since the number of oil- exporting 
countries is relatively small, the income 
losses, on the one hand, are highly concen-trated in individual economies. On the other 
hand, some oil- producing countries have built up large fi  nancial reserves, enabling sustainable absorption over an extended 
period by way of dissaving.
In many cases, oil (or energy) is seen as a necessary factor for the production of 
 aggregate output. Thus, from this perspec-tive, a factor of production is falling in price, 
causing the quantity of that factor used, 
and therefore potential output, to increase. Global economic activity also increases as a 
result, although this is more of a longer- 
term mechanism.
Oil intensity, ie the relationship between 
real oil consumption and economic output 
(also in real terms), is often cited as the key 
determinant of the magnitude of real eco-
nomic effects. Since this link has weakened 
considerably over time, the infl  uence of changes in oil prices on economic activity should, in effect, also have decreased  accordingly. However, the “oil burden”, ie the value expressed as a percentage of 
1 See J D Hamilton (2011), Nonlinearities and the 
Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices, Macroeconomic 
Dynamics, Vol 15, pp 364-378.
2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The price of crude 
oil and its impact on economic activity in the industrial 
countries, Monthly Report, June 2012, pp 27-49.
3 See L Kilian (2009), Not All Oil Price Shocks Are 
Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market, American Economic Review, Vol 99, pp 1053-1069.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
12

costs or expenditure, is more decisive for 
major impacts.
Thus, the extent of households’ expend-
iture cuts following a drop in the price of petroleum products, for example, corres-
ponds to the product of the share of spend-ing on these commodities and the percent-
age change in their (relative) price. Assum-
ing no change in quantity and a fall in price 
of 50%, expenditure on petroleum prod-ucts is cut in half. In this scenario, an ori-ginal 5% share of total expenditure, for 
 example, corresponds to a saving of 2½%, 
now available for additional consumption 
of goods or services. The share of spending 
therefore specifi  es the upper limit for the elasticity (in this case 0.05) of consumers’ aggregate demand to relative price shifts. The cost share is also an important factor for enterprises when considering their use 
of oil in production.
In recent years, the ratio of oil expenditure 
to nominal gross domestic product in the 
United States was almost twice as high as 
in Germany and also markedly higher than 
in Japan. US consumers and enterprises 
could therefore stand to benefi  t greatly 
from the fall in oil prices. It must be kept in mind, however, that the United States does 
not have the same degree of dependence 
on oil imports as other industrial countries. Part of this price relief therefore constitutes 
a mere redistribution of income within the 
US economy. Although investment in the oil 
and gas industries is being cut back, US household consumption could be stimu-
lated by the lower oil prices, though that is 
also uncertain. US motor vehicle and retail 
sales fi  gures both proved disappointing at 
the turn of 2014-15.
Various other effects of oil price changes are also discussed in the literature. In par-
ticular, some studies look into a dampening 
impact of oil price volatility on economic activity.
4 It could lead to increased uncer-tainty, for instance, prompting enterprises 
to defer investment. An effect of this kind 
would be one reason why a decline in the 
price of oil may not stimulate economic 
growth to the same extent that a rise in oil 
prices weighs on it. Another strand of the 
literature addresses these sorts of asymmet-
ric effects.5 This research is based on the 
 experience of 1986, when a substantial 
slump in crude oil prices was unable to in-
crease the US economy’s growth rate.
In some macroeconomic models, such as NiGEM, the global econometric model 
 developed by the National Institute of Eco-
4 See, for example, J P Ferderer (1996), Oil Price Vola-
tility and the Macroeconomy, Journal of Macroeco-
nomics, Vol 18, pp 1-26, as well as S Jo (2014), The Effects of Oil Price Uncertainty on Global Real Eco-
nomic Activity, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 46, pp 1113-1135.
5 See, in particular, K A Mork (1989), Oil and the 
Macro economy When Prices Go Up and Down: An  Extension of Hamilton’s Results, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol 97, pp 740-744, as well as J D Hamilton (2011), op cit.Adverse impact of crude oil prices on major economies
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the US 
Energy  Information  Administration,  the  International  Energy Agency, the OECD and the IMF. Figures for 2014 are projec-
tions. 1 Levels according to 2005 market exchange rates. 2 Oil 
consumption measured using the price of Brent crude.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.20.61.01.4
1971 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 1402468Oil intensity
Barrels per thousand units of output1
Oil burden
Expenditure on oil2 divided by 
nominal GDPUSA Japan Germany
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
13

nomic and Social Research (NIESR), for ex-
ample, a decline in the price of oil depresses 
the general level of prices and wages as 
well as, temporarily, infl  ation expectations. 
Assuming a rule- based monetary policy, the 
difference between the infl  ation rate and its target triggers an interest rate move by the 
central bank. Because of the rule’s simple 
formulation, the reason for missing the tar-
get is inconsequential. As a result, further 
macroeconomic effects arise, which cannot 
be separated within the model from the “short- run” effects of the change in oil price. These effects depend, however, on 
the specifi  c design of the policy rule.6
In New Keynesian models, which are com-
monly used as a macroeconomic analytical 
instrument, an additional effect can result 
from the lowering of infl  ation expectations. In combination with a zero lower bound for 
nominal interest rates, monetary policy-
makers would no longer be able to prevent 
a real interest rate rise, causing consump-
tion to shift into the future. As a result, an increased supply of oil or other shocks that 
raise potential output, such as a positive 
productivity shock, would lead to the para-
dox of a slowdown in current economic  activity.
7 Admittedly, the relevance of this 
real interest channel is dubious since its  impact is signifi  cantly infl  uenced by the model’s fi  xed specifi  cation.
8 For liquidity- 
constrained households who are rarely able 
to shift their consumption  intertemporally and who, especially in times of high un-employment, should be numerous, it is 
surely more important that a supply- induced decline in the price of oil leads to purchas-
ing power gains. Including these factors causes the stimulating effect to dominate 
even within a New Keynesian model frame-
work.9 In addition, recently published em-
pirical evidence for the United States seems to call into question the impact of infl  ation 
expectations on consumption behaviour 
derived from the New Keynesian model.10According to a December 2014 estimate by 
the International Monetary Fund, the part 
of the fall in oil prices attributable to supply- 
side factors, if it lasts, could boost global economic activity by ¾% this year. How-ever, should the price reduction taper off, the positive impact would be reduced to ¼%.
11 Simulations with NiGEM confi  rm 
 effects of this magnitude. Then again, as 
explained above, this type of model- based 
analysis relies on a series of functional 
 assumptions, not least a symmetrical effect 
of price increases and decreases. Further-
more, knowledge of a particular future path 
of oil prices is required. With this in mind, 
any simulation results are to be interpreted with caution. Based on trend, the fall in oil 
prices should indeed stimulate global eco-
nomic growth; however, the magnitude of 
this effect is diffi   cult to quantify, given the 
high degree of uncertainty surrounding causes, persistence and manner of action. The stimulating effect is clearer for those 
economies which have no considerable oil 
production of their own, such as the euro 
area, for example.
6 See R Barrell and O Pomerantz, Oil Prices and the 
World Economy, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Focus 
on European Economic Integration, Q1/ 04, pp 152-
177, as well as Deutsche Bundesbank (2012), op cit.
7 See also G B Eggertsson (2010), The Paradox of Toil, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, 
No 433.8 See B Maćkowiak and M Wiederholt (2011), Business Cycle Dynamics under Rational Inattention, ECB Work-ing Paper Series, No 1331, as well as X Gabaix (2012), Boundedly Rational Dynamic Programming: Some Pre-liminary Results, NBER Working Paper, No 17783.9 See J F Wieland (2014), Are Negative Supply Shocks Expansionary at the Zero Lower Bound?, University of California, San Diego, Working Paper.
10 See R Bachmann, T O Berg and E R Sims (2015), 
Infl  ation Expectations and Readiness to Spend: Cross- 
Sectional Evidence, American Economic Journal: Eco-
nomic Policy, Vol 7, pp 1-35.
11 See R Arezki and O Blanchard, Seven Questions 
about the Recent Oil Price Slump, IMF Blog, posted on 
22  December 2014 at http://blog- imfdirect.imf.org/ 
2014/ 12/ 22/seven- questions- about- the- recent- oil- price- slump/.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
14

first weeks of February, it stabilised above the 
US$50 mark, yet was still only just over half the 
level reported a year earlier. Oil futures are cur -
rently trading at considerable premiums. In the 
past few months, other commodity prices like -
wise continued to trend downwards. This was 
more true of industrial commodities than of 
food and beverages. The main reason was gen -
erally ample supply in the individual markets, 
though the failure of global economic  activity 
to pick up steam probably played a part, too. 
However, the OPEC decision to maintain its 
production quotas irrespective of the current 
market situation was probably also an 
 important factor behind the slide in crude oil 
prices (see box on pages 16 and 17).
The sharp fall in the prices of refined petroleum 
products put a considerable damper on aggre -
gate headline consumer price inflation in the 
industrial countries. The entire basket of con -
sumer goods was only 0.6% more expensive in 
December 2014 than a year earlier, compared 
with +1.4% three months previously. Annual 
core inflation (which excludes energy and food) 
decreased over the same period just a little, to 
+1.3%. Core inflation has therefore remained 
unchanged since the end of 2013. Although 
the fall in the prices of refined petroleum prod -
ucts is likely to have indirect effects, there are 
still, on the whole, no signs of a broadly- based 
decline in consumer prices in the industrial 
countries.
Selected emerging market 
economies
The pace of China’s economic growth slack -
ened towards the end of 2014, according to 
data issued by the National Bureau of Statistics. 
In the fourth quarter, seasonally adjusted real 
GDP was up by 1½% on the period, following 
a 2% rise a quarter earlier. GDP was up by 
7½% on the year, likewise somewhat less than 
in 2012 and 2013. One particular reason for 
last year’s slowdown appears to be the percep -
tible cooling of the housing market, which has been weighing on activity in construction and 
some manufacturing sub- sectors, particularly 
the steel industry. The housing market re -
mained weak throughout the reporting period, 
and this could well persist in 2015 amidst signs 
of structural overcapacity.3 Aggregate invest -
ment growth tailed off in 2014, which is con -
sistent with a moderation of growth originat -
ing in the real estate market. On the other 
hand, consumption seems to have continued 
its growth unabated. Persistently strong wage 
growth and lower inflation have been boosting 
households’ purchasing power. For the year as 
a whole, consumer price inflation stood at 
2.0%.
According to its early estimate, the Indian Min -
istry of Statistics is expecting real GDP growth 
of 7½% for the 2014-15 fiscal year, which still 
runs until the end of March. A year earlier, 
 revised results put the same figure at 7%.4 The 
slight acceleration at the current end appears 
to be due primarily to faster expansion in the 
industrial sector. Consumer price inflation has 
continued to abate in the past few months; it 
stood at 5.1% in January 2015, compared with 
8.8% 12 months earlier. The significant easing 
of the situation in the food markets is one 
 reason, but not the only one, for subsiding 
 inflation. The Reserve Bank of India therefore 
recently loosened its tight monetary policy 
stance somewhat.
Economic activity in Brazil remained anaemic. 
In the third quarter, the latest quarter for which 
national accounts data are available, seasonally 
adjusted real GDP virtually stagnated following 
two consecutive quarters of contraction. No 
meaningful recovery is likely to have occurred 
in the fourth quarter, either. In the meantime, Consumer price 
inflation consid-erably subdued
Weakening of 
housing market weighing on Chinese eco-nomic  activityIndia growing at slightly  accelerated pace in current fiscal year
Anaemic 
 aggregate growth in Brazil
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential effects of a 
downturn in the Chinese housing market on the real econ -
omy, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 17-19.
4 In January 2015 the Indian Ministry of Statistics, as part 
of a comprehensive revision, upped the growth rates for 
the 2012-13 and 2013-14 fiscal years perceptibly. Since 
then, in addition, GDP at market prices has been used as 
the preferred indicator of aggregate economic output, in 
line with standard international practice. The indicator was 
previously GDP at factor cost, ie gross value added.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
15

Causes of the fall in oil prices
If the price of oil in US dollar terms is ad-
justed for the general price level as shown 
in the US consumer price index (excluding 
energy), it becomes clear that the resulting 
real price of oil, by historical standards, has 
been exceptionally high over the past few 
years. It was only in 1979-80 and 2008 that 
oil prices hit a similarly high level or were 
even higher for a short time. Moreover, oil 
prices were repeatedly characterised by 
sudden surges, or by marked slumps. One 
key reason for this is likely to have been the fact that supply and demand in the oil mar-
ket scarcely react to price changes in the 
short term. Even small shifts in terms of vol-
ume can sometimes require sharp price movements in order to ensure an equilib-
rium in the market.1
In the past, oil prices slumped, as a rule, in 
periods of recession in the US economy, with 
the cyclical downturn itself being preceded 
by a steep rise in the price of crude oil. This 
was especially true of the sharply falling prices in 1974, 1991 and 2008-09. Given that growth in the global economy and oil 
prices have been quite steady over the past 
few quarters, this pattern does not seem to fi  t the recent fall in prices. Indeed, the price slide of 1986, which occurred in the middle of a period of expansion in the US economy, might be seen as a precedent. After the cri-ses of the 1970s, recovery in global demand 
for oil was no more than sluggish in the 
1980s. At the same time, oil from new pro-
duction regions, such as  Alaska and the North Sea, was fl  owing onto the market. Saudi Arabia, in particular, attempted to 
counter an incipient erosion of prices by cut-
ting production, but had, in turn, to accept 
massive losses of revenue. After Saudi Arabia 
abandoned this tactic, by July 1986 the (nominal) price of oil had slumped to only one- third of its level in November 1985.
2 
Leaving aside the brief period during the 
Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, it was not until 
2005 that the price of oil attained the same level again in real terms.Demand from the rapidly growing emer-ging market economies is likely to be one 
key reason for oil prices being high over the 
past few years. At the same time, uncon-
ventional methods of extracting oil and gas reserves in North America have opened up the possibility of a further fundamental shift of power on the crude oil market.
3 The fact 
that the International Energy Agency (IEA) made repeated downward revisions of its 
forecasts of global oil demand in the second half of 2014 is seen, in part, as a trigger for 
the recent slump in oil prices. The back-ground to this was persistently moderate 
global activity, which disappointed hopes of 
a stronger pick- up in the world economy.4 
An additional factor is thought to be the 
surprisingly clear recovery in the oil produc-tion of some members of the Organization 
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) along with a continuing expansion of output in the United States. Finally, the plunge in prices is likely to have been fur-ther intensifi  ed by the decision of OPEC – above all, Saudi Arabia – at the end of November 2014 to maintain existing pro-
duction quotas and, thus, no longer play a stabilising role in the oil market.
5
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Price elasticity of crude 
oil in the short term, Monthly Report, June 2012, 
pp 34-36. Alternatively, reference is often made to the 
role played by speculation in the oil market. See also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact of speculation on 
the price of oil, Monthly Report, June 2012, pp 32-33; 
as well as S Reitz and U Slopek (2009), Non- Linear Oil Price Dynamics: A Tale of Heterogeneous Speculators?, German Economic Review, Vol 10, pp 270-283.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Oil crises of the 1970s, 
Monthly Report, June 2012, pp 29-30.3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The price of crude oil and its impact on economic activity in the industrial coun-tries, Monthly Report, June 2012, p 47.4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The global growth fore-cast revisions in recent years, Monthly Report, Novem-ber 2014, pp 12-15.5 By contrast, Baumeister and Kilian (2015) ascribe the 
very sharp decline in crude oil prices – in comparison 
with the prices of other commodities  – since June 2014 to the cumulative effect of past developments 
which are specifi  c to the oil market. See C Baumeister 
and L Kilian (2015), Understanding the Decline in the 
Price of Oil since June 2014, Center for Financial Stud-ies, Working paper No 501.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
16

the Banco Central do Brasil maintained the 
monetary tightening cycle it introduced nearly 
two years ago to fight inflation. At the end of 
the year, consumer price inflation was only 
slightly below the central bank’s upper limit of 
6.5%.
Already in difficulty owing to the fallout from 
the Ukraine conflict, the Russian economy was 
forced to contend with plummeting crude oil 
prices in autumn. This was followed by a crisis 
on the Russian financial markets in December. 
In order to prop up the currency and protect 
financial stability, the Russian monetary author -
ities intervened in the foreign exchange mar -
ket, raised the policy rate sharply and initiated 
various measures to assist ailing banks. The 
 impact of the collapse in oil prices on the real 
sector, by contrast, is unlikely to be fully felt 
until sometime this year. Barring a strong 
 recovery in the price of this important export 
good, Russia will probably be unable to avoid a 
severe recession. In 2014, Russian GDP merely managed growth of ½% according to an initial 
estimate by the Russian Federal State Statistics 
Service; no separate results for the fourth quar -
ter are available yet. The drastic depreciation of 
the rouble has already caused inflation to 
 accelerate significantly. However, the associ -
ated negative purchasing power effect in terms 
of aggregate demand was overshadowed in 
the last quarter of 2014 by the fact that house -
holds, expecting prices to rise sharply, dissolved 
their savings and increasingly purchased dur -
able goods. Inflation stood at 15.0% in Janu -
ary, having been as low as 6.1% at the begin -
ning of 2014.
United States
After adjustment for the usual seasonal effects, 
the quarterly increase in US real GDP stood at 
¾% in the final quarter of 2014, according to 
an initial estimate, following growth of 1¼% in 
the preceding quarter. This meant that aggre -Russian 
 economy hit by 
severe macro-economic shocks
More moderate increase in real GDPOverall, the supply side is predominantly 
seen as the driving force behind the per-ceived oil glut and the slump in prices.
6 
Nevertheless, the causes cannot be pin-pointed with certainty. How long the de-
cline in prices will last is no less uncertain. 
The crucial question is how quickly and at 
what price level supply and demand for oil 
will reach a new equilibrium under the changed circumstances. Given the “wait- 
and- see” attitude adopted by OPEC, enter-
prises involved in unconventional oil pro-
duction in the United States, which are fl  ex-
ible in their operations, could have a key 
role to play in this.7 In any event, reports of 
a steep decline in the number of drilling in-
stallations in North America caused the price of oil to recover somewhat in late 
January- early February. 6 See R Arezki and O Blanchard, Seven Questions 
about the Recent Oil Price Slump, IMF, published on 
22  December 2014 at http://blog- imfdirect.imf.org/; and World Bank, Understanding the Plunge in Oil Prices: Sources and Implications, Global Economic 
 Prospects, January 2015, pp 155-168.
7 See International Energy Agency, Medium- Term Oil 
Market Report 2015.Price of Brent Crude oil
020406080100120140
Sources: IMF, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Haver Analytics and 
Bundesbank calculations. 1 Crude oil price relative to US CPI 
excluding  energy  (seasonally  adjusted,  2014 = 100,  index  for 
January 2015 extrapolated).
Deutsche BundesbankUS recessions
as defined by NBER
real 1US dollars per barrel, quarterly averages
1972 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15nominalJanDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
17

gate economic growth remained moderate 
both on average and over the course of 2014 
(+2½%). The very fast pace of growth in the 
second and third quarters of 2014 should be 
seen against the background of the contraction 
at the beginning of 2014.5 In addition, growth 
in the third quarter was also fuelled by an 
 unusually strong expansion in public sector 
 demand; the subsequent return to normal 
weighed on GDP growth in the autumn. Fur -
thermore, the favourable stimulus from foreign 
trade from the summer months was never 
likely to last; a surge in imports, in arithmetical 
terms, perceptibly dampened GDP growth in 
the last quarter of the year. On the other hand, 
increased inventory building had a positive 
 impact. Lastly, the rapid pace of private gross 
fixed capital formation growth could not be 
sustained. The slump in oil prices did not yet 
have a noticeable retarding effect; commercial 
construction investment growth in the mining 
sector was significant, as it had been in the 
previous quarter. By contrast, private consump -
tion growth accelerated further. This rested on 
the solid foundation of a sharp rise in real 
 disposable income fuelled by employment 
growth which was, at times, strong, as well as 
by falling energy prices. The unemployment 
rate dropped from 5.9% in September 2014 to 
5.7% in January, leaving it not very far from the 
range regarded by the majority of the US Fed -
eral Open Market Committee as the long- run 
normal rate of unemployment (5.2% to 5.5%). 
The inflation rate as measured by the consumer 
price index shrank to 0.8% towards year’s end. 
Excluding energy and food, by contrast, it 
only went down to 1.6%. Looking at 2015, it 
 remains to be seen to what extent purchasing 
power gains and the continuing improvement 
in the labour market can maintain the fast 
growth of private consumption. However, con -
siderable cutbacks to investment in the oil and 
gas industries would have the potential to per -
ceptibly curb GDP growth.Japan
As this report went to press, the Japanese cab -
inet office had not yet published its provisional 
national accounts figures for the final quarter 
of 2014. In the past, the official GDP figures 
have often proven to be volatile and prone to 
revision, and experience has shown that pro -
jections based on standard monthly indicators 
are not always reliable, either. Contrary to what 
was widely expected by observers, the official 
statistics (published in December) indicate that 
 aggregate output was down significantly on 
the period in summer 2014. Although further 
surprises cannot be ruled out, the available 
data point to a rise in real GDP in the fourth 
quarter, which fits with the assessment that the 
consumption tax hike last April deferred aggre -
gate demand without fundamentally disrupting 
the underlying growth path. In the fourth quar -
ter, industrial output in particular gathered 
pace following a subdued third quarter. On the 
expenditure side, more buoyant exports are 
likely to have been a driving force behind the 
pick- up. The fall in the unemployment rate to 
3.4% in December –  its lowest level since 
 September 1997 – also points to an economic 
upturn. At the same time, consumer price infla -
tion, though boosted by April’s consumption 
tax increase, continued to fall and thus weighed 
less heavily on household budgets than it had 
previously. The annual rate for the consumer 
price index declined from 3.2% in September 
2014 to 2.4% in December. Core  inflation (ex -
cluding energy and food) fell by only 0.2 per -
centage point to 2.1%; excluding the effect of 
the consumption tax hike, it stood at 0.4% in 
November.6Aggregate 
 output probably increased
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Weather effects on real GDP 
growth in the USA in the first six months of 2014, Monthly 
Report, August 2014, pp 22-24.
6 See Bank of Japan, Monthly Report of Recent Economic 
and Financial Developments, January 2015, p 16.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
18

United Kingdom
The first official estimate indicates that, after 
seasonal adjustment, final- quarter aggregate 
output in the United Kingdom was up by ½% 
compared with the third quarter, when it rose 
by ¾%. The official figures for GDP growth in 
previous quarters had already been revised 
downwards somewhat in an earlier estimate. 
Nonetheless, on an annual average for 2014 
the UK economy recorded its strongest growth 
since 2007 (+2½%). Falling real gross value 
added in the construction sector was a key 
 factor in the final- quarter deceleration. There 
was no further growth in the rest of the pro -
duction sector, either. Aggregate growth was 
thus driven almost entirely by the services 
 sector, where output continued to expand 
 robustly. The upturn on the expenditure side, 
for which no official figures are yet available, 
was thus probably fuelled mainly by private 
consumption – as is also indicated by the very 
strong growth in the volume of goods trans -
acted in the retail sector. The rise in consump -
tion was probably shored up by improved real 
income prospects. Plummeting crude oil prices 
drove down HICP inflation to only 0.5% in 
Decem ber, leaving it significantly below the 
core rate of 1.2% (excluding prices for energy 
and unprocessed food). Further progress was 
also made in reducing unemployment. National 
figures indicate that, between the June-  August 
period and the September- November period, 
the standardised unemployment rate fell by 
0.2 percentage point to 5.8%.
New EU member states
In most of the new EU member states (the 
 EU-7),7 economic output again showed a per -
ceptible quarter- on- quarter increase in the last 
quarter of 2014. On an annual average, the 
region’s real GDP rose by 2¾%. The last time 
the EU-7 recorded such favourable growth fig -
ures was in 2011. Growth was driven by buoy -
ant domestic demand, which proved fairly 
 robust to potentially disruptive external influ -ences, particularly in connection with the con -
flict in Ukraine. Annual HICP inflation continued 
to decline in the fourth quarter, primarily be -
cause of the falling oil prices, and slipped into 
negative territory (-0.1%) for the first time since 
the time series began in 1998. Excluding  energy 
and unprocessed food, prices were 0.7% up on 
the year, meaning that core inflation was only 
marginally down on the period.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Economic growth in the euro area picked up 
somewhat in the final quarter of 2014. Owing 
to rounding, however, quarter- on- quarter real 
GDP growth remained at ¼% after seasonal 
adjustment. The picture across the euro area 
was mixed. Of the major economies, Germany 
and Spain recorded the strongest growth 
(+¾% each). By contrast, the French economy 
expanded only marginally. Having plummeted 
since the beginning of 2013, Italian real GDP 
stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2014. Greece 
recorded slightly negative growth for the first 
time in three quarters. Nonetheless, the Greek 
economy expanded by no less than 1¾% over 
the course of 2014, although growth was con -
siderably lower (1%) on an annual average 
 because of a negative carry- over effect at the 
end of 2013. Survey- based indicators suggest 
that the cyclical weakness in Greece may have 
continued at the beginning of the year. This is 
probably mainly because the outcome of the 
parliamentary election shook confidence 
among consumers and enterprises.
In the euro area as a whole, real GDP expanded 
by 1% last year, after shrinking by ½% in 2013. 
However, the level of growth was still 1¼% 
below the figure recorded for 2008. Current 
estimates by the European Commission point Sustained 
 upswing in  services sector
Continuing 
 economic  recoveryGrowth  somewhat more   dynamic 
 towards the end of 2014
Return to 
growth in 2014 as a whole,  albeit with large 
differences 
 between  member states
7 This group comprises the countries that have acceded to 
the EU since 2004 and which, in the fourth quarter of 2014 
(the reporting period), were not yet members of European 
monetary union (thus including Lithuania, which did not 
join the euro area until 1 January 2015).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
19

to a continuing underutilisation of capacity in 
the euro area, amounting to 2¾% of potential 
output. The growth rate for the euro area as a 
whole still masks large differences between 
member states. Using the forecast figures from 
the Commission’s February projection for the 
member states whose annual figures cannot 
yet be determined, growth rates range from 
-2¾% in Cyprus to +4¾% in Ireland. On a 
positive note, only three of the 18  member 
states are likely to have seen a  decline in 2014, 
compared with ten in 2012 and eight in 2013.
After a disappointing second and third quarter, 
industrial activity rebounded in the final quarter 
of 2014. Quarter- on- quarter output was up by 
¼% after seasonal adjustment. On an annual 
average for 2014, growth still reached ½% 
 because of the buoyant start to the year. The 
fourth- quarter rise in industrial output was 
driven by the manufacture of consumer goods, 
which expanded by a seasonally adjusted 1%. 
Capital goods output rose slightly, whereas 
that of intermediate goods stagnated and 
 energy production was reduced. The moderate 
growth in industrial output is in keeping with 
the rise in capacity utilisation, which was 
¾ percentage point higher in January than in 
October and continued to catch up with its 
long- term average. Euro- area construction out -
put rose by ½% in the October- November 
period compared with the summer months and 
was thus 1¼% up on the year.
Above all, private consumption is likely to have 
fuelled demand perceptibly in the fourth quar -
ter of 2014. Real retail sales (excluding motor 
vehicles and fuel) rose by a seasonally adjusted 
¾% on the quarter. In addition, new car regis -
trations were up by 2%. Investment demand 
may also have been something of a driving 
 factor – at least that is what is suggested by 
the higher output of machinery and equipment 
and the increase in construction services ren -
dered. By contrast, external demand probably 
continued to make a negative contribution to 
GDP growth in the final quarter. At all events, 
after seasonal and working-  day adjustment, Pick- up in 
 industrial  activity 
in 2014 Q4
Private 
 consumption 
fuelled growth 
at year- endAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014981001021042010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
9698100102104106
9698100102104106
969810010210410698100102104
Italy
SpainFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
20

nominal exports to non- euro- area countries fell 
by 1¼% in  October- November compared with 
the summer months, while, in value terms, 
goods imports increased by ½% despite the 
considerable fall in oil prices.
According to the monthly indicators already 
available for January, the euro area made a 
 successful start to 2015. The composite PMI 
rose fairly sharply and moved further away 
from the expansion threshold thanks to im -
provements in the PMIs for manufacturing and 
services. Industrial confidence, which had 
 deteriorated in December, also strengthened in 
January, albeit only slightly. This improvement 
was attributable to more favourable produc -
tion expectations and a more optimistic assess -
ment of order books. Orders received in order- 
based industry also developed fairly positively 
in the October- November period, and some of 
these orders are likely to be processed only in 
2015. Excluding large orders, orders were up by 
a seasonally adjusted 1¼% in the October-  
November period compared with the third 
quarter. Orders both from within the euro area 
and from non- euro- area countries increased.
The situation on the labour market continued 
to improve slightly in the second half of 2014. 
Employment in the euro area rose by a season -
ally adjusted ¼% in the third quarter, and by 
½% on the year, thus continuing the moderate 
upward trend seen since the beginning of 
2014. One striking development is the strong 
employment growth in some periphery coun -
tries, reaching 1½% on the year in Ireland, 
Spain and Greece and 2% in Portugal. Like in 
the other euro-  area countries, new jobs were 
mainly created in the services sector. In Decem -
ber 2014, the number of unemployed persons 
was down by 863,000 on the year. This was 
primarily because of the favourable develop -
ments in Germany, Spain and some smaller 
member states, while unemployment con -
tinued its upward trend in Italy in particular but 
also in France. The standardised unemploy -
ment rate for the euro area stood at a season -
ally adjusted 11.4% at the end of 2014, and was thus 0.4 percentage point down on the 
year.
In the final quarter of 2014, consumer prices in 
the euro area were 0.2% down on the period 
after seasonal adjustment, having risen slightly 
in the summer. Most of this decline can be 
 explained by the more rapid fall in crude oil 
prices, whose impact on domestic energy 
prices was dampened only slightly by the de -
preciation of the euro. Consequently, consumer 
energy prices declined perceptibly. Excluding 
this component, HICP inflation continued to 
rise slightly after seasonal adjustment. This was 
mainly due to higher prices for food and ser -Signs of 
 successful start to 2015
Slight progress 
on the labour market  continued
Falling prices 
mainly due to 
plummeting 
crude oil 
 quotationsUnemployment in the euro area*
Source: Eurostat. * Excluding Lithuania, which joined the euro 
area  on  1  January  2015.  1 As  at  October  2014.  2 As  at 
September 2014. 3 As at November 2014.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 5 10 15 20 25 30%, seasonally adjusted
December 2013GR
ESCY
PT
IT
SK
EMU
LVIE
FR
SI
FIDecember 2014
BEEE
NL
LUMTDEAT1
2
3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
21

vices, while industrial goods prices remained 
stagnant. Annual headline HICP inflation con -
tinued to fall in the final quarter of 2014, reach -
ing 0.2%. Excluding energy, it remained at 
0.6%.
For 2014 as a whole, the euro area posted a 
very low inflation rate of 0.4%. Only in the cri -
sis year of 2009 was the inflation rate even 
lower, at 0.3%. Excluding energy, the 2014 rate 
was a mere 0.7%, marking a new low. This was primarily because, after rising very sharply in 
the preceding years, food prices virtually lev -
elled off, which should be regarded as a return 
to normal. The appreciation of the euro, which 
began in spring 2013 and did not ease off until 
spring 2014, had a discernible impact on indus -
trial goods prices. Services price inflation con -
tinued to lose steam as a result of the ongoing 
wage moderation in a number of euro- area 
countries. At the same time, inflation in 2014 
as a whole was almost entirely attributable to 
the services component, which accounts for 
around 40% of the basket of goods and 
 experienced average annual inflation of 1.2%.
There are signs that headline HICP inflation will 
continue to decline in 2015 as a result of devel -
opments in crude oil prices. A negative annual 
rate (-0.2%) was already recorded in December 
2014 for the first time since November 2009. 
According to the Eurostat flash estimate, this 
negative annual rate increased to -0.6% in 
January 2015 owing to the continuing fall in 
crude oil prices. In the coming months, the 
HICP rate is likely to remain negative because 
of the lower crude oil prices. Excluding energy, 
annual consumer price inflation amounted to 
0.4% in January. Over the remainder of 2015, 
this rise should be boosted by the now quite 
significant depreciation of the euro. On an 
 annual average, however, there could be a 
 further fall in headline HICP inflation given the 
dominant influence of energy. From a macro -
economic point of view, however, this is not a 
disadvantage  inasmuch as the decline is due to 
an improvement in the terms of trade.Unusually low 
HICP rate in 2014Signs that HICP inflation will continue to  decline in 2015Breakdown of euro-area consumer price 
inflation by type of product
Source: ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20141.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––+++++++% or percentage points
Energy Food
Non-energy
industrial goodsServices
Annual change in HICPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and  
money market developments
In line with its forward guidance, during the 
reporting period, the Governing Council of the 
ECB kept key euro- area interest rates at the 
levels reached following the interest rate cut of 
4 September 2014, which it considers the lower 
bound. Therefore, the main refinancing rate 
 remains at 0.05%, the marginal lending rate at 
0.30% and the deposit rate at -0.20%.
On 22 January 2015, the Governing Council of 
the ECB announced the launch of an expanded 
asset purchase programme (EAPP). It also 
 decided to lower the interest rate for the six 
remaining targeted longer- term refinancing 
 operations (TLTROs) to the level of the main 
 refinancing rate, thereby removing the 10 basis 
point spread that was required in the first two 
operations.
The majority of the ECB Governing Council 
 regarded the EAPP as being necessary to fulfil 
the Eurosystem’s price stability mandate. The 
reasoning behind this was, first, that recent in -
flation dynamics were again weaker than ori -
ginally expected, as reflected by the decline in 
annual HICP inflation to -0.2% in December 
2014. In addition, market- based indicators of 
medium to long- term inflation expectations 
had continued to fall, leading to assumptions 
that annual HICP inflation might also be low or 
negative in the next few months owing to 
dampened energy price developments. Finally, 
the degree of monetary accommodation cre -
ated through the measures adopted between 
June and September 2014 was considered in -
sufficient to address the increased risks of too 
prolonged a period of low inflation.
Under the EAPP , the Eurosystem’s covered 
bond purchase programme (CBPP3) and asset- 
backed securities purchase programme ( ABSPP), 
which were launched in September 2014, will be continued at the same conditions. From 
March 2015, purchases will be expanded to 
 include bonds issued by euro- area central gov -
ernments, agencies and European institutions. 
The additional bonds to be purchased as part 
of the programme can have maturities of be -
tween two and 30 years. Ultimately, the Euro -
system will not purchase more than 25% of 
each issue so as not to obstruct the application 
of collective action clauses (CACs). The Eurosys -
tem will accept the same treatment as private 
investors. Moreover, it will not hold more than 
33% of each issuer’s debt in total, ie including 
other Eurosystem portfolios. The monthly pur -
chase volume under the EAPP , including the 
ABSPP and CBPP3, is to total €60 billion and 
this volume is to be maintained until the end of 
September 2016 or, in any case, until the Gov -
erning Council sees a sustained adjustment in 
the path of inflation that is consistent with its 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term. As in the case of 
CBPP3, the purchase of public- sector debt 
 instruments also generally requires a minimum 
credit  assessment equivalent to an external rat -
ing agency’s rating of BBB-. Bonds issued by 
countries that do not meet this credit rating re -
quirement are exempt from this rule if the min -
imum credit quality threshold for acceptable 
collateral from the country in question has 
been suspended for monetary policy oper -
ations. This is the case if a country is undergo -
ing an EU/IMF adjustment programme and 
meets the programme conditions.
The ECB Governing Council has also decided 
that any losses arising from the purchase 
of  securities of European institutions, which 
 account for 12% of the additional asset pur -
chases and are purchased by the national cen -
tral banks, will be subject to loss sharing. The 
ECB will purchase 8% of the remaining assets, 
which will also be subject to the risk-  sharing 
regime, while the rest of the securities will be 
purchased in a decentralised manner by the Key interest 
rates remain at all- time low
ECB Governing 
Council adopts expanded asset purchase pro-gramme and lowers interest rate on longer- term refinancing operationsProgramme to start in March 
2015 with 
monthly 
 purchase 
 volume of 
€60 billion
Additional asset 
purchases only partially subject to risk- sharing regimeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
23

Money market management and liquidity needs
The three reserve maintenance periods 
from 8 October 2014 to 27 January 2015 
saw a marked increase in euro- area liquidity needs stemming from autonomous factors. 
In the December 2014-January 2015 reserve 
period, the fi  gure averaged €505.2 billion, 
which was €30.1 billion higher than in the 
September- October 2014 reserve period. At 
€34.2 billion, this was primarily driven by 
the sharp rise in banknotes in circulation 
– particularly before Christmas – typical of 
the season. By contrast, the €12.1 billion net decline in government deposits with the Eurosystem served to provide liquidity, while the aggregate decrease in the re-
maining autonomous factors (including net 
foreign assets) totalling €8.0 billion had a liquidity- absorbing effect. The increase in 
minimum reserve requirements triggered an additional €0.8 billion rise in the calculated liquidity needs (see table below).The outstanding volume of tender oper-
ations fl  uctuated greatly between €484 bil-
lion and €629 billion during the period 
under review (see chart on page 26). On the one hand, these fl  uctuations were driven in particular by the increased bids in main refi  -nancing operations towards the end of the 
month, accompanied by a higher number 
of bidders. On the other hand, the second 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operation 
(TLTRO) allotment had a more noticeable impact. As at 17 December 2014, around €130 billion had been credited, although 
the outstanding tender volume only experi-enced a net increase of €84 billion that day due to funds shifted from the main refi  nan-
cing operation and early repayments of  liquidity provided in the three- year LTROs. Overall, the early repayments in the three reserve maintenance periods under review came in at a high fi  gure of €135 billion (compared to a total of €87 billion in the 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2014/2015
8 Oct to
11 Nov12 Nov to9 Dec10 Dec to27 Jan
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  2.3 –  6.2 – 25.7
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  2.3 +  4.4 +  5.4
3 Net foreign assets
1 + 10.0 +  2.3 + 12.1
4 Other factors 1 – 16.9 –  7.5 –  8.0
Total –  6.9 –  7.0 – 16.2
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  3.7 +  8.1 + 15.7
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations + 14.3 – 16.4 + 58.3
(c) Other operations –  1.4 +  8.7 + 15.9
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.1 –  0.1 +  0.3
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  6.7 +  3.7 – 22.9
Total +  2.6 +  4.0 + 67.3
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) –  4.3 –  2.9 + 50.9
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.4 –  0.7 +  0.3
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
24

three previous periods), with the approach-
ing maturities also making a contribution.
Banks received additional liquidity from new 
purchases that commenced in October and 
November 2014 under the purchase pro-
grammes CBPP3 and ABSPP . By 23 January 
2015, purchases under these programmes 
had reached on- balance- sheet levels of €37.2 billion (CBPP3) and €2.3 billion ( ABSPP). At the same time, the balance 
sheet holdings of securities acquired through 
purchase programmes already completed fell further during the period under review as a result of maturities and taking into 
 account end- of- quarter revaluations (CBPP1 and CBPP2 declined by €4.0 billion to €27.8 
billion and by €0.8 billion to €12.7 billion  respectively, while the SMP volume was 
down by €4.9 billion to €144.3 billion).
As a consequence of fl  uctuations in autono-
mous factors (between €465 billion and 
€564 billion) and changes in demand for  liquidity, excess liquidity also proved vola-tile. At €71 billion, excess liquidity hit its lowest level on 24  November 2014. Its 
highest point, €263 billion, was reached on 
1  January 2015, as credit institutions had  increased their liquidity buffers at the end 
of the year to meet, inter alia, their balance 
sheet or regulatory requirements. While 
average excess liquidity in the two previous periods was rather low, at €114 billion and 
€106 billion respectively, it rose sharply to €180 billion (compared to €145 billion in 2013) during the Christmas maintenance period. With an extended duration of 49 
days, this was also the fi  rst reserve mainten-
ance period to occur under the new cycle 
implemented for the ECB Governing Coun-cil’s monetary policy meetings.
With the exception of the month- end rates, 
overnight rates also fl  uctuated in the three 
reserve maintenance periods under review 
between the main refi  nancing rate and the 
deposit facility rate, although secured over-night money (GC Pooling Overnight, ECB 
basket) remained consistently below  EONIA, 
by 5 basis points on average in this period 
(by 3 basis points in the three previous 
periods) (see charts above). After the period 
averages of both EONIA and the secured overnight rate had remained at approxi-mately the same level in the fi  rst two Central bank interest rates, money
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.  1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankSep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
2014 20150.20.100.10.20.3
––+++Daily data
€ bn%
050100150200250Excess liquidity1EONIA
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
Spread between Stoxx GC Pooling 
Overnight and the main refinancing rate
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankOct Nov Dec Jan Feb
2014 20150.20.100.1
––+
Mean value for the reserve
maintenance periodPercentage points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
25

periods as in the September- October 
2014 period, they both experienced a 
marked drop in the December 2014-January 
2015 reserve period in light of the signifi  -
cant increase in excess liquidity. EONIA fell 
to -0.05% on average for the period (-0.01% 
in the two previous periods), and the  secured overnight rate to -0.11% on aver-age (-0.06% and -0.04% in the previous periods). On 24  December 2014, both  EONIA and GC Pooling Overnight reached 
new all- time lows at -0.085% and -0.177% 
respectively. For the period under review, the underlying turnover on the overnight market was consistently lower on average 
than the levels recorded in the September- 
October 2014 period. While the corres-
ponding turnover on GC Pooling (ECB bas-
ket) sank to an average of €14.7 billion in the December 2014-January 2015 reserve 
period (€19.9 billion in September- October 
2014), EONIA turnover ended its downward 
trend in this reserve maintenance period. This was primarily the result of increased turnover from mid- January onwards, which ultimately led to an average of €27.4 billion 
for the period. One reason for this rise in EONIA turnover may have been that the 
fi  rst three- year LTRO matured on 29 January 
2015, as the remaining €39 billion of the €489 billion originally allotted expired at 
the beginning of the January- February 2015 
reserve period. However, this maturity had 
little effect on the outstanding tender vol-
ume because credit institutions had ob-tained more liquidity in return through higher demand for the main refi  nancing  operation and for the three- month LTRO, 
which was settled the same day. In the last 
week of January, these shifts led to a net rise of €9 billion in the Eurosystem’s out-standing tender volume to €579 billion. 
Overall, until the additional purchases under 
the expanded asset purchase programme 
(EAPP) begin in March 2015, and settlement of the third TLTRO takes place on 25 March 
2015, increased volatility in excess liquidity 
can be expected.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP),  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3) and Asset-Backed Securities Purchase Programme (ABSPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve 
requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility
2000200400600800
–++++
Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
2014 2015Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tenders
Three-year LTROsPurchase programmes1
Targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs)Marginal lending facility
Reserve period tenders
Excess liquidity 2Main refinancing operations
FebDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
26

 national central banks. The other assets pur -
chased by the national central banks will not be 
subject to loss sharing, meaning that for a total 
of 80% of the additional assets purchased 
under the EAPP following the decision of 
22  January 2015, any losses sustained by a 
 national central bank will not be shared among 
the members of the Eurosystem.
Price developments, which are subdued at 
present, pose a challenge to monetary policy -
makers because inflation figures at the current 
end are a long way off the target of 2%, and 
projections over the typical monetary policy 
horizon do not suggest a rapid return to this 
level. However, this is mainly due to a sharp fall 
in oil prices, which is likely to boost economic 
activity as households’ disposable income goes 
up and enterprises’ profits rise. In addition, 
 adjustment processes in a number of euro- area 
countries are currently suppressing price devel -
opments in the euro area as a whole. This 
 reflects the necessary restoration of competi -
tiveness in the countries in question and is 
therefore also a positive sign. Although infla -
tion rates are currently very low, both these 
factors suggest that the risk of deflation in the 
sense of a negative downward spiral of prices 
and wages is currently small.
The Eurosystem began purchasing asset- backed 
securities (ABS) at the end of November 2014; 
by 6 February 2015, €2.7 billion worth of ABS 
had been acquired. Under the covered bond 
purchase programme (CBPP3), bonds worth a 
total of €42.9 billion had been purchased on 
the primary and secondary market by 6 Febru -
ary 2015.
Lithuania joined the euro area at the beginning 
of 2015. Lithuania’s accession to the Eurosys -
tem triggered the rotating system of voting 
rights in the Governing Council of the ECB, 
starting from 1 January 2015. Under this sys -
tem, the group of governors representing the 
national central banks of the euro area’s largest 
member states, which includes the Bundes -
bank president as well as the governors of the Spanish, French, Italian and Dutch central 
banks, take turns in relinquishing their voting 
rights in the ECB Governing Council for one 
month.
On 4 February 2015, the Governing Council of 
the ECB decided to lift the waiver of minimum 
credit rating requirements for marketable in -
struments issued or guaranteed by Greece. This 
waiver had allowed such instruments to be 
used in Eurosystem monetary policy operations 
despite the fact that they did not fulfil min -
imum credit rating requirements. The Govern -
ing Council’s decision is based on the fact that 
it is currently not possible to assume a success -
ful conclusion of the programme review, and is 
in line with existing Eurosystem rules. As a 
 result, funding of the Greek banking system 
shifted away from monetary policy refinancing 
towards emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). 
This consists of short- term assistance provided 
by Eurosystem national central banks to solvent 
financial institutions facing temporary liquidity Risk of down-
ward spiral of prices and wages is low
Eurosystem con-
tinues purchase programmes for asset- backed  securities (A BSPP) and covered bonds (CBPP3)
Lithuania joins 
euro area;  rotating system of voting rights introduced for ECB Governing CouncilECB Governing Council makes new decision on 
eligibility of 
Greek bondsMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month EONIA swap rate. The three-month Eurepo rate 
used hitherto was discontinued on 1 January 2015. See also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Money market risk premia: indicators for the state of the interbank market, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 30-31. • Average 1 to 12 February 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 20150.500.51.01.52.02.5
–
050100Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
EONIA 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
27

problems. The Greek banks receiving ELA 
should therefore take measures to improve 
their liquidity position. An expansion of liquidity 
needs as a result of purchasing short- term 
Greek government debt in the coming weeks 
would run counter to this.
The second of eight TLTROs was carried out on 
11 December 2014. In this operation, 306 insti -
tutions borrowed an overall volume of €129.9 
billion from the Eurosystem. The amount bor -
rowed in the first two tenders came to €212.5 
billion in total. In the first two TLTROs, partici -
pating banks were able to take out central 
bank loans amounting to up to 7% of their 
outstanding credit volume to the non- financial 
private sector (not including loans to house -
holds for house purchase) as at 30 April 2014. 
Overall, banks made use of around 50% of this 
upper limit. A further six TLTROs will be con -
ducted up until June 2016, allowing counter -
parties to borrow up to three times the amount 
of their eligible net lending above a certain 
benchmark.
The refinancing volume and excess liquidity 
rose sharply at the turn of the year as a result 
of an increase in banks’ demand for liquidity. 
After rising considerably following the second 
TLTRO on 17 December 2014, both variables 
also continued to climb until the end of the 
year owing, inter alia,  to greater recourse to 
other monetary policy refinancing operations. 
As in previous years, the increase in demand 
for liquidity probably resulted from the banking 
system’s tendency to hold liquidity buffers at 
year- end and banks actively shaping their bal -
ance sheets to comply with internal and regu -
latory requirements.
Having reached around €260 billion at the 
 beginning of January 2015, its highest level 
since the turn of the last year, excess liquidity 
decreased again markedly throughout January. 
The major factors that influenced this were a 
temporary decline in the main refinancing vol -
ume, early repayments of liquidity in both 
three- year tenders and the maturity of the first of these operations on 29 January 2015. How -
ever, excess liquidity has gone back up of late 
owing to further purchases by the Eurosystem 
under the ABSPP and CBPP3 programmes and 
a significant pick- up in main refinancing oper -
ations.
Consistent with the rise in excess liquidity, 
short- term money market rates reached new 
lows in December and January. The unsecured 
interbank money market rate EONIA temporar -
ily fell to as low as -0.085%, while the secured 
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight rate even went 
down to -0.177%. Although these very short-  
term rates have recently gone back up in line 
with developments in the liquidity situation, 
they remain firmly in negative territory. The 
three- month EURIBOR, by contrast, currently 
stands at a record low of 0.051%. This is likely 
to reflect the expectations of an increase in 
 excess liquidity in the next few months as a 
 result of the decision taken by the ECB Govern -
ing Council at the end of January to launch an 
expanded asset purchase programme. Overall, 
it is clear that, even when they are in negative 
territory, short- term money market rates react 
as expected to liquidity developments and 
move towards the interest rate on the deposit 
facility as excess liquidity rises.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
Last year saw a marked recovery in the growth 
of the broad monetary aggregate M3 despite 
sluggish economic activity, weak inflation 
 dynamics and, latterly, a significant depreci -
ation of the euro. At an (annualised) three-  
month rate of 4.6%, inflows to M3 in the final 
quarter reached a level typical of the first half 
of the last decade. This pick- up was due, above 
all, to the money- holding sector’s sustained 
preference for highly liquid assets as interest 
rates continued to fall. In terms of counter -
parts, the growth in M3 was relatively broad-  
based; credit to the private sector, in particular, 
made a positive contribution again for the first 306 banks 
 borrow €129.9 billion in second TLTRO
Marked rise in 
excess liquidity at the turn of the yearShort- term money market rates tempor-arily reach new lows
Moderate rise 
in M3 against 
backdrop of 
continued slug-
gish economic 
activityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
28

time in just under two years. In addition to 
moderate growth in real economic activity, the 
extremely expansionary monetary policy stance 
in the euro area is also likely to have caused 
lending to the private sector to continue its 
 upward trajectory across all sectors.
In the final quarter, the inflows to M3, which 
were already significant in the previous quarter, 
recorded a further rise. The increase was once 
again primarily driven by overnight deposits, 
which benefited from a further reduction in 
interest rates for other deposits and which 
were accumulated by households in particular 
as well as to a lesser extent by non- financial 
corporations. By contrast, these sectors’ de -
mand for short- term time deposits and savings 
deposits fell again significantly in the reporting 
quarter. Furthermore, M3 growth was distrib -
uted much more evenly across the euro- area 
countries than during the crisis years 2011 and 
2012.
Against this backdrop, the upward trend in 
monetary growth that has been observed since 
the beginning of 2014 gained further momen -
tum in the reporting quarter and the annual 
growth rate of M3 rose markedly to 3.6%. The 
continuation of the upward trend also led to an 
increase in the annual growth rate for loans to 
the euro-  area private sector (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation), which, at 0.1%, moved 
into positive territory again for the first time 
since July 2012. Because growth in lending 
business is still very moderate, despite evident 
signs of recovery, the underlying monetary 
 dynamics in the euro area remain subdued.
One particularly encouraging sign is that the 
upward movement in lending was again 
strongly supported by loans to non- financial 
corporations. During the reporting quarter, 
these borrowers recorded a net increase for the 
first time since summer 2011 (see chart on 
page 31). Another striking development was 
the pick- up in loans with a maturity of more 
than five years, which are usually used for 
 investment purposes, and which had been in 
decline for a prolonged period. The annual rate 
of change for loans to non- financial corpor -
ations in the euro area therefore bottomed out 
at -3.1% in the first quarter of 2014; in the 
 reporting quarter, it stood at -1.0%.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) carried out in 
the fourth quarter also pointed to a gradual 
upward movement in lending to the non-  
financial corporations sector. The euro- area in -
stitutions surveyed as part of the BLS reported 
a marked increase in demand for bank loans 
among non- financial corporations for the first 
time in over three years. The survey identified Significant M3 
growth still driven by over-night deposits
Continued 
 upward trend in 
monetary and credit growthOngoing  recovery in loans to  non-financial  corporations
BLS, too, points 
to gradual  stabilisation in lending to  non-financial  corporationsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2014 Q4 2014 Q3
Central government deposits 8.6 – 20.9
Monetary aggregate M3 114.2 107.4
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 138.9 125.8
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 60.9 – 21.9
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 36.3 3.6
Monetary capital – 84.1 –  3.0
of which
Capital and reserves 3.8 51.5
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 88.0 – 54.5Assets 2014 Q4 2014 Q3
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 16.8 – 18.9
Loans 18.8 – 10.5
Loans, adjusted 1 28.4 – 10.8
Securities –  2.0 –  8.4
Credit to general government in the euro area 38.3 41.1
Loans 13.0 –  1.4
Securities 25.2 42.5
Net external assets 30.0 27.9
Other counterparts of M3 – 56.0 33.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
29

an increase in the financing needs of large cor -
porations, in particular. Demand for credit was 
bolstered by the continuing fall in lending rates. 
The banks surveyed in the BLS also said that, 
on balance, they had substantially eased their 
credit standards for loans to enterprises for the 
first time since 2007. This applied to enterprises 
of all sizes in a similar way. According to the 
information provided by the institutions, along -
side banks’ good liquidity position, the easing 
of standards was due, in particular, to the high 
level of competition in the area of corporate 
banking.
Support for the recovery in lending came from 
a broad base of countries. In the reporting 
quarter, this included the four large euro- area 
countries, in particular. In Germany and France, 
the quarterly inflows rose markedly in the 
fourth quarter. At the same time, the level of 
net redemptions fell in Spain and Italy. As in the 
previous quarters, enterprises’ demand for 
bank loans is likely to have been dampened by 
an increase in the use of alternative sources of 
funding. Larger non- financial corporations 
 obtain part of their funding directly from the 
capital market; furthermore, own funds repre -
sent the primary source of financing in Ger -
many, in particular.
The recovery in loans to households observed 
since summer 2013, too, persisted on balance. 
However, with an annual growth rate of 0.8% 
in the reporting quarter, the growth of this ag -
gregate is to be regarded as moderate. In an 
environment characterised by historically low 
interest rates, growth was again driven by 
loans for house purchase. Unlike loans to non- 
financial corporations, the increase in the euro- 
area aggregate was supported only by some of 
the member states. Whereas loans for house 
purchase moved up significantly in most of the 
core countries of European monetary union, 
the extent of the reduction in the periphery 
countries remained essentially unchanged, not 
least against the backdrop of the persistent 
need for household deleveraging. For the euro 
area as a whole, the banks surveyed as part of Recovery in 
lending to enter-prises supported by all four large euro- area  countries
Perceptible 
 increase in loans 
to householdsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, taken in 
isolation, an increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan 
sales and securitisation. 5 Adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation from 2010 Q1. 6 Non-monetary financial corporations. 
7 Non-financial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014505101520
–++++
–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
505101520
–++++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Sectoral growth contributions 2of which
Loans to the private sector 5Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
contributions to growth 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining balance
sheet items
Longer-term financial
liabilities to other non-MFIs 3
Net external
asset position
Credit to the
private sector 4
Financial
corporations 6
Non-financial
corporations 7
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
30

the BLS, too, reported that demand in this 
credit segment had again risen considerably, 
while standards for loans to households for 
house purchase had been eased marginally.
The gradual upward movement in consumer 
credit observed in the last few quarters reflects 
the somewhat improved underlying dynamic of 
household consumption since 2013. This 
 assessment is also consistent with what the 
 institutions surveyed as part of the BLS  reported, 
indicating that the perceptible increase in the 
consumer credit segment was accompanied by 
a marginal easing of standards.
Besides the net increase in loans to the private 
sector, monetary growth in the reporting quar -
ter was again supported by an inflow of funds 
from abroad. However, as in the preceding 
quarter, the net external asset position of the 
MFI sector, which has been the main counter -
part supporting M3 for the last two years, in 
the three months up to December recorded 
only a slight rise on balance. In December, per -
ceptible net outflows could even be observed. 
Outflows from portfolio transactions with non- 
residents are likely to be the main reason for 
the waning momentum, while current account 
surpluses remained largely constant. This sug -
gests that the decline in the preference of for -
eign investors for euro- area debt securities was further dampened by the renewed escalation 
of the situation in Greece, among other things. 
In addition, the demand of euro- area investors 
for foreign securities increased, too.
The greatest supporting effect on the monetary 
aggregate in the reporting quarter was exerted 
by monetary capital, which, following con -
tinued outflows in the preceding quarters, 
again recorded a major decline in the fourth 
quarter. This was chiefly attributable to consid -
erable net redemptions of bank debt securities 
with a maturity of over two years; unlike in the 
previous quarter, these were not counterbal -
anced by an extensive increase in capital and 
reserves.
The reduction of long- term bank debt secur -
ities in the hands of the euro- area money-  
holding sector has been observed since the 
fourth quarter of 2011. While net redemptions 
of these securities were initially attributable, 
above all, to weak investor demand, the refi -
nancing situation of banks in the market has 
clearly improved again in the meantime. This 
was also reflected in the results of the banks 
surveyed as part of the BLS, which, as in the 
previous quarters, in the fourth quarter again 
reported distinct improvements in the issuance 
of longer- term bank debt securities. Hence, the 
recent net redemptions are likely to have in -Again only slight 
increase in net external asset positionMajor decline in monetary  capital owing to 
long- term bank debt securitiesLoans to non-financial corporations
€ billion; three-month changes at the end of the quarter, seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
Source: ECB. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 14 2011 12 13 1425201510505101520
–––––++++Spain France Italy Germany Euro area
(scale reduced)
2011 12 13 145040302010010203040
–––––++++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
31

creasingly been triggered by supply- side fac -
tors. First, the deleveraging initiated by the 
new regulatory provisions and the ECB’s exten -
sive asset quality review at the end of 2013 
 resulted in an overall decline in the funding 
 requirements of the banking sector. Second, 
the demand for credit of the non-  financial 
 private sector in the  periphery countries re -
mains weak, which at present still means that 
banks require less funding. Moreover, despite 
improved market  access, the continued reduc -
tion in long- term bank debt securities suggests 
that this type of refinancing has become less 
attractive compared with alternative sources of 
funding, such as the ever growing holdings of 
deposits and the  liquidity provided by the Euro -
system at favourable conditions. Alongside 
lending to enterprises, the banks participating 
in the BLS explicitly stated substitution of alter -
native sources of funding as the reason for tak -
ing up the funds provided as part of the Euro -
system’s  TLTRO.
A look at euro- area banks’ asset items shows 
that the balance sheet reduction in the banking 
sector, which began in mid-2012, came to an 
initial halt last year (see the chart above). In 
2014, asset items increased again for the first 
time since the end of 2012, the growth being 
broadly based across the individual balance 
sheet items. In the reporting year, bank funds flowed mainly into financial derivatives in the 
trading portfolio; in addition, claims on non-  
residents were significant, too. The four large 
euro- area countries exhibited two divergent 
developments. Whereas banks in Germany and 
France decisively supported the balance- sheet 
leveraging seen in the euro- area aggregate, the 
pace of deleveraging merely slowed for banks 
in Spain and Italy. It was, above all, financial 
derivatives as well as bonds of other euro- area 
countries which were purchased in the  latter 
two countries; in addition, the decline in claims 
on the private sector lost momentum.
German banks’ deposit  
and lending business with  
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers in the fourth quarter of 2014 was 
characterised by an, albeit discernibly weak -
ened, rise in overnight deposits, while all other 
deposit types declined on balance. This devel -
opment reflects the money- holding sector’s 
continued strong preference for liquidity, which 
had been encouraged by even lower opportun -
ity costs associated with holding money in the 
short term. Furthermore, the flat yield curve 
caused the decline in long- term time deposits, 
which had already been observed for several Increase in 
banks’ asset items for the first time since the end of 2012Deposit business still marked by shiftsBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20143,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++12-month changes1 at the end of the quarter, in € billion
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
32

quarters, to significantly accelerate again in the 
reporting quarter. Possible reasons for the over -
all weak growth in deposit business are the 
search for more profitable forms of investment 
and the increase in the propensity to spend due 
to low interest rates.
A larger part of the inflow of short-  term de -
posits continued to originate from households, 
which again markedly built up their cash hold -
ings, although this increase was somewhat 
weaker that in the preceding quarter. At the 
same time, households’ investment behaviour 
was characterised by a discernible reduction in 
other short- term deposits (time and savings 
 deposits). Given the persistently stable income 
and financial assets situation of households in 
Germany, the weakened deposit growth may 
be a reflection of the higher propensity of this 
sector to purchase and invest. This assessment 
is consistent with different indicators on con -
sumer climate and with the latest results of the 
BLS, which point to good consumer sentiment 
on the whole in the reporting quarter.
Moreover, domestic banks’ deposit business 
was characterised by a distinct reduction in 
long- term time deposits in the quarter under 
review and, as in the preceding quarters, the 
most pronounced movements were recorded 
by financial corporations. As in the previous 
quarters, financial corporations are likely to 
have shifted the freed- up funds into less liquid 
and riskier assets outside M3 instruments (such 
as debt securities and investment fund shares) 
in search of higher yield.
The considerable expansion of banks’ lending 
business in Germany with the domestic non-  
bank sector, which could be observed in the 
preceding two quarters, did not continue at 
the same pace in the fourth quarter of 2014. 
This was essentially due to a material decrease 
in credit to general government. However, 
lending to the domestic non- bank sector de -
veloped positively overall as loans to house -
holds again recorded distinct inflows and 
 unsecuritised loans to non-  financial corpor -ations increased slightly again following a 
 noticeable decline in the previous quarter.
On the one hand, the considerable decline in 
lending to general government was the result 
of net redemptions of loans to general govern -
ment, which had been recorded for several 
quarters and are likely to be connected to the 
consistently good budgetary position. How -
ever, the current decline was essentially attrib -
utable to the fact that banks significantly scaled 
back their holdings of domestic government 
bonds in the reporting quarter. The increase in 
net external assets of domestic banks suggests 
that this development may, in part, be linked to 
a greater interest of international investors in 
German government bonds.
As in the previous quarters, loans to house -
holds mainly consisted of loans for house pur -
chase. Against the backdrop of the exception -
ally favourable financing conditions and the 
lack of attractive alternative investment oppor -Renewed 
 increase in over-
night deposits owing to low opportunity costs
Further  
interest- related 
reduction in long- term  deposits
Positive lending 
business with non- banksConsiderable  reduction in loans to general government
Loans to house-
holds continue to be driven by loans for house purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2014
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 34.6 24.9
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 5.1 –  3.0
of over 2 years – 4.3 – 15.1
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 1.4 –  1.6
of over 3 months 2.3 –  1.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 4.3 –  2.3
Securitised lending 5.4 –  5.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 5.5 7.8
of which to households 3 5.3 5.4
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 – 3.2 1.5
Securitised lending 4.2 0.3
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes. 1 Enterprises, households 
and general government excluding central government. 
2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
33

tunities, loans for house purchase recorded an -
other clear rise in the reporting period. Reasons 
for this are provided by the latest BLS results. 
For example, according to the banks participat -
ing in the BLS, the demand for private housing 
loans experienced renewed stimulation in the 
fourth quarter of 2014. The surveyed bank 
managers stated that the outlook on the hous -
ing market had clearly improved on the previ -
ous quarter from the point of view of borrow -
ers and consumer confidence, too, contributed 
to the increase in demand. Conversely, when 
viewed in isolation, alternative sources of fund -
ing, such as household savings and loans from 
other banks, had a negative impact on house -
hold demand for loans for house purchase at 
the surveyed institutions. Simultaneously, the 
lending policies of banks were conducive to the 
rise in demand for loans for house purchase in 
the quarter under review. Although the banks 
surveyed as part of the BLS did not adjust their 
standards for housing loans in the final quarter, the margins for both average and riskier loans 
narrowed slightly.
The banks surveyed as part of the BLS also 
 experienced a significant increase in demand 
for consumer credit. However, in the aggregate 
across all reporting banks in Germany, net lend -
ing in this credit segment remained almost 
 unchanged, which – given households’ sound 
income and asset situation – could be attribut -
able to a simultaneous rise in redemptions. 
According to the BLS, banks’ lending policies in 
the final quarter were somewhat less strict 
overall than in the quarter before. First, the 
 surveyed banks –  above all, for competitive 
 reasons – eased their credit standards some -
what; second, this segment, too, saw a slight 
narrowing of margins. On the whole, the in -
crease in lending to households in Germany 
continues to be very moderate. The 12-month 
rate for loans to households edged up slightly 
from 1.4% in the previous quarter to 1.5%.
Owing to a distinct upturn in November, loans 
to domestic non- financial corporations increased 
slightly on balance in the reporting quarter, 
having declined appreciably in the preceding 
quarter. Positive net lending to enterprises was 
marked by various developments in the individ -
ual maturity segments. Whereas the noticeably 
more expensive loans in the medium-  term 
 maturity segment fell substantially, shorter-  
term loans (with an agreed maturity of up to 
one year) and to a greater extent also long-  
term loans (with an agreed maturity of more 
than five years) exhibited discernible inflows on 
balance. The generally positive development in 
demand for corporate loans in the reporting 
quarter is likely to be attributable to the under -
lying trend of positive economic and business 
expectations and the historically favourable 
 financing conditions. This assessment is largely 
consistent with the results of the BLS, which 
state that the positive demand for bank loans 
of non-  financial corporations in the reporting 
quarter was driven by a heightened demand 
for funding for mergers, acquisitions and cor -
porate restructuring as well as fixed invest -Net redemptions 
of consumer loans defy over-all less strict lending policies
Slight increase in 
loans to 
 non-financial 
 corporationsLoans of German banks to
selected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations. 3 Corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20142101234
––++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales 
and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2
Non-financial corporations 3Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened slightly” and the number 
of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened slightly” and the number of respondents report-
ing “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 20152.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 151.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
9060300306090
–––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for loans for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
2.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for loans for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
35

ments and debt restructuring. Moreover, the 
bank managers taking part in the BLS indicated 
that, as in the previous quarters, demand of 
enterprises for bank loans, taken in isolation, 
was dampened by lower financing needs for 
inventories and working capital and the 
 recourse to other sources of funding.
According to the results of the BLS, the lending 
policies of banks in the reporting quarter sup -
ported the positive development of loans to 
non- financial corporations. While credit stand -
ards on loans to non- financial corporations 
 remained unchanged on balance, banks tight -
ened margins on average loans considerably 
and on riskier loans markedly. In a departure 
from the preceding two quarters, these nar -
rowed margins benefited not only large but 
also small and medium- sized enterprises. In 
addition to tightening margins, the institutions 
also eased the other surveyed credit conditions, 
such as collateral requirements, covenants and 
non- interest rate charges.
The BLS in the fourth quarter contained ad hoc  
questions on the banks’ funding conditions, 
the impact of the new regulatory and supervis -
ory activities and the banks’ participation in the 
TLTROs from 2014 to 2016. In view of the cur -
rent situation on the financial markets, German 
banks again reported that their funding situ -
ation had improved slightly compared with the 
preceding quarter. For the first time, the banks 
surveyed as part of the BLS did not, on balance, 
reduce their risk- weighted assets further in the 
second half of 2014 in response to the new 
regulatory and supervisory activities; none-
theless, they continued to scale back their risk -ier loans and strengthened their capital pos -
ition. The TLTRO in December 2014 was met 
with moderate interest by the surveyed Ger -
man institutions as the majority of banks did 
not face any funding shortages. The banks 
from the BLS sample that took part in the oper -
ation cited the attractive conditions as the rea -
son for participating and said they wished to 
use the funds provided chiefly for lending. The 
institutions anticipate that taking part will 
 improve their financial situation slightly, but do 
not expect any impact on their credit stand -
ards.
Lending rates in the fourth quarter of 2014 
largely followed the slight interest rate decline 
in the money and capital markets across all 
 reported segments, maturities and volumes. 
Interest rates for long- term loans to enterprises 
decreased slightly and remained virtually un -
changed on the whole for short- term loans. On 
average, at the end of December, the reporting 
institutions were charging interest of 2.8% for 
small- scale and 1.6% for large- scale short- term 
loans to domestic non- financial corporations. 
Interest rates for long- term loans to non-  
financial corporations stood at 2.1% and 2.0% 
of late, reaching a new all- time low since the 
introduction of the harmonised MFI interest 
rate statistics in 2003.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the conditions 
on loans to households, too, fell to their lowest 
levels since 2003. At the end of December, the 
interest rate on long- term loans for house pur -
chase dipped slightly to 2.2%. Deposits of 
households again earned less interest than in 
the previous quarter.German banks’ 
credit standards for enterprises eased
BLS indicates 
moderate  interest of  German banks in TLTROsBank lending rates follow interest rate  decline in the 
capital marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments on the international financial 
markets in the fourth quarter of 2014 were 
 increasingly marked by the expectation of 
large- scale asset purchases by the Eurosystem. 
This expectation was predicated on easing 
 medium and longer- term inflation expectations 
in the wake of tumbling oil prices. The mere 
prospect of an expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme, as decided upon by the ECB Govern -
ing Council by majority vote on 22  January 
2015, pushed down bond yields throughout 
the euro area apart from in Greece, with new 
lows being recorded in several countries. Bond 
yields outside the euro area likewise eased 
amid the abundant liquidity supply and falling 
oil prices. The equity markets were upbeat for 
the most part, with European stock exchanges, 
in particular, seeing strong demand for shares. 
The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme 
evidently exceeded the expectations of some 
market participants in terms of both volume 
and breadth, causing an intensified search for 
alternative investment opportunities after its 
announcement. Furthermore, the euro’s depre -
ciation is likely to have boosted exporters’ 
earnings expectations. Measured by its 
weighted average against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners, the euro lost approxi -
mately 5% of its value on balance compared 
with the end of September 2014. The higher 
implied stock market volatility and lower con -
sensus amongst analysts, however, are indica -
tive of elevated stock price uncertainty.
Exchange rates
Much of the euro’s depreciation in nominal 
 effective terms can be attributed to the trajec -
tory of the bilateral exchange rate against the 
US dollar, which was itself particularly influ -
enced by a growing disparity between the 
monetary policy strategies being pursued on either side of the Atlantic. Announcements by 
the Governing Council of the ECB to the effect 
that the prospect of subdued price develop -
ments might necessitate further monetary pol -
icy easing served to weaken the euro. ECB 
president Mario Draghi noted in mid- November 
that expansionary monetary policy measures 
can also include government bond purchases. 
Reports in early December of unexpectedly 
 favourable developments in the US labour mar -
ket only added to the euro’s woes.
That being said, the euro’s loss in value against 
the US dollar remained comparatively moder -
ate up to mid- December 2014 as several busi -
ness indicators for the euro area published in 
the autumn certainly provided a positive sur -
prise. Moreover, some forex market partici -
pants seemed disappointed after the ECB Gov -
erning Council’s meeting in early December 
that a bond purchase programme had not 
 already been decided at that particular session. 
The chief impression, however, is that their 
 uncertainty over the future path of US interest 
rates was undiminished.
For the euro’s loss in value began to gain 
 traction in mid- December last year when the 
 Federal Open Market Committee statement no 
longer referred to a “considerable time” pass -
ing before an interest rate hike, which market 
players evidently interpreted as signalling that 
policy rates would be lifted sooner. The ex -
change rate movement was compounded by 
the surprisingly sharp upward revision of US 
GDP . On this side of the Atlantic, the euro was 
additionally burdened by the decline in the 
euro- area consumer price index brought about 
by contracting energy prices as well as by the 
uncertainty surrounding the need for new par -
liamentary elections in Greece. Following the 
ECB Governing Council’s decision in favour of a 
bond purchase programme in January 2015, 
the value of the euro fell to US$1.12, its lowest 
level since September 2003. While it subse -Financial 
 markets  expecting quan-titative easing by Eurosystem
Depreciation of 
euro against US dollar …… still moderate up to mid- December 2014, …
… but picked 
up pace in the ensuing periodDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
37

quently stabilised, the euro latterly stood at 
US$1.13, putting it 10% below its level at the 
end of September 2014.
In November, the euro strengthened markedly 
against the yen following the Japanese central 
bank’s decision at the end of October to ex -
pand its programme of quantitative easing. In 
the course of the same month, the yen was 
further weakened first by the uncertainty aris -
ing from rumours, later confirmed, that prime 
minister Shinzo Abe intended to call new elec -
tions and to postpone the planned VAT in -
crease, and second by the unexpected renewed 
decline in Japanese GDP . Spurred by these fac -
tors, the euro climbed to its highest level since 
October 2008, standing at ¥149 at the begin -
ning of December. However, when it subse -
quently became increasingly evident that the 
ECB Governing Council was likewise going to 
green- light an extensive bond purchase pro -
gramme, the euro quickly relinquished its gains, 
primarily in the new year. At the end of the 
 reporting period the euro stood at ¥136, mean -
ing that the single currency had depreciated 
against the yen by 2% in net terms during this 
time.
Shifts in the value of the euro against the 
pound sterling remained comparatively moder -
ate in the final quarter of 2014. Up to the end 
of November, the euro recorded slight gains 
after the Bank of England had signalled to the 
market that it would probably further delay the 
expected policy rate increase. In the ensuing 
period, the prospect of further substantial 
monetary policy easing in the euro area caused 
the euro to shed value against the pound ster -
ling, too. As this report went to press, it was 
trading at 0.74 pound sterling, 5% below its 
level at the end of September 2014.
With effect from 15 January 2015, the Swiss 
National Bank discontinued the minimum ex -
change rate of CHF1.20 per euro that it had 
introduced in September 2011. At the same 
time, it lowered the rate applying to credit bal -
ances held in current accounts above a given Euro also down 
against the yen …
… and against 
the pound  sterling
Minimum euro 
exchange rate for Swiss franc abandonedExchange rate of the euro
1 Exchange  rate  at  the  start  of  monetary  union  on  4 Janu-
ary 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the currencies of 
19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A S OND J FM
2013 2014 20151.101.201.301.40
130140150
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105110Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: ¥133.73 1
... Swiss franc... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: CHF1.6168 1Launch exchange rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange rate:
103.13 11.001.101.201.301.401.501.601.70CHFDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
38

exemption threshold to -0.75% in order to 
 ensure this abandonment of the currency ceil -
ing would “not lead to an inappropriate tight -
ening of monetary conditions”. The central 
bank justified this move by pointing to the fact 
that the euro and therefore the Swiss franc had 
seen a marked depreciation against the US dol -
lar and that the franc was no longer quite so 
overvalued. Until the reference rate could be 
set, the day on which the cap on the franc was 
abandoned saw the euro depreciating against 
the Swiss currency by 14½%, while the latter 
appreciated against the euro by 17% in net 
terms. Since then, the exchange rate for the 
two currencies has stabilised. Most recently, 
the euro stood at CHF1.06, making it 12½% 
weaker than at the beginning of the final quar -
ter of 2014.
Since the beginning of this year, the effective 
euro rate is no longer calculated against the 
currencies of 20 trading partners but those of 
19 partner countries instead. This is due to the 
fact that Lithuania gave up its previous cur -
rency, the litas, replacing it with the euro at the 
beginning of the year, the irrevocable litas to 
euro exchange rate being 3.4528. As a result, 
all three Baltic countries now use the euro as 
their legal tender. In the wake of the above 
 developments, the effective euro rate, as now 
calculated against the currencies of 19 trading 
partners, is down by 5% compared with the 
beginning of the final quarter of 2014. This was 
accompanied by an improvement in the price 
competitiveness of euro- area exporters.
During the period under review, the euro con -
tinued to gain appreciably against the rouble, 
which is excluded from the calculation of the 
effective euro rate for this group of countries. 
After the rouble was allowed to trade freely in 
November 2014, pre- existing and ongoing 
 adverse factors such as the drop in oil prices, 
the Ukraine conflict and the economic sanc -
tions imposed on Russia were compounded by 
a major rating agency’s decision to downgrade 
the credit rating of Russian government bonds 
to below investment grade status. The euro has now gained 51½% against the rouble since the 
end of September 2014.
Securities markets and  
portfolio transactions
Following activation of the asset- backed secur -
ities and covered bonds purchase programme 
announced by the Eurosystem in September 
2014, and with inflation expectations on the 
decline, there was a growing expectation 
among market participants during the period 
under review that wide- scale purchases of gov -
ernment bonds would be introduced as an Improvement in 
euro- area price competitiveness and introduction of euro in  Lithuania
Dramatic slide in 
value of rouble
European bond market  influenced by monetary policyBond yields in Germany, the rest of the euro area and the USA
Source: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 150123456
–1.00+1.0+2.0Monthly data
%
Percentage
points
PercentagepointsYield spread between
German governmentbonds and thoseof other euro-areacountries
Yield spread between US
and German government bondsYield on ten-year government bonds
outstanding
USAEuro area
excluding
Germany
Germany
01234
++++Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
39

additional monetary policy measure. Given 
these market influences, yields on government 
bonds issued in the euro area narrowed for the 
most part throughout the period under review. 
At its meeting on 22 January 2015, the Govern -
ing Council of the ECB  announced that it would 
be expanding its existing asset purchase pro -
gramme to include bonds specified in greater 
detail and issued by euro- area central govern -
ments, agencies and European institutions. It is 
envisaged that public and private sector secur -
ities totalling €60 billion in value are to be 
bought each month on the secondary market, 
at least until September 2016.1 In this market 
environment, the GDP- weighted yield on ten-  year bonds issued by euro- area countries (ex -
cluding Germany) has contracted by 52 basis 
points since the end of September, falling to a 
historically low level of just over 1.3% at last 
count. Investors’ continued high demand for 
German Federal bonds (Bunds) sent yields on 
ten- year paper to fresh lows. Yields on ten- year 
Bunds eased by 55 basis points, latterly dipping 
to a level of 0.33%.
The expectation of new monetary policy meas -
ures also affected bond yields in other euro-  
area countries, with the exception of Greece. In 
the countries particularly affected by the sover -
eign debt crisis, yields on ten- year government 
bonds declined by more than 40 basis points, 
resulting in new temporary lows for most of 
these countries, too. Yield spreads over Bunds 
with matching maturities mostly narrowed 
slightly on balance, while risk premiums meas -
ured on the basis of CDS spreads remained 
 virtually unchanged. In Greece, uncertainty 
over the need for new parliamentary elections 
and the new government’s economic policy 
stance helped to drive risk premiums higher. 
Ten- year Greek sovereign bonds yielded more 
than 10% in January 2015 for the first time 
since late summer 2013, representing a jump in 
yield of 339 basis points since the end of Sep -
tember 2014.2
On bond markets outside the euro area, geo -
political tensions played something of a lesser 
role in the fourth quarter, with the focus pri -
marily being on the cyclical trajectory of the 
global economy, the lower inflation rates 
caused by falling oil prices and the expectation 
of non- standard monetary policy measures in 
the euro area. In this context, international link -
ages between interest rates came back to the 
fore as of November 2014. US government Yield spreads 
over German Bunds broadly narrower
Yields down on 
international bond marketsFinancing conditions for selected euro-area countries
1 Government  bonds  with  a  residual  maturity  of  ten  years. 
Source: Thomson Reuters. 2 Spreads on ten-year credit default 
swap (CDS) contracts on the basis of government bonds with 
matching maturities. Source: Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20150246810121416
02004006008001,0001,200Weekly averages
% pa
Basis points
Credit default swap spreads 2Yields1Ireland
PortugalSpain
Italy
1 For more detailed information, see pages 23 to 36.
2 There has been a pronounced fall in the market volume 
of Greek bonds as a result of the assistance measures taken 
by the international community. The liquidity of these 
bonds is likely to be fairly low. Moreover, market yields do 
not reflect the Greek state’s interest burden, which essen -
tially depends on the considerably more favourable condi -
tions of the assistance programme.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
40

 securities, too, saw a decline in yields. Only the 
better- than- expected economic data for the 
United States in October 2014 and at the start 
of February 2015 sparked a brief countermove -
ment. On balance, yields on ten- year US Treas -
uries shed 51 basis points from the end of Sep -
tember to stand at 2.0%. The yield spread over 
Bunds with matching maturities expanded by 
4 basis points. The Japanese bond market was 
once again influenced by the further monetary 
accommodation by the Bank of Japan and 
fresh economic stimulus, leading to a yield on 
ten- year Japanese government bonds of 0.4% 
on balance, which is 13 basis points down on 
the end of September 2014.
Since the end of September 2014, the slope of 
the German yield curve derived from the yields 
on Federal securities became flatter still, slip -
ping by 54 basis points to 55 basis points as 
measured by the yield differential between ten- 
year and two- year bonds (see chart top right). 
The narrowing interest rate spread reflects the 
market expectation that short- term interest 
rates will remain persistently low. The debate 
over the current low inflation rates and over 
the  declining inflation expectations were also 
contributory factors. In addition, there was a 
downward shift in the yield curve, meaning 
that yields in the maturity category of up to six 
years are now negative.
Market- based longer- term inflation expect -
ations in the euro area continued to fall in the 
period under review. The five- year forward in -
flation rate in five years based on French and 
German bonds dropped to 1.6% from 1.9% at 
the end of September 2014. A similar tendency 
can be seen in inflation expectations calculated 
on the basis of inflation swaps. International 
factors, such as the steep fall in the price of oil, 
appear to have contributed substantially to this 
development. Indeed, the five- year forward 
 inflation rates in five years in the euro area and 
in the USA have diminished more or less in par -
allel since mid-2014 (see bottom chart on Yield curve 
for Federal  securities
Further fall 
in  inflation 
 expectationsYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.1 Day before the 
ECB Governing Council meeting.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456789 1 00.300.30.60.91.2
–++++
Residual maturity in years12 February 201521 January 2015 130 September 2014%
Forward inflation rates* in the euro area
and the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising from infla-
tion swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban 
Consumers for the USA) realised across the next five or ten 
years. 1 Brent blend (for one-month forward delivery).
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20152.32.62.93.2
1.41.72.02.3Weekly averages
US$% pa
80100120
406080
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swaps
USA
Euro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1
Spread between US and euro-area
forward inflation ratesPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$% paDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
41

page 41).3 The start of this intensified down -
ward trend lags slightly behind the onset of the 
steeper decline in oil prices. A comparison be -
tween inflation expectations derived from the 
swap markets and those based on surveys 
would additionally suggest that an increasingly 
negative inflation risk premium is likely to have 
contributed to the fall in market- based indica -
tors.
On the European corporate bond market the 
financing conditions for enterprises on the cap -
ital market, which were already favourable by 
historical standards, improved even further in 
the period under review. This was especially 
true for financial corporations. The yields on 
their bonds with a residual maturity of seven to 
ten years and a BBB rating shed 93 basis points 
since the end of September 2014 to reach 
2.5% when this report went to press – that is 
more than 2 percentage points down on the 
level immediately before the outbreak of the 
 financial crisis. Equivalent bonds for the non-  financial sector currently yield 1.5%, compared 
with just over 2% at the end of the previous 
quarter.4 Yields for financial sector bonds de -
clined so strongly that the yield spread over 
Bunds with the same maturity narrowed by 47 
basis points, while the equivalent yield spread 
for non- financial corporations remained broadly 
unchanged. It appears that in their search for 
yield, investors are increasingly looking to cor -
porate bonds, which is pushing up their prices.
Gross issuance on the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2014 was slightly down 
on the previous quarter. Overall, German bor -
rowers issued paper worth €330½ billion, 
compared with €331½ billion in the previous 
three months. Net of redemptions and changes 
in issuers’ own holdings, domestic issuers 
 reduced their capital market borrowing by €24 
billion. The fourth quarter saw foreign debt 
 instruments totalling €26½ billion being sold 
on the German bond market. On balance, the 
total outstanding volume of bonds in Germany 
thus climbed by €2 billion in the quarter under 
review.
Domestic credit institutions, which have abun -
dant liquidity, trimmed their capital market 
 borrowing by €18 billion from October to 
Decem ber 2014. “Other bank debt securities”, 
which can be structured flexibly, as well as debt 
securities issued by specialised credit institu -
tions, were the main focus of redemptions 
(€6½ billion in each case). The volume of pub -
lic Pfandbriefe also continued to drift down -
wards (€5½ billion). By contrast, mortgage 
Pfandbriefe worth €½ billion were issued net.
The public sector, where demand for borrow -
ing is also low, redeemed debt instruments 
 totalling €4 billion net in the quarter under Favourable 
 financing  conditions for enterprisesNet redemptions of domestic debt securities
Credit institu-
tions’ capital market debt on the decline
Net public 
 sector  redemptionsCorporate bond yields in the euro area*
Source: Markit. * BBB-rated bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 15036912151821242730%, weekly averages
iBoxx Non-FinancialsiBoxx Financials
iBoxx
Corporates
3 The days before and after the decision of the ECB Gov -
erning Council on an expanded asset purchase programme 
(EAPP) saw increased fluctuation, with no clear trend, in 
the five- year forward inflation rates in five years in the euro 
area.
4 These calculations are based on the corporate bond 
yields included in the various iBoxx bond indices for differ -
ent rating grades.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
42

 review. This is, on balance, solely attributable 
to the state governments, which took bonds 
worth €6½ billion net out of the market. For its 
part, the Federal government, and the reso -
lution agency classified as part of central gov -
ernment, mainly issued ten- year and 30-year 
bonds (for €10 billion and €2 billion respect -
ively). This contrasted with net redemptions of 
five- year Federal notes totalling €6½ billion 
and Federal Treasury discount paper worth 
€5½ billion.
The final quarter of 2014 saw domestic enter -
prises tapering their capital market debt in Ger -
many by €1½ billion. These redemptions were, 
on balance, solely attributable to other finan -
cial intermediaries without a banking licence 
(€5½ billion), while non- financial corporations 
issued debt instruments to the net value of 
€4 billion.
In the fourth quarter of 2014, debt securities 
were bought exclusively by German non- banks, 
which added €26½ billion worth of bonds to 
their portfolios in net terms. In contrast, fixed- 
income securities were divested above all by 
domestic credit institutions (€13 billion), but 
also by foreign investors (€10 billion). “Window 
dressing” at the end of the financial year may 
well have played a role in this context.
Against the backdrop of accommodative mon -
etary policy in the key currency areas and fall -
ing oil prices, international stock markets have 
proven to be largely buoyant in the latter part 
of 2014 and in early 2015. What is more, unlike 
in the euro area, the growth outlook for the 
United States and Japan did not need to be 
 revised downwards in response to the Consen -
sus forecast in the fourth quarter of 2014. This 
catalyst caused both the US and Japanese stock 
markets to initially distinctly outperform the 
Euro Stoxx. However, European equity markets 
soared in January 2015 on the back of the ECB 
Governing Council’s decision on the QE pro -
gramme. When this report went to press, the 
US and Japanese stock markets, as measured 
by the S&P 500 and the Nikkei, were 5.9% and 11.2% up respectively on their levels at the end 
of September 2014, compared with a figure of 
8.8% for the Euro Stoxx.
European stock markets have put in a very 
mixed performance since the end of Septem -
ber 2014. Prices rose especially strongly in the 
core euro- area countries, while stock markets 
in some periphery countries took a hefty tum -
ble. For example, Germany’s broad CDAX 
ratcheted up gains of 15.9%, whereas Greek 
and Portuguese equities shed 20.3% and 9.6% 
respectively of their value. The losses suffered 
by the Spanish stock market were less severe.
These developments were driven by more than 
just the divergent economic outlooks for the 
individual countries; market participants also 
took a nuanced view of banks’ current and 
 future prospects. Bank equities suffered dispro -
portionately heavy losses, particularly in the 
periphery countries. On balance, European 
bank equities are 8.5% down on their value at Net redemption 
of corporate bonds
Debt securities 
bought solely by German non- banks
Equity markets 
largely upbeatMixed  performance by European 
equitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 8.1 17.1 12.1
Credit institutions –  0.6 4.9 – 12.8
of which
Foreign debt securities 2.3 3.4 7.4
Deutsche Bundesbank –  2.1 – 3.7 –  1.6
Other sectors 10.8 15.9 26.5
of which
Domestic debt securities –  8.0 1.8 7.1
Non-residents – 19.9 1.7 –  9.9
Shares
Residents –  7.0 0.7 6.3
Credit institutions –  2.2 2.3 4.4
of which
Domestic shares –  1.9 0.7 4.5
Non-banks –  4.8 – 1.6 1.9
of which
Domestic shares –  1.7 – 0.3 –  6.7
Non-residents 4.9 5.9 3.8
Mutual fund shares 1
Investment in specialised funds 29.1 20.7 31.3
Investment in retail funds –  0.5 0.4 –  1.5
of which
Equity funds 1.2 – 3.2 –  4.4
1 Figures for the fourth quarter of 2014 are provisional.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
43

the end of September (see above chart), prob -
ably because of market participants’ doubts 
about banks’ business models in the light of 
the slump in profits from investment banking 
and the prospect of lending margins drying up 
in the medium term as a result of interest rates 
reaching new lows. Analysts’ short- term out -
look, however, does not appear to be quite as 
downbeat, raising their earnings forecasts for 
the banking sector for the next 12 months by 
1.8% on this side of the Atlantic and by 3.3% 
on the other side of the pond.
The price rises mentioned earlier have driven 
the price- earnings ratio of European and US equities based on earnings forecasts to 14.8 
and 16.4 respectively, sending the figure for 
Euro Stoxx to its highest level since 2004. By 
means of a dividend discount model it is pos -
sible to quantify the implied cost of equity 
which reflects the stock price as well as 
 medium- term earnings growth and the divi -
dend level. For European enterprises, the real 
cost of equity is now more than one percent -
age point down on its relatively high level in 
September 2014. Entrenched expectations of 
quantitative easing measures by the Eurosys -
tem are likely to have been a contributory 
 factor. Meanwhile, the real cost of equity has 
remained unchanged for US enterprises. Taking 
into account the roughly 60 basis- point drop in 
long- term US and German real interest rates, as 
indicated by Consensus inflation expectations, 
the implied equity premium is up 48 basis 
points for US enterprises and down 53 basis 
points for their European counterparts. At the 
same time, expected implied stock market 
volatility, which is derived from stock options, 
increased on both sides of the Atlantic on bal -
ance. Together with the increased dispersion of 
analysts’ forecasts, this indicates heightened 
levels of uncertainty on stock markets. The in -
creased equity premium in the United States 
also suggests a slightly increased risk percep -
tion among investors there.
On balance, funding raised on the German 
stock market totalled €1½ billion in the report -
ing quarter. The volume of foreign shares on 
the German market rose by €8½ billion in the 
same period. In net terms, equities were pur -
chased by German credit institutions (€4½ bil -
lion) and foreign investors (€4 billion), as well 
as in smaller volumes by domestic non- banks 
(€2 billion).
The changeover in reporting standards as of 
December 2014 means that final figures for the 
sales and purchases of investment fund shares 
in the fourth quarter of 2014 are not yet avail -
able. Preliminary data suggest that domestic 
investment companies recorded inflows of 
€30 billion in the final quarter of 2014, com -Increased 
stock market  uncertainty
Almost no funds 
raised on equity market
Sales and 
 purchases of 
 investment 
fund sharesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Ex-
pected future volatility calculated using the prices of options 
on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Monthly, lin scale
Price/earnings ratio based on
12-month earnings expectations
Euro StoxxEuro Stoxx
Euro Stoxx
Banks%End of December 2008 = 100, log scale
Price indicesWeekly averages
% Implied volatility of Euro Stoxx 15075100125150
3691215
1020304050
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
44

pared with €21 billion in the previous quarter. 
On balance, the inflows were channelled exclu -
sively to specialised funds reserved for institu -
tional investors (€31½ billion). Of the various 
asset classes, it was above all mixed security-  
based funds (€9½ billion), bond funds (€7 bil -
lion) and open- end real estate funds (€1½ bil -
lion) which attracted inflows of funds, some in 
significant amounts. By contrast, equity funds 
redeemed their own shares to the tune of 
€7½  billion net. The outstanding volume of 
foreign mutual fund shares in Germany rose by 
€6½ billion in the period under review. Invest -
ment fund shares were bought on balance 
 exclusively by domestic non- banks, which 
added paper worth €40 billion to their port -
folios. The vast majority of this paper was 
 issued by domestic mutual funds. By contrast, 
non- resident investors and domestic credit in -
stitutions offloaded investment fund shares 
worth €3½ billion and €½ billion respectively.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows amounting to €45 bil -
lion in the fourth quarter of 2014, there were 
also net capital exports in the direct investment 
account, albeit in the much smaller amount of 
€28 billion. Alongside investments by German 
enterprises abroad, the outflows of funds also 
reflect a reduction in intra- group liabilities to 
foreign countries.
Domestic owners provided their foreign 
branches with funding totalling €18 billion 
from October to December 2014. They chiefly 
topped up their equity capital (by a total of €19 
billion), reinvesting profits of €2½ billion in 
 affiliated enterprises abroad. In terms of intra-  
group funding, the issuance and repayment of 
cross- border loans practically balanced each 
other out (-€½ billion). German corporate in -
vestment abroad is essentially broadly diversi -
fied in regional terms. In the fourth quarter, 
direct investments were up slightly in the Neth -Capital exports 
in direct  investment
German direct 
investment abroadMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2013 2014
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I Current account + 59.4 + 53.8 + 66.6
1 Goods 1 + 51.3 + 61.6 + 60.4
2 Services 2 –  7.2 – 18.2 –  7.6
3 Primary income + 26.4 + 18.3 + 25.2
4 Secondary income – 11.2 –  8.0 – 11.4
II Capital account 0.0 +  0.8 –  0.7
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 74.9 + 79.5 + 71.7
1 Direct investment – 10.0 + 25.7 + 27.9
Domestic investment 
abroad +  1.1 + 19.3 + 18.2
Foreign investment in the reporting country + 11.1 –  6.3 –  9.8
2 Portfolio investment + 34.0 + 23.2 + 45.0
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 23.7 + 27.2 + 35.8
Shares
3 –  2.9 –  0.1 +  3.3
Investment fund shares 4+  8.3 + 12.8 +  6.3
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  0.4 +  2.5 +  1.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 17.7 + 16.2 + 29.0
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 12.0 + 11.9 + 20.3
Short-term debt  securities
7 +  0.5 –  1.7 –  2.7
Foreign investment in 
 domestic debt securities – 10.3 +  4.0 –  9.2
Shares 3 +  4.2 +  5.5 +  4.1
Investment fund shares +  5.4 –  3.2 –  3.4
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 10.9 –  7.0 +  6.7
of which
Public bonds and 
notes 8 + 16.4 –  6.4 +  7.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 – 30.8 +  8.6 – 16.6
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  6.0 +  6.8 +  6.7
4 Other investment 10 + 43.4 + 23.6 –  6.3
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 + 63.8 – 27.4 + 31.2
Enterprises and  households
12 + 21.9 –  0.7 – 24.9
General government +  9.1 +  8.2 +  8.7
Bundesbank – 51.4 + 43.4 – 21.3
5 Reserve assets 13 +  1.5 +  0.3 –  1.7
IV Errors and omissions 14 + 15.5 + 24.9 +  5.7
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4 Including reinvestment of earnings. 
5  Up to and including 2012, without accrued interest. Long- term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
45

erlands, Luxembourg, the United States and 
China.
Foreign direct investment in Germany was 
 almost €10 billion down in the final quarter of 
2014. Non- resident enterprises lifted their equity capital in Germany by nearly €5 billion 
but simultaneously scaled back the funding 
provided as direct investment loans by €14½ 
billion. Intra- group credit transactions chiefly 
saw the repayment of previously issued loans.Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
46

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Following extended periods of weak growth 
during 2014, economic activity in Germany 
 regained considerable momentum even before 
the turn of the year. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP in 
the final quarter of 2014 expanded strongly by 
a seasonally and calendar- adjusted 0.7% com -
pared with the preceding quarter, when only 
very modest growth of 0.1% had been re -
corded. Growth in economic output was thus 
1.6% for 2014 as a whole; compared with the 
first preliminary report in January, this repre -
sents an upward revision of 0.1 percentage 
point. Given that corporate sentiment did not 
begin to rebound until November, it is remark -
able how quickly and, in particular, how 
strongly economic growth in Germany picked 
up towards the end of last year.
The slide in oil prices and the depreciation of 
the euro, which began in mid-2014 and 
showed a marked acceleration at the end of 
the year, have considerably altered some key 
indicators of the global setting. Enterprises 
consequently stepped up their production 
– despite the moderate expectations for global 
economic growth – in the hope of an improve -
ment in business. The upward movement was 
not based solely on export markets, however. 
An especially strong stimulus came from do -
mestic demand. The background to this was 
the considerable increase in purchasing power 
due to the decline in energy prices, which 
helped to strongly boost private consumption. 
According to rough estimates, Germany’s oil 
bill fell by €3½ billion in the second half of 
2014, with the bulk of this saving being real -
ised in the final quarter of the year. The saving 
could turn out to be even greater in the current 
year. A large part of the energy price- induced 
stimulus, however, is likely to have already 
been reflected in the high level of consumption 
at the end of last year, whereas the effects of the euro depreciation on exports are likely to 
emerge only gradually. The boost to the Ger -
man economy that is to be expected from 
 external determinants is therefore not yet likely 
to have been exhausted in the reporting period.
The German economy’s export sales showed a 
further perceptible rise in the final three months 
of 2014. Goods exports expanded by a season -
ally adjusted 1¼% compared with the third 
quarter, which had already shown a consider -
able increase. There was probably also a pick-  
up in exports to both euro- area and non- euro- 
area countries. According to regional data cur -
rently available up to November, there was a 
further substantial rise in exports to the indus -
trial countries and the emerging market econ -
omies of south and east Asia, although the 
pace of growth in business with China slowed 
down. Sales of goods to the United Kingdom Rapid recovery 
from dip in growth
Economic 
 activity stimu-lated by  dramatic decline in oil prices and euro  depreciationMarked rise 
in exports …
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014949698100102104106108
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
47

and to central and east European EU countries, 
and possibly also to the USA, continued to rise 
after a major increase in sales to these coun -
tries had already been recorded in the third 
quarter. By contrast, sales to Japan might have 
declined again following strong growth in the 
summer quarter. The marked downward trend 
in trade with Russia continued.
In the final quarter of 2014, exports received a 
substantial boost from trade in motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts, which had receded 
somewhat in the third quarter. Significantly 
more machinery was also exported. By con -
trast, exports of computers, electronic and  optical products as well as electrical equipment 
did not expand on a comparable scale. Capital 
goods exports showed a marked increase on 
the whole, whereas exports of intermediate 
and consumer goods were more subdued. 
Nevertheless, exports of both intermediate and 
consumer goods performed better in the third 
quarter than capital goods.
In real terms, the increase in imports in the 
fourth quarter matched growth in exports. 
 Imports of goods were up 1½% on the quarter 
in price and seasonally adjusted terms, with 
 imports from both euro- area and non- euro-  
area countries posting an increase. Owing to 
the drop in energy prices, the total value of im -
ports rose by a mere ½% on the third quarter, 
however. Price- adjusted energy imports went 
up particularly sharply in October and Novem -
ber. Imports of consumer goods also showed a 
significant rise, with pharmaceutical products 
playing a significant part in this. Imports of 
intermediate goods likewise picked up dis -
tinctly. By contrast, there was a further slight 
decline in imports of capital goods, which was 
due, in part, to other transport equipment, 
which is generally a volatile sector. Imports of 
machinery were also down. This contrasted 
with a steep rise in imports of motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts. This was possibly con -
nected with the increase in motor vehicle 
 exports owing to the close international pro -
duction ties in the automotive industry. Imports 
of information and communications technol -
ogy (ICT) products and electrical equipment 
again recorded moderate growth.
Investment in machinery and equipment is 
 unlikely to have generated any stimuli in the 
final quarter of 2014 after the recovery in 
 investment had suffered a set- back in the 
third quarter in view of the temporary deterior -
ation in sentiment. Although more German-  
manufactured machinery was sold to domestic 
customers in the reporting period, imports of 
machinery  declined. Motor vehicle registration 
figures show somewhat higher new purchases 
of commercial vehicles and commercially used … especially 
motor vehicles and machineryImports also 
rose perceptibly
Investment in 
machinery and equipment  lacking momen-tum, but greater  investment in buildings90100110120Underlying trends in foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Oct-
Nov 8090100110120
Oct-
Nov
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
48

passenger cars. By contrast, there was probably 
more investment in buildings again in the final 
quarter of the year than in the third quarter. 
This is indicated by the growth in main con -
struction output. Private housing construction 
has been tending to lose momentum, but de -
mand conditions in this construction subsector 
were so favourable up to the end of the period 
under review that, in terms of construction in -
vestment as a whole, they not only offset the 
lack of impetus from industrial construction, 
but also the public sector reluctance to engage 
in new construction projects.
Private consumption saw very sharp growth 
again in the final quarter of 2014. The signifi -
cant decline in energy prices provided a further 
boost to consumer demand in an environment 
that has already been buoyed for some time by 
marked pay rises and low unemployment. 
 Retail turnover in the fourth quarter suggests 
that households took advantage of the re -
duced strain on their budgets – due chiefly to 
considerably lower fuel prices – to make other 
consumer purchases. Furthermore, a number 
of households also benefited from heating cost 
reimbursements towards the end of the year as 
a late effect of the very mild winter weather at 
the beginning of 2014. Households held back 
on making heating oil purchases in October 
and November. They were evidently speculat -
ing about further price cuts given the dramatic 
fall in crude oil prices, especially as households 
tend to still have sufficient reserves in their oil 
tanks at the beginning of the heating season. 
Households’ increased real spending capacity 
was not reflected in the figures for private 
motor vehicle registrations up to the end of the 
year, but the sharp rise in domestic motor 
 vehicle orders gives reason to expect that this 
will be the case in the first half of 2015.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output in the final quarter of 2014 
was up ½% on the quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms. Industrial enterprises stepped up their output again slightly in light of the im -
proved order situation after cutting back their 
production in the second and third quarters. 
Intermediate goods manufacturers increased 
their output by a seasonally adjusted ¾%, 
thereby offsetting the losses of the previous 
quarter. In the reporting period, the seasonally 
adjusted production of capital goods remained 
virtually at the third- quarter level, which, buck -
ing the overall trend, saw an increase. This was 
due mainly to the fact that the production of 
machinery had been at a particularly high level. 
The sector did not quite match this in the 
fourth quarter. By contrast, there was an in -
crease in the manufacture of motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts following a decline in 
the third quarter. The manufacture of other 
transport equipment again showed a further 
marked increase in output. Consumer goods 
output rose by 1% on the quarter.
Utilisation of tangible fixed assets in industry 
also rose in line with the expansion in output. Very sharp 
growth in  private con-sumption again
Industrial output 
pointing  upwards againOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Industry
859095100105110
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
49

According to Ifo Institute data, manufacturing 
firms  reported that utilisation was running at 
84½% of normal full capacity in January 2015. 
The longer- term average of 84%, which can be 
 interpreted as a normal degree of utilisation, 
was therefore exceeded for the first time in 
 almost three years.
Construction output in the fourth quarter was 
down by a seasonally adjusted 1% on the quar -
ter. This was due mainly to the extremely weak 
performance of the finishing trades towards 
the end of the year, according to the statistics, 
which showed a 3½% decline on the quarter. 
Data on the finishing trades are, however, sus -
ceptible to fairly strong fluctuations and are 
highly prone to revision. By contrast, output in 
main construction in the fourth quarter of 
2014, with an increase of 1%, was up consider -
ably on its rather weak level in the second and 
third quarters. The expansion in civil engineer -
ing was markedly greater than building con -
struction. The continued very high level of util -
isation of machinery and equipment reflects 
the unchanged positive cyclical position of the 
main construction sector. Energy output rose 
perceptibly in the fourth quarter by a season -
ally adjusted 1¾%.
There is likely to have been positive economic 
activity in the services sector in the final quarter 
of 2014. The services industries, in particular, 
were feeling the effects of the current sizeable 
contribution to growth made by domestic 
 activity, which is being supported by very strong 
private consumption at present. This is sug -
gested by the favourable assessments of the 
business situation in major sectors of the econ -
omy which are reported to the Ifo Institute. The 
increase in the mileage of domestic heavy 
goods vehicles subject to tolls on motorways 
suggests that business activity has picked up in 
the transport sector. While the turnover of 
wholesale firms was only marginally up on the 
quarter, motor vehicle sales did not quite match 
their elevated level of the third quarter. 
Consumption-  related service providers did, 
however, benefit from German households’ high propensity to purchase. This was also re -
flected in the sharp rise in retail sales. Hotels 
and restaurants are also likely to have increased 
their turnover strongly.
Employment  
and labour market
The labour market in the fourth quarter of 
2014 was characterised by both a stable 
 upward tendency in employment and a marked 
decline in unemployment. One factor in this is 
that firms again recruited more persons from 
among the unemployed. For one thing, there 
was a greater need for labour in the services 
industries, which are booming at present. For 
another, replacements had to be found for 
workers taking up the option of early retire -
ment on a full state pension at the age of 63. 
The rapid increase in the number of vacancies 
reveals that it was not possible to meet the 
growing demand for labour immediately.
The number of persons in work in Germany 
rose by 84,000 in the fourth quarter of 2014 
after adjustment for seasonal variations. Em -
ployment growth therefore stood at 0.2% as it 
did in the third quarter. The increase in regular 
jobs subject to social security contributions 
continued to provide the basis for this. On an 
average of October and November, an add -
itional 100,000 jobs subject to social security 
contributions were filled, which was an in -
crease of 0.3% on the third quarter. Broken 
down by sector, the strongest growth in rela -
tive terms was in employment in business-  
related services (including temporary agency 
employment, which is on the increase again) 
and in the hotel and restaurant sector (+¾% in 
each case), as well as in the health and social 
work sector and the logistics sector (+½% in 
each case). There was an increase on average 
in the number of positions filled in manufactur -
ing and trade. There was marginal growth in 
the construction sector.Rise in industrial 
capacity  utilisation
Construction 
output showing sideways move-ment, energy 
production 
much higher
Continued 
 upward trend in 
services sector 
activityStable employ-
ment growth and decline in unemployment
Growth in jobs 
subject to social security contri-
butions in Q4 
primarily in 
 services sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
50

On an average of 2014, employment subject to 
social security contributions, with an increase 
of an estimated 500,000 jobs (+1.7%), likewise 
showed stronger growth than employment 
overall, which went up by 370,000 persons 
(+0.9%). According to the data available at 
present, the number of persons employed 
 exclusively in low- paid part- time work is, at 
best, likely to have seen only marginal growth 
on an annual average. The number of self-  
employed persons fell by 1.2% last year. 
 Furthermore, there were significantly fewer 
persons employed in the secondary labour 
market in job creation schemes, such as 
 government- assisted working arrangements 
(one- euro workfare jobs) and community work. 
The  decline in unemployment in 2014, at 
52,000 persons, once again fell a long way 
short of the increase in employment. As in 
 previous years, the labour force potential went 
up considerably as a result of labour market-  
oriented immigration. According to a current 
estimate by the Federal Statistical Office, net 
migration amounted to at least 470,000 per -
sons in 2014, compared with 430,000 in the 
previous year. A large part of this increase is 
probably attributable to civil- war refugees and 
asylum seekers, although they are not granted 
immediate access to the labour market.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment fell by 
36,000 to 2.87 million in the fourth quarter of 
2014 compared with the average of the third 
quarter. The unemployment rate fell by 0.1 per -
centage point to 6.6%. The number of un -
employed persons covered by the statutory 
 insurance scheme declined around twice as 
sharply as the number of persons receiving the 
basic welfare allowance. This difference can be 
explained primarily by a greater number of the 
more short- term unemployed being able to 
find a new job again recently. Registered un -
employment declined further in January 2015, 
albeit at a slower pace than in the final three 
months of 2014. According to the figures of 
the Federal Employment Agency, 2.84 million 
persons are currently out of work, which cor -
responds to an unemployment rate of 6.5%.Growth in 
 employment in 2014 again due primarily to high level of labour market- oriented immigration
Perceptible fall 
in registered  unemployment in Q4Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fe-
deral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclu-
ding  seasonal  jobs  and  jobs  located  abroad.  3 From  May 
2009, unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Jan40.541.041.542.042.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Million
Million200300400500Thou-
sand
Thou-
sand
Thou-sandOfficially unemployed
 3Unemployed
Year-on-year change1TotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct-
NovDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
51

The labour market could pick up momentum in 
the coming months, especially with regard to 
employment. In January 2015, the Ifo employ -
ment barometer, which provides information 
on the employment plans of enterprises over 
the coming three months, climbed to its high -
est level in almost three years. According to the 
most recent survey carried out by the German 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), 
however, firms’ hiring intentions are less 
 expansionary. This is likely to be due to the fact 
that, in a number of services sectors and 
 regions, the general statutory minimum wage 
is being seen as a labour cost risk – something 
which is reflected to a greater extent in the 
 results of the DIHK survey than in the Ifo Insti -
tute’s data.
The number of vacancies registered with the 
Federal Employment Agency in the final quarter 
of 2014 was up by a seasonally adjusted 25,000 
on the quarter, and by a further 15,000 after 
the turn of the year. There was also a consider -
able increase in the Federal Employment 
 Agency’s BA-  X job index, which besides the 
quarterly stock figures, also records the inflow 
of newly reported vacancies for unsubsidised 
jobs. The current quite high number of vacan -
cies is an indication that a cyclically induced rise 
in demand, especially from the labour- intensive 
services sectors, appears to be accompanied by 
a still unmet need to find replacements follow -
ing the early retirement of experienced skilled 
professionals in connection with the option to 
 retire on a full pension at the age of 63. It can 
therefore be assumed that registered un -
employment will continue to decline in season -
ally adjusted terms. In any event, the IAB  labour 
market barometer, which is based on surveys 
of the managers of all the local employment 
agencies, has moved into positive territory in 
recent months.
Wages and prices
The 2014 pay round brought employees an 
average year- on- year rise of 3.0% in their  negotiated rates of pay.1 This means that the 
increases in rates of remuneration negotiated 
by management and labour were the highest 
in almost 20 years. According to the provisional 
figures of the Federal Statistical Office, actual 
earnings grew slightly more moderately at 
2.7%. A key reason for the negative wage drift 
of 0.3 percentage point, as in the previous 
year, was that voluntary payments made by 
employers, such as bonuses, were again smaller 
given the temporarily more difficult economic 
setting.
Negotiated rates of pay rose by 2.8% in the 
final quarter of 2014 compared with the same 
period of the previous year. As in the third 
quarter, the increase thus remained well down 
on the rates of the first six months of the year 
(+3¼%). This slowdown was due, on the one 
hand, to the collective labour agreements of 
the past two years often agreeing multi- stage 
rises with the largest increase at the beginning 
of the  validity period. On the other hand, the 
wage agreements concluded after mid-2014 
provided for somewhat more moderate in -
creases owing to the economic slowdown and 
special sector- specific factors. Trade unions’ 
wage  demands for the 2015 pay round range 
so far from just under 5% to 6% and are thus 
somewhat lower than in last year’s negoti -
ations. This is due, firstly, to the fact that eco -
nomic expectations, despite the improvement 
of the past months, are still lagging behind 
what was hoped for a year earlier. Secondly, 
this time some trade unions want pay negoti -
ations to focus more on qualitative elements, 
such as  arrangements for phased retirement 
and training.
The general statutory minimum wage of 
€8.50 per hour entered into force on 1 January 
2015. It applies, with exceptions for some cat -Positive labour 
market develop-ments expected to continue
Large number of 
vacanciesNegotiated rates of pay increase by 3% in 2014 but negative wage drift
Wage demands 
in 2015 slightly lower than last year
General and 
sector- specific minimum wages
1 The Federal Statistical Office is provisionally reporting an 
increase of 3.1% on the year in negotiated rates of pay 
( including one- off payments and fringe benefits). The slight 
difference compared with the Bundesbank’s pay index is 
due to the various industry- specific employee weightings in 
the respective pay indexes.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
52

egories of employees, in all economic sectors 
apart from those industries where the German 
federal government has declared sector- specific 
minimum wage levels to be generally binding, 
which occurred most recently in agriculture 
and forestry as well as horticulture. This sector 
belongs to the six industries making use of the 
transitional arrangement allowing pay below 
the general minimum wage to the end of 2017. 
The others are the meat industry nationally and 
in eastern Germany hairdressing, temporary 
agency work, textile and clothing and large 
laundries.
The fall in crude oil prices is the key factor 
shaping price developments at all stages of the 
economy at the current end. The countervail -
ing trend in domestic wage costs and the 
marked depreciation of the euro against other 
major currencies will become more apparent in 
the headline rates only once the direct effects 
of falling oil prices have run their course. The 
annual rates for import, producer and con -
sumer prices are therefore likely to be negative 
in the next few months if crude oil prices do 
not increase any further.
The decline in energy import prices accelerated 
markedly in the final months of 2014. On an 
average of the fourth quarter, import prices 
were almost one- fifth down on the year. There 
was even a decline of just over one- quarter in 
December. If energy is excluded, import prices 
were showing a slight upward tendency in the 
fourth quarter, however, with the euro depre -
cation gradually having more influence here. 
While depreciation also meant that import 
prices (excluding energy) from non- euro- area 
countries increased by 1.2% on the year, im -
port prices from other euro- area countries 
were down slightly by 0.4%. The upward 
movement of import prices for intermediate 
and consumer goods was more pronounced 
than for capital goods. Domestic sales prices 
for energy receded more slowly than import 
prices owing to the greater role played in the 
former by electricity and gas – the prices of 
which did not fall as much as those of refined petroleum products. The prices of consumer 
goods eased owing to discounts on food prod -
ucts. The moderate upward price tendency 
continued in the case of intermediate and cap -
ital goods. On the back of energy prices, the 
annual rates for domestic sales prices declined 
by 0.4 percentage point to -1.2% and for 
 imports by 0.6 percentage point to -2.4%. As 
export sales prices went up slightly in fact by 
0.2%, the terms of trade showed a consider -
able improvement.
Price inflation for domestic construction work 
continued to ease. The year- on- year figure for 
construction prices narrowed to 1.6% in the 
fourth quarter. In housing construction, the 
prices of the finishing trades rose a little more 
strongly than structural work. In this context, it 
is significant that cement has become cheaper 
recently. The calming of prices on the housing 
markets continued up to the end of the year. 
According to bulwiengesa AG data, the prices 
of freehold apartments in the seven largest 
German cities increased by 5½% in the fourth 
quarter, following annual growth rates of 5¾% 
in the third quarter and 7% in the first half of 
the year. More detailed comments on house 
price developments last year can be found on 
pages 55 to 57.Drop in oil price 
determines price trends
Excluding energy, 
import prices pointing up-wards,  producer 
prices not yetIncrease in con-struction prices continues to slow downNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding additional benefits and lump-sum payments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201400.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,
total
Basic pay 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
53

Consumer prices eased quite clearly by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.3% in the final three months 
of 2014 compared with the preceding quarter. 
This was mainly due to lower energy prices. 
Prices for food and industrial goods (excluding 
energy) showed very little change. Prices for 
services and rents continued their moderate 
upward trend. The annual rates of the national 
consumer price index (CPI) and of the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) declined 
further, from 0.8% in both cases, to 0.5% and 
0.4% respectively.
The increase in consumer prices also clearly 
flattened out when looking at 2014 as a whole. 
According to the CPI, consumer prices went up 
by only 0.9% (0.8% according to the HICP). 
The increase had been as much as 1.5% (1.6%) 
in the previous year. A large part of this moder -
ation can be explained by the decline in energy 
prices. Nevertheless, even if energy is excluded, 
price inflation contracted from 1.6% to 1.3% 
(1.2%) and was thus weaker than would have 
been expected in view of the position of the 
German economy and the favourable labour 
market situation. Key factors here were, firstly, 
that the extremely strong surge in food prices 
of the past two years did not continue and, 
secondly, that there was no substantial acceler -
ation in the upward movement of prices for 
 industrial goods and services. This was im -
peded by the appreciation of the euro, at least 
in the first half of last year, and, later, by price 
reductions for package holidays. Furthermore, 
housing rents are increasing only slowly. By 
contrast, the GDP deflator, which records the 
price components of domestic value added, 
 increased by 1.7% last year, which is approxi -
mately as strongly as is to be expected given 
normal aggregate capacity utilisation.
Consumer prices in Germany continued their 
decline at the beginning of 2015 and the year- 
on- year- rate turned negative. Measured in 
terms of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), it 
 decreased to -0.4% and HICP inflation fell by 
as much as -0.5%. Along with the continued 
sharp decline in energy prices, this was due to Energy drives 
fall in consumer prices
Only moderate 
rise in consumer prices in 2014
Energy main 
reason for  negative year- on- year rate in JanuaryExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 159095100105110
95100105110
95100 100105110
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Jan95100105
JanDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
54

Housing prices in 2014 in Germany
Housing prices in Germany continued their 
clear upward trend in 2014, although at a 
markedly slower pace than in previous 
years. This was particularly true for apart-
ments in urban real estate markets, whereas 
prices for single- family houses in urban centres continued to rise substantially. 
 Declining interest in buying residential prop-
erty in the previously particularly booming 
submarkets could have played a role in the 
easing of the price trend in Germany as a whole. The price level in these segments, 
measured in terms of medium to long- term 
economic and demographic conditions, is 
estimated to still be at a fairly high level. In 
addition, the expansion of the housing 
stock has since progressed noticeably.
According to calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG, housing prices in 
German cities rose by an average of 5¼% in 
2014, after having increased by 7¼% in 2013. This means that the rate of growth has decreased for the fi  rst time since the upturn in the housing markets began in 2010. This reporting is based on compre-hensively revised price indices, which do 
not, however, paint a fundamentally differ-ent picture for the previous years in qualita-tive terms. Quantitative effects on the com-
posite index arise, on the one hand, from 
the fact that the reporting sample was ex-
panded to include price data for detached 
single- family houses.1 Taken in isolation, the 
below- average increase in the prices of  detached single- family houses in recent years pulled down the rates of change in the price aggregate. On the other hand, 
 individual data relating to regions and type 
of property are now weighted using their systematic shares in the total number of 
transactions.2 Stock- weighted price indices are also provided based on a new and 
homogenous data set.3
In the reporting year, the differences in price rises between the regions and be-
tween individual property types diminished 
again. This was primarily due to the fact that infl  ation in the housing markets in major cities, which had stood at almost 10% per year on average from 2010 to 2013, decreased significantly (+5½%). 
 Although slowing price dynamics were also observed on average in the other cities, the 
increase in prices for freehold apartments, 
at 5¼%, was closer to the rates recorded in the preceding three years. It also marginally 
exceeded the price increase for houses. In 
the major cities, by contrast, houses saw greater price rises than apartments in the 
period under review. Overall, prices for resi-
dential properties in those cities rose by 5¾%, which was considerably lower than 
in the preceding three years.
1 By contrast, a number of data revisions and the 
 expansion of the group of cities to include Bayreuth 
and Schweinfurt, taking the total to 127 cities, have no 
notable impact.
2 The new weighting system aggregates housing 
prices at the administrative district level, which was not previously possible due to a lack of appropriate 
weights. To date, property- specifi  c prices were region-
ally consolidated on the basis of population fi  gures. 
For Germany as a whole, the aggregation of the prices of single- family houses and apartments was based on 
various data sources, such as construction statistics and survey results. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Real  estate prices in Germany in 2008, Monthly Report, 
February 2009, pp 52-53.
3 Stock- weighted price indices may be useful for 
 analysing wealth effects and fl  uctuations in the value 
of real estate assets pledged as collateral for a loan, for example. For a more detailed explanation of the newly 
weighted price indicators, including a  description of the methodology, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Report on the methodology of housing price  indices, avail-able  online at: www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/DE/ 
Standardartikel/Statistiken/publikationen_preise.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
55

The weakened price dynamics in the Ger-
man real estate market in 2014 in those 
segments which previously experienced the 
strongest momentum are also demon-
strated by other price indicators. According to data provided by the Association of Ger-
man Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher 
Pfandbriefbanken, vdp), the price index for 
freehold apartments increased by an esti-
mated 3% in 2014, following a rise of 5% 
the year before. Taking into account the 
fact that prices for owner- occupied houses 
rose steeply over the course of the report-
ing year, however, the annual rate of in-crease in the vdp price index for owner- 
occupied housing could have been roughly 
as high as in 2013 (+3¼%). According to the results of  the composite index pub-
lished by Hypoport AG, price increases for 
residential property declined from 5% in 
2013 to 2¾% in 2014.4
The calming in the urban housing markets 
is also refl  ected in rents. As in 2013, rents 
for new lettings of existing apartments and 
rents for fi  rst- time occupancy saw some-
what weaker rises than in the previous year. Greater rent adjustments than before were observed in the major cities with respect to new contracts for existing apartments. An-
ticipatory effects in connection with the planned cap on rents in new contracts 
could have played a role in this segment.
The expansion of the housing supply, which 
has been discernible since prices for resi-
dential property began rising substantially in 2010, contributed to dampening the 
4 The regionally broad- based Destatis house price 
index shows that housing prices rose by 2¾% in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2014, the most recent for which data is 
currently available, after an increase of 3% in 2013. 
The composite index of bulwiengesa AG for all 402 
administrative districts, which rose more than the vdp index in 2012 and 2013 by an average of 1½ percent-age points, also looks set to show a stronger increase in the reporting year.Selected price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price data provided by bulwiengesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 20142010 = 100, annual values, log scale
9296100104108112116120124128132136
96100104108112116
96100104108112116120
96100104108112
Federal Statistical Office
(Destatis) house price indexHypoport AG
composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
quarterly7 major cities127 towns and citiesTotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
56

price trend in the past year. With an esti-
mated 285,000 building permits granted 
for housing units in new and existing build-
ings, planned construction activity in the  reporting year exceeded the level in the 
previous year, when around 270,000 build-
ing applications were approved. The chief 
increase was in approvals for the construc-
tion of apartments in new multiple- family houses, which are now likely to make up just over half of all approved construction 
projects in new buildings. By contrast, ap-
provals for the construction of new build-
ings containing one or two units have not 
picked up signifi  cantly since a clear increase in 2011. Overall, it is likely that considerably 
more dwellings were completed in 2014 than in 2013, when the fi  gure was just 
under 215,000. Nonetheless, the additional 
supply probably falls short of the higher 
 demand for housing at present.5
Besides the substantial infl  ow of immi-
grants, both persistently good income and 
employment prospects and the exception-
ally favourable fi  nancing conditions for resi-
dential property are ensuring that demand 
for housing remains high. The affordability 
of housing is likely to have improved fur-ther, primarily owing to the low fi  nancing costs for acquiring residential property. While the price- to- income ratio
6 barely 
changed in the reporting year, the average rate for mortgage loans declined by ¾ per-
centage point over the course of 2014 to 
2¼% at the end of the period under review. 
Adjusted for the expected longer- term 
 infl  ation rate, the average interest rate on 
loans for house purchase was thus 2 per-
centage points lower in 2014 than in 2009.
Following the revision of the econometric 
model used for analysing residential prop-
erty prices, evidence of a statistically signifi  -
cant impact of mortgage rates can be found.
7 This can be used to calculate the arithmetical effect of the currently excep-
tionally low interest rates on possible over-
valuations of residential property. For  example, the drop in interest rates since 
2009, viewed in isolation, was a contribut-
ing factor to housing prices in 2014 being 
an average of 3½% higher than in a scen-
ario of unchanged mortgage rates.
For Germany as a whole, there are still no 
signs of a substantial overvaluation of resi-
dential property. In cities, however, current 
estimates which now also take into account the prices of detached single- family houses 
continue to put upward price deviations at between 10% and 20%, with freehold apartments in major cities showing the strongest overvaluations. In the  reporting year, however, price increases again ap-
proximated the rates of change which can 
be derived from the general trends in the economic and demographic fundamentals 
for housing prices. However, waning price 
dynamics did not reduce existing overvalu-
ations.
5 A quicker adjustment of the housing supply in the 
particularly booming urban areas is likely to be hin-
dered by the fact that infi  ll development can only cre-
ate additional housing on a limited scale and new 
building land can only be approved with a time lag.
6 Measured as the ratio of the vdp index for owner- 
occupied housing to disposable household income, 
which is currently calculated using estimates in some 
cases.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The determinants and 
 regional dependencies of house price increases since 
2010, Monthly Report, October 2013, pp 13-30, and 
F Kajuth, T A Knetsch and N Pinkwart, Assessing house 
prices in Germany: evidence from an estimated stock- 
fl  ow model using regional data, Bundesbank Discus-
sion Paper, No 46/ 2013.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
57

an exceptional moderation of prices for pack -
age holidays. The introduction of a general 
statutory minimum wage on 1  January 2015 
has had only a very limited effect on consumer 
prices to date.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy will also continue to 
benefit from the economic upturn after the 
start of the new year. In the short term, the 
 upturn will be sustained mainly by private 
 consumption. Given the continued moderate 
global economic momentum, the distinct fall in 
the euro’s external value will, nevertheless, pro -
vide German exporters with enhanced sales 
opportunities in export markets outside the 
euro area. Moreover, the stimulating effects of 
the euro’s depreciation in the euro- area mem -
ber states could also trigger secondary effects 
via the trade channel. This is indicated by the 
broad- based increase in industrial orders in the 
fourth quarter. Over time, improving business 
prospects and heightened capacity utilisation 
could give renewed impetus to the currently 
stalled recovery in investment. Given the 
brighter overall economic picture, it is under -
standable that current forecasts for economic 
growth in Germany this year are markedly 
higher than the projections made in autumn 
last year.
Since the rebound in sentiment last November, 
optimism is growing among German enter -
prises, irrespective of whether their focus is on 
the domestic market or whether they have a 
strong European or international orientation. 
Fundamentally, this is also evident in the cur -
rent business survey of the German Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), which 
covers a broad range of industries.
Industrial activity at the beginning of this year is 
likely to have been boosted by the seasonally 
adjusted 1¾% quarter- on- quarter increase in 
new orders in the final quarter of 2014. The 
automotive industry once again assumed the Economic 
 upturn set to 
continue
Enterprises more 
optimistic
Distinct expan-
sion in industrial orders primarily due to consider-able increase in motor vehicle ordersDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
58

role of frontrunner, with orders shooting up by 
8% following a subdued phase in the second 
and third quarters. Demand for German- made 
motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts rose 
considerably in Germany as well as in and out -
side the euro area. The capital goods sector 
benefited from large orders for the aircraft and 
aerospace industry at the end of the year. 
Orders of computers and optical and electronic 
products almost offset the decline of the sum -
mer months. By contrast, the mechanical 
 engineering sector suffered losses following a 
substantial increase in the third quarter. It is 
worth noting that, in this sector, a strong posi -
tive stimulus came from the euro area at the 
end of the period under review.
There was an above- average seasonally ad -
justed 2% quarter- on- quarter increase in orders 
of intermediate goods. Even so, domestic 
orders in the final three months of the year 
were only marginally up on their subdued level 
of the third quarter. Evidently, there was not 
yet a need to order inputs and intermediate 
goods on a large scale in order to achieve the 
increase in industrial output at the end of the 
year. By contrast, demand from the euro area 
rose by 4%, after moving sideways for almost a 
year. Orders from non- euro- area countries, 
which had already increased in the third quar -
ter, likewise saw a steep upturn (+3%). After 
seasonal adjustment, the consumer goods 
 industry received 1¼% more orders in the 
period under review than they had done in the 
third quarter. Export orders rose slightly more 
than domestic orders.
Current order books are likely to ensure a rela -
tively high degree of capacity utilisation in con -
struction, although an expansion of activities 
beyond the current level cannot be expected in 
the short term. The retarding movement in de -
mand for residential construction continued 
until the end of the year. Building permits measured in terms of the estimated costs of 
work on new and existing buildings in the 
period from July to November 2014 were on 
average only 1% up on their level in the first 
half of the year after seasonal adjustment com -
pared with 2¾% in the first six months of the 
year; the corresponding half- yearly rates were 
+6¾% and +5% in 2013. The slowdown is re -
lated to the fact that  demand for apartments 
continued to increase in the second half of 
2014, but the pace has waned. In any event, a 
sideways movement in demand for single-  
family and two- family houses has been evident 
for some time. Furthermore, enterprises were 
placing only a relatively moderate volume of 
orders for new construction projects at the end 
of the period under review and the volume of 
public sector construction orders showed a fur -
ther clear slump in the fourth quarter.
Against the backdrop of very upbeat income 
expectations, energy price- related purchasing 
power gains and strong consumer confidence, 
private consumption has become the immedi -
ate mainstay of the cyclical upturn. Stable 
 employment growth and marked wage in -
creases have been supporting the consumer 
 climate on the income side for some time now. 
In addition to these underlying trends, the 
 easing of households’ expenditure on energy 
currently represents a strong boosting factor. A 
sustained stimulus to growth is not to be 
 expected from this, however. Many consumers 
appear to have used their unexpectedly 
 enhanced scope for expenditure in last year’s 
Christmas trading period. A large one- off effect 
for private consumption is still outstanding 
 during the first quarter, as households are 
 unlikely to miss out on the opportunity to 
 replenish their heating oil tanks at very low 
prices. Furthermore, lagged effects in the wake 
of price adjustments for other  energy sources 
can be expected.Orders of inter-
mediate goods still moderate, particularly from Germany
No new stimuli 
for constructionPrivate con-sumption  currently  mainstay of  economic growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
59

Public finances*
General government budget
The public finance situation in Germany im -
proved over the past year. The initial report 
 released by the Federal Statistical Office indi -
cates that the general government budget 
 recorded a sizeable surplus of 0.4% of gross 
domestic product (GDP) (2013: +0.1%). With 
cyclical factors largely neutral, the structural 
surplus was at a similar level.1 On balance, the 
year- on- year improvement was attributable to 
lower interest expenditure. The expenditure ratio fell somewhat to 44.1% as a result, while 
the ratio of primary expenditure (excluding 
interest expenditure) to GDP barely changed. 
Although the increase in social payments was 
markedly higher than nominal GDP growth, 
smaller rises were recorded in other areas of 
expenditure. The revenue ratio (44.5%) was 
unchanged on the year. While the surplus in 
the social security funds dipped slightly due to 
accelerated expenditure growth, the central 
government budget balance saw a significant 
improvement owing to lower interest expend -
iture and the higher Bundesbank profit (see 
 further information on general government 
budget developments on pages 61 and 62).
The debt- to- GDP ratio had fallen to 74.8% by 
the end of the third quarter of 2014 (end-2013: 
76.9%) and is likely to have declined further by 
the end of 2014. The significant drop in the first 
three quarters of 2014 was primarily attribut -
able to nominal growth in GDP in the ratio’s 
denominator and buoyed by the further slight 
portfolio reduction at government- owned bad 
banks, while assistance loans granted to euro- 
area countries and payments to the European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM) increased the debt 
ratio.
The fiscal balance is likely to deteriorate further 
in the current year, but will probably remain in 
positive territory. The impact of cyclical factors 
on government budgets is set to remain broadly 2014: sizeable 
surplus and …
… declining debt ratio
2015: deterior-
ation in balance and continued decline in debt- to- GDP ratioGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties.
Deutsche Bundesbank434445464748
101234
–++++As a percentage of GDPExpenditure ratio
Revenue ratio
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Deficit ratio383940 Taxes and social contributions ratio1
* The section entitled “General government budget” con -
cerns the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. The 
subsequent reporting on the budgets of central, state and 
local government and of the social security funds is based 
on the figures as defined in the government’s financial stat -
istics (which are generally in line with the budget accounts).
1 Calculated using the Eurosystem’s cyclical adjustment 
method. For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A 
disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: 
Germany’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, 
Monthly Report, March 2006, pp 61-76. By contrast, the 
cyclical adjustment procedure used for EU budgetary sur -
veillance and for the central government’s debt brake 
when drawing up the budget paints a clearly negative 
 picture of the economic situation in 2013 and 2014.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
60

The structural development of public fi  nances 
in Germany − results of the disaggregated framework for 2014
According to the provisional national ac-
counts data published by the Federal Statis-
tical Offi   ce in January, Germany’s general 
government budget recorded a notable sur-
plus in 2014. Compared with the virtually 
balanced result in 2013 (+0.1% of GDP), the 
general government fi  scal balance has im-
proved to +0.4% of GDP . Using the “disag-
gregated framework” for analysing public 
fi  nances,1 fi  rst, the role played by cyclical 
infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects2 is 
estimated. Second, other – referred to here 
as structural – changes in the revenue and 
expenditure ratios and their major deter-
minants are identifi  ed. The main results of 
this analysis for 2014 are presented below.3
On average, cyclical factors had a broadly neutral impact on the fi  scal balance in 2014  – both in terms of the amount by 
which it changed and its overall level. After adjustment for cyclical infl  uences, the struc-
tural fi  scal balance in relation to nominal trend GDP improved by 0.2 percentage point. The structural surplus was thus 
roughly the same as the unadjusted level.
The unadjusted revenue ratio remained 
 unchanged in 2014 and structural revenue 
in relation to trend GDP rose slightly 
(+0.1 percentage point). There was no net 
change in the structural tax and social con-
tributions ratio. While fi  scal drag pushed 
the ratio up somewhat, this was partly off-
set by shortfalls arising from legislative 
changes (such as, above all, the increase in 
the basic income tax allowance). The key 
revenue reference variables developed 
broadly in line with nominal trend GDP and, 
unlike in previous years, there were no sig-nifi  cant one- off developments.
4The unadjusted expenditure ratio dropped 
by 0.2 percentage point in 2014. The struc-
tural ratio, however, fell only slightly (-0.1 percentage point), mainly because 
trend GDP in the ratio’s denominator grew 
at a somewhat weaker pace than GDP on 
average in 2014. The interest expenditure ratio continued to wane, chiefl  y due to  favourable fi  nancing conditions.
5 By con-
trast, the structural ratio of other expend-iture (primary expenditure) went up by 
0.2 percentage point overall. This increase 
was driven by signifi  cant net growth in 
 social payments, predominantly for health-
care. Pension expenditure grew roughly in 
line with nominal trend GDP . Growth accel-
erated rapidly compared with previous 
years largely due to payments for the pen-
sion benefi  ts package, which was not im-
plemented until the second half of the year. 
However, the further (slight) decline in  labour market expenditure provided some 
relief.
1 For a more detailed description of the framework, 
including the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical component used in the Eurosystem, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for 
analysing public fi  nances: Germany’s fi  scal track record 
between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 
2006, pp 61-76.
2 In the defi  nition used here, temporary effects were 
of no signifi  cance in 2014.
3 These results are subject to amendments arising 
from revisions to the national accounts fi  gures or to 
estimates of the macroeconomic outlook.4 Receipts from profi  t- related taxes, in particular, gen-
erally fl  uctuate to a much greater extent than the changes in entrepreneurial and investment income (which are used as macroeconomic reference vari-ables) and the estimated fi  scal impact of legislative changes would suggest. However, no major distor-
tions have been observed in this area of late.
5 The exact breakdown of the change in the interest 
expenditure ratio is not shown because the debt ratio for 2014 is not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
61

In conclusion, Germany’s public fi  nances 
 recorded a notable surplus in 2014, both in 
unadjusted and structural terms. The year- 
on- year structural improvement was attrib-
utable to a further fall in interest expend-
iture. Structural strains resulting from a sig-
nifi  cant rise in social payments were partly 
offset by favourable developments in other 
areas (such as higher profi  t distribution by 
the Bundesbank). Overall, the structural pri-
mary balance deteriorated slightly.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 – 0.3 – 3.0 – 1.0 3.2 1.0 0.1 0.3
Cyclical component 1 0.4 – 1.7 0.3 0.9 0.0 – 0.4 0.1
Temporary effects 1 – 0.3 0.2 – 1.0 1.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0
Fiscal balance – 0.4 – 1.4 – 0.4 1.2 1.0 0.4 0.2
Interest payable 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3
Owing to change in average interest rate 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3
Owing to change in debt level 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0
Primary balance – 0.4 – 1.6 – 0.5 1.3 0.8 0.0 – 0.1
Revenue 0.3 – 0.8 – 0.2 1.0 0.2 0.0 0.1
Taxes and social contributions 0.2 – 1.0 – 0.4 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.0
Fiscal drag 2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Decoupling of macroeconomic reference variables 
from GDP 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0
Legislative changes – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.6 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1
Residual 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.1
of which: profi  t-related taxes 3 0.5 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.1
Non-tax revenue 4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1
Primary expenditure 0.6 0.8 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.6 0.0 0.2
Social payments 5 0.2 0.2 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.3
Subsidies 0.0 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.0
Compensation of employees 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.0
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0
Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other expenditure 6 0.0 – 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.1
Memo itemPension expenditure
7 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 0.0
Healthcare expenditure 8 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2
Labour market expenditure 9 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. 1 Year- on- year change in 
the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 In this context, the term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the overall (positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 
3 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment income tax. 4 Other current transfers receivable, sales 
and total capital revenue. 5 Including other current transfers to households. 6 Other current transfers payable to corporations and the rest of the world, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 7 Spending by the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme, on civil servants’ pensions as well as payments by the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal 
Railways Fund. 8 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 
9 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the compensatory amount (up to 2007)/reintegration payment (from 2008 to 2013) paid to central government) and central government expenditure on unemployment welfare benefi  t (II) 
and on labour market reintegration measures.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
62

neutral. Social payments are forecast to con -
tinue to climb considerably in 2015 and marked 
increases are expected in other areas, such 
as  transport infrastructure, education and 
 research. Overall, rising budget burdens are 
likely to outstrip the relief provided by low 
interest rates. The revenue ratio is projected to 
remain on a stable course. In particular, the 
lower pension contribution rate and slight cut 
in additional contributions to the statutory 
health insurance institutions will broadly com -
pensate for the higher contribution rate to 
long- term care insurance. The rapid reduction 
of the debt-  to- GDP ratio, chiefly as a result of 
GDP growth in the ratio’s denominator and 
buoyed by the portfolio reduction at bad banks, 
is set to continue.
After recording a surplus in 2014, the general 
government budget has now remained at least 
balanced for the third year in a row and, with 
the current plans in place, this trend is set to 
continue. The balance has improved markedly 
in structural terms since 2012; however, this 
was largely due to low interest rates and the 
resulting fall in interest expenditure. The budget 
stance remained broadly neutral, meaning that 
the ratio of the cyclically adjusted primary bal -
ance to GDP barely changed.
Achieving a government budget position that is 
at least balanced on average over the business 
cycle makes an important contribution to redu -
cing the high debt ratio to around 60% by the 
end of this decade. Not least in view of the fact 
that demographic strains will subsequently in -
tensify, maintaining the moderate structural 
surplus as well would not be an overambitious 
objective. Furthermore, there is an ongoing 
need for consolidation in some federal states to 
ensure that the national debt brake is met 
across Germany from 2020 at the latest. Above 
and beyond that, it is advisable to factor in 
clear safety margins vis- à- vis the strict national 
deficit ceilings under normal circumstances in 
the form of surpluses. Given the difficult macro -
economic environment at the European level, 
however, the fiscal plans so far for the general government budget seem appropriate. These 
plans envisage a notable structural deterior -
ation this year, chiefly owing to the depletion 
of the social security funds’ reserves. Unex -
pected cyclically induced budget developments 
should be tolerated, ie the automatic stabilisers 
should be allowed to take effect. Overall, Ger -
man fiscal policy is making an important contri -
bution to stabilising the situation in the euro 
area, although more resolute efforts could be 
made towards strengthening growth potential 
within the current budgetary framework. By 
contrast, little would be gained from launching 
a debt- financed demand stimulus in Germany, 
given the largely neutral domestic economic 
situation and an only limited impact on the rest 
of the euro area.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
At 4%, growth in tax revenue2 remained stable 
in 2014 (see the chart and table on pages 64 
and 65) and was therefore somewhat higher 
than predicted in the November forecast made 
by the Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecast -
ing. Receipts from income- related taxes climbed 
significantly by just over 5%. This was chiefly 
due to the dynamic increase in wage tax 
 receipts which, although bolstered by stagnat -
ing deductions (for child benefit and subsidies 
for supplementary private pension plans), was 
mainly attributable to positive wage develop -
ments and the growing number of  employed 
persons. Despite the basic income tax allow -
ance being raised, the progressive taxation 
schedule also contributed to the increase. By 
contrast, at 3½%, the rise in receipts from 
profit- related taxes decelerated significantly. 
Growth in assessed income tax maintained a Neutral budget 
stance in 2013 and 2014, but interest cost  savings
Keep govern-
ment budget at least balanced on average over the business cycleFurther robust growth in tax revenue in 2014
Buoyant growth 
in wage tax  receipts
2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the last quarter recorded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
63

strong upward trajectory, which was partly 
 attributable to the development of deductions 
(a much weaker rise in income tax refunds to 
employees and the phasing- out of both the 
homebuyers’ grant and the investment grant) 
but also reflects solid growth in gross revenue. 
However, following strong growth in previous 
years, the increase in revenue from corporation 
tax slowed down in 2014, with receipts from 
non- assessed taxes on earnings (primarily in -
vestment income tax on dividends) edging up 
only slightly. Receipts from withholding tax on 
interest income and capital gains actually 
 decreased considerably, not least on account of 
the lower average annual interest rate. Overall, 
receipts from consumption- related taxes in -
creased at a below- average pace of just over 
2½%. Stagnating energy and electricity tax 
 receipts (probably due in part to weather con -
ditions) were a contributing factor here, while 
receipts from turnover tax grew in line with the 
relevant macroeconomic reference variables.
According to the latest official tax estimate, at 
3%, growth in tax revenue (including local gov -
ernment taxes) is expected to shrink slightly in 
2015. The underlying growth in macroeco -
nomic reference variables for tax revenue is 
forecast to be roughly the same as in 2014 and 
legislative changes are likely to be relatively in -significant. However, tax refunds are expected 
as a result of previous court rulings.3
Central government budget
Central government was able to close the 2014 
fiscal year without posting any net borrowing, 
ie with a balanced budget,4 for the first time 
since 1969 and one year earlier than planned, 
after it had recorded net new borrowing of 
€22 billion in 2013. On the expenditure side, 
reduced exceptional charges were the main 
factor behind the improvement (elimination of 
advance payments to the flood assistance fund 
of €8 billion and a €4½ billion cut in ESM con -
tributions). In addition, the interest burden fell 
sharply (-€5½ billion). All in all, central govern -
ment expenditure fell by 3½% (€12½ billion). 
By contrast, growth of 3% (€9½ billion) was 
recorded on the revenue side. Tax revenue 
 increased significantly (+€11 billion). The Bun-
desbank ’s profit distribution for the core budget 
also rose by €2 billion. By contrast, the €3 bil -
lion decrease in proceeds from asset realisa -
tions placed a strain on the budget.
Overall, the fiscal balance was €6½ billion 
higher relative to the budget estimates drawn 
up in June 2014. Receipts were €5½ billion 
higher than forecast, with tax revenue exceed -
ing budget estimates by €2½ billion. Non- tax 
receipts were €3 billion higher than estimated, 
not least owing to the fact that provisions of 
€1½ billion in the budget for any shortfalls due 
to court rulings regarding the constitutionally 
still controversial nuclear fuel tax did not need 
to be drawn upon. The sum of well- specified 
estimates on the expenditure side was under -
shot by a total of €3 billion, thus exceeding the 
global cuts in expenditure provided for in the 
budget plan. The largest savings were made on Below- average 
rise in receipts from consump-tion- related taxes
Revenue growth 
expected to continue on stable path in 2015No net borrow-ing in 2014 thanks to end of exceptional charges, rising tax revenue and declining inter-est payments
Result signifi-
cantly better than forecastTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014012345678
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
3 Chiefly the European Court of Justice ruling of 20 Octo -
ber 2011 on the taxation of dividends paid to EU/EEA com -
panies, with total losses of €2½ billion distributed over the 
course of 2015 and 2016 (case C-284/ 09).
4 However, the fiscal balance excluding coin seigniorage 
was slightly negative.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
64

interest expenditure (€1½ billion). Outflows of 
funds for investment remained €½ billion 
below their estimates, not least on account of 
lower payments to Deutsche Bahn (the Ger -
man railway company) and the smaller number 
of development aid loans granted.
Based on initial national accounts figures from 
the Federal Statistical Office in accordance with 
the debt brake provisions for central govern -
ment, the Ministry of Finance disclosed a struc -
tural surplus of 0.3% of GDP in its monthly 
 report for January 2015.5 This equates to an 
improvement of 0.2 percentage point on the 
budget estimate.6 While the Bundesbank’s cyc -
lical adjustment procedure results in a signifi -
cantly lower cyclical burden for 2014, after 
 deduction, a structural surplus of 0.1% of GDP 
is still recorded even on this basis. Overall, the 
achievement of a safety margin vis- à- vis the 
permanent upper limit of 0.35% of GDP for 
structural net borrowing to be observed as of 
2016 is welcome.While the 2015 budget, which was approved at 
the end of November and envisages no net 
borrowing, does not foresee any further im -
provement in the balance compared with the 
actual 2014 figures, several of the positive 
budget deviations in 2014 are likely to extend 
into this year. For example, it is expected that 
the favourable 2014 result will largely continue 
to serve as a base effect for tax revenue. Fur -
thermore, the German economy’s now some -
what more favourable growth prospects could 
additionally boost tax receipts. The persistently 
low interest rate level could also provide further Structural 
 balance in 2014 
also far more positive than  estimatedImproved start -
ing point but also risks for 2015 budgetTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2014 
as a whole
1,2,3Q4
2013 2014 2013 2014
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 570.2 593.0 + 22.8 + 4.0 + 3.5 153.8 164.1 + 10.3 +  6.7
of which
Wage tax 158.2 168.0 +  9.8 + 6.2 + 6.1 44.9 47.6 +  2.7 +  6.1
Profi  t-related taxes 4 87.7 90.9 +  3.2 + 3.6 + 1.0 19.9 22.2 +  2.3 + 11.4
Assessed income tax 42.3 45.6 +  3.3 + 7.9 + 5.8 10.6 11.8 +  1.2 + 11.2
Corporation tax 19.5 20.0 +  0.5 + 2.7 – 1.2 4.8 5.1 +  0.3 +  6.2
Investment income 
tax5 25.9 25.2 –  0.7 – 2.7 – 5.3 4.6 5.3 +  0.8 + 17.5
Turnover taxes 6 196.8 203.1 +  6.3 + 3.2 + 3.1 50.5 52.3 +  1.8 +  3.5
Energy tax 39.4 39.8 +  0.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 15.1 15.2 +  0.1 +  0.4
Tobacco tax 13.8 14.6 +  0.8 + 5.7 + 4.7 4.3 4.7 +  0.4 +  8.7
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2014. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Tax revenue including (still estimated) local govern-ment taxes was €3.7 billion above the May 2014 estimate, which formed the basis for the 2014 central government plan drawn up in 
summer 2014. Excluding the effect of legislative changes made since the estimate, the government projects that tax revenue would have 
been revised upwards by €3.6 billion. 4 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 5 Withhold-
ing tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 The surplus factors in the combined €1 billion deficit of 
the Energy and Climate Fund and the flood assistance fund 
(central government off-  budget entities) while deducting 
cyclical burdens of €6 billion and net expenditure on finan -
cial transactions totalling €2½ billion.
6 It should be noted that the flood assistance fund was 
included in the budget plan with a zero deficit despite the 
alleviating effect of the planned (but not yet completed) 
transfer of €1 billion back from the flood assistance fund 
having been factored into the central government budget. 
The structural surplus reported in the budget plan was 
therefore too high.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
65

relief relative to budget estimates. Additionally, 
it appears that revenue from the radio fre -
quency auction planned for 2015 was not 
 factored into the budget.7 However, this more 
favourable outlook for the budget should not 
be misinterpreted as creating scope for fiscal 
manoeuvre. Ballooning demographic burdens 
and rising interest rates are likely for the central 
government budget in the longer term. More -
over, considerable risks exist in the relatively 
short term arising from guarantees given by 
Germany for assistance loans to euro- area 
member states and rulings yet to be made by 
the Federal Constitutional Court, in particular, 
concerning nuclear fuel tax and the phasing-  
out of nuclear energy.
It seems appropriate for these considerations 
to also be taken into account in mid- March 
when central government sets out benchmark 
figures for the 2016 budget and the medium-  
term fiscal plan up to 2019. Increased central 
government investment in the 2016 to 2018 period to the cumulated amount of €10 
billion with no net borrowing, which was an -
nounced back in November 2014, is expected 
to be offset primarily by additional interest cost 
savings. Germany was called upon by, among 
others, the European Commission and inter -
national organisations to boost government 
 investment spending. Attention has been 
 focused on numerous comparisons of Ger -
many’s expenditure with that of other coun -
tries. However, it is not possible to deduce in 
this manner whether Germany needs to in -
crease government investment spending. For 
example, expenditure comparisons can be dis -
torted due to responsibilities being divided 
 differently between the public and private sec -
tor and due to the inefficient allocation of 
funds. When making comparisons over time, 
events such as the surge in investment in the 
wake of German reunification, which are ultim -
ately followed by a period of normalisation, 
need to be taken into account. In any event, it 
is important to first critically check the benefits 
to be expected from each project. It should 
also be ensured that investment expenditure, 
including follow- up costs, is realistically esti -
mated at the cost efficiency analysis stage and 
that systematic use is made of cost- cutting op -
portunities in planning, construction and oper -
ation. Greater involvement of private investors 
would likely be of little benefit with respect to 
financing costs. If financing were provided out -
side the central government budget, there 
would also be a risk of circumventing the debt 
brake. In any case, it appears that no additional 
central government borrowing is required to 
maintain a good infrastructure.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks and the loss compensation 
payments they receive) recorded a surplus of 
around €4 billion in 2014 compared with €11 
Benchmark fig-
ures for coming years should take account of risks and seek value for money from investmentCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42015105051015
––––+++
–25–20–15–10–50
20132012Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20122014
20142013€ billion
7 The total minimum bids are reported to amount to €1½ 
billion. However, it seems to have already been agreed to 
make compensation payments to those who previously 
used the frequencies, give federal states a share in the in -
come and make funds available to expand the network, 
meaning that net relief for the 2015 central government 
budget could be moderate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
66

billion in 2013. The decrease mainly reflects the 
elimination of central government payments 
totalling €8 billion to the flood assistance fund 
(with only a small increase in expenditure by 
the flood assistance fund). But the Financial 
Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) also re -
corded a decline after posting a surplus of 
€1½  billion following repayment of the final 
tranche of its silent participation in Commerz -
bank in 2013. By contrast, the Investment and 
Repayment Fund closed €2 billion higher after 
receiving this level of funds from the Bundes -
bank’s profit distribution. Lower profit distribu -
tion by the Bundesbank and higher outflows 
from the flood assistance fund could place a 
strain on the surplus for off- budget entities in 
2015 compared with the previous year. Overall, 
however, sustained surpluses, especially that of 
the precautionary special funds for civil servant 
pensions, could at the very least offset antici -
pated deficits, chiefly in the flood assistance 
fund.
State government budgets8
According to the monthly cash statistics, in 
2014 state government core budgets recorded 
a surplus (of just over €½ billion) for the first 
time since 2008, following a deficit of €½ bil -
lion one year previously. Revenue rose by 4% 
(€12½ billion). This was ultimately mainly due 
to growth in tax revenue (+4½%, or €10 bil -
lion), with joint taxes and, in particular, inherit -
ance tax and real estate acquisition tax (the fig -
ure for the latter was also impacted by tax rate 
increases) rising significantly. Furthermore, in 
the last quarter BayernLB made a large- scale 
payment in connection with support measures 
from the federal state of Bavaria.9 By contrast, 
transfers received from public administrations 
increased at a more moderate pace (+2½%, or 
€1½ billion). Expenditure (+3½%, or €11½ bil -
lion) recorded somewhat weaker growth than 
revenue. Once again, significantly higher cur -
rent transfers to local government (+6½%, or 
€4½ billion) were a particularly major factor in 
this regard. Moreover, in light of wage adjust -ments also being applied to civil servants and 
retired civil servants,10 personnel expenditure 
rose considerably (+3½%, or €4 billion). Invest -
ment expenditure also recorded marked growth 
(+3%, or €1 billion), while other operating ex -
penditure stagnated and interest expenditure 
recorded a significant decline (-8%, or €1½ bil -
lion).
In 2014, most of the federal states (Baden-  
Württemberg, Bavaria, Berlin, Hamburg and 
the east German states) recorded core budget 
surpluses. However, despite some improve -
ment, Bremen and Saarland still recorded very 
high deficits per capita, and Rhineland-  
Palatinate, Hesse, North Rhine-  Westphalia and 
Schleswig- Holstein also recorded marked def -
icits. Based on the assumed ongoing favour -
able conditions and increasing relief being 
 provided by central government, in December 
2014 the Stability Council forecast steady 
–  although given the overall positive budgetary 
situation only minor  – improvements in the 
budgetary balance for state government as a 
whole for subsequent years. Developments in 
the federal states of Berlin and Schleswig-  
Holstein, where budgetary recovery procedures 
were initiated, were given a positive assess -
ment. By contrast, the measures announced by 
Bremen were criticised and deemed insuffi -
cient, and the Stability Council once again 
called on the federal state to step up its con -
solidation efforts. Given a dwindling and com -
paratively low safety margin vis- à- vis the upper 
limit within the framework of the agreed deficit 
reduction path, Saarland was also called on to Surplus for off- 
budget entities in 2014 weaker but still marked thanks to Bun-
desbank profit
Surplus in 2014 
primarily due to growth in tax revenueStability Council 
warns Bremen, 
in particular, but 
also Saarland of 
further need for 
consolidation
8 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2014 was analysed in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s January 2015 Monthly Report. These are 
the most recent data available.
9 BayernLB made a payment of almost €2 billion to the 
Bavarian state government in connection with the sale of 
an ABS portfolio and the repayment of a further part of the 
silent participation. In return, the Bavarian state govern -
ment paid €1 billion to BayernLB owing to a loss compen -
sation guarantee.
10 Another factor in this regard was that in North Rhine- 
Westphalia the increased remuneration and pension pay -
ments for higher pay grades which were agreed retrospect -
ively (following a ruling by the State Constitutional Court) 
were paid out in the final quarter. A similar adjustment was 
made in Bremen.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
67

continue to push ahead with its budgetary 
consolidation measures. In these two federal 
states, the budget plans still envisage marked 
deficits, which is also attributable to the fact 
that the very favourable conditions have not 
been consistently used to achieve more rapid 
consolidation. There is thus still a considerable 
need for consolidation.
A study11 published alongside the statement of 
the Advisory Board of the Stability Council 
points to considerable differences in the scope 
for expenditure of individual federal states 
( including local governments and off- budget 
entities) if they are to achieve a balanced 
budget in 2020 when the debt brake enters 
into full force. According to the study, given 
the developments in tax revenue currently fore -
cast, and after deducting interest and pension 
expenditure extrapolated based on standard 
assumptions,12 numerous federal states would 
be able to cope with marked increases in 
 expenditure. Bremen, which is heavily indebted, would also be able to put up expenditure to a 
limited extent, whereas Saarland would have 
to reduce its expenditure each year even if 
interest rate conditions were favourable and 
pension expenditure developed at a more sub -
dued pace (compared with the baseline scen -
ario). Some of the east German states also face 
major  challenges, even though they currently 
have budgetary surpluses, as the financial 
 assistance payments provided to rebuild east -
ern Germany will be phased out by 2020 and a 
further marked decline in the population is 
 expected. The projected figures for the real 
scope for  expenditure (ie after adjustment 
for  price changes) show that in addition to 
 Saarland and Bremen, there is also a distinct 
need for spending cuts in Saxony-  Anhalt and 
Thuringia.
Social security funds13
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
According to preliminary data, the statutory 
pension insurance scheme recorded a clear sur -
plus of just over €3 billion in 2014. On balance, 
the additional revenue owing to the contribu -
tion rate cut being waived at the start of 2014 
(although the cut was generally required by 
law) outweighed the additional expenditure 
from mid-2014 onwards resulting from the 
pension benefits package (in particular, 
Saxony-  Anhalt 
and Thuringia 
also still need to make sizeable adjustments to comply with debt brakeUnexpectedly high surplus in 2014Finances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014626466687072
–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
11 See I Deubel, J Hamker, D Rumpf and D Stegarescu 
(2014), Zum Ausgabenspielraum der einzelnen Bundeslän -
der im Rahmen der Schuldenbremse bis zum Jahr 2020 , 
mimeo, www.stabilitaetsrat.de. The Advisory Board of the 
Stability Council refers in detail to the study in its statement 
dated 8  December 2014 on compliance with the upper 
limit for the structural general government deficit (see 
pp 17-24).
12 To calculate the actual available scope for expenditure, 
interest and pension expenditure are deducted from the 
available funds (tax revenue after financial equalisation plus 
transfers from central government and the EU), since they 
represent non- disposable or less- disposable existing bur -
dens.
13 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the third quar -
ter of 2014 was analysed in detail in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s December 2014 Monthly Report. These 
are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
68

mothers’ pension and full pension at 63). The 
surplus was up by €1 billion on the year. Over -
all, revenue rose by 3½%, whereas expenditure 
increased by 3%. Contribution receipts bene -
fited from the ongoing favourable employment 
and wage developments. At almost 4%, they 
rose at a greater pace than total receipts be -
cause other components, such as central gov -
ernment grants in particular, recorded weaker 
growth. In addition to the general adjustment 
requirements, a further €¼ billion discretionary 
cut in the general central government grant 
contributed to the weaker growth.
Pension expenditure developed very differently 
in the two halves of the year. In the first six 
months, it still recorded very moderate year- on- 
year growth of just over ½%, which was attrib -
utable to the low mid-2013 pension increase, 
the scheduled increase in the official retirement 
age and the still relatively small number of 
people in the age groups currently entering re -
tirement. The mid-2014 pension increase was 
higher (1.67% in western Germany and 2.53% 
in eastern Germany). However, the acceleration 
in expenditure growth was mainly due to the 
expanded benefits for periods spent raising 
children born before 1992 and the full pension 
without actuarial deductions from the age of 
63 for persons who have been insured for a 
particularly long period of time. In the second 
half of the year, expenditure rose at a signifi -
cantly faster pace (just over 5%). Nevertheless, 
the additional expenditure lagged behind the 
amount estimated in the draft Act on Improve -
ments in Pension Insurance Benefits (Renten -
versicherungs-Leistungsverbesserungsgesetz) . It 
is so far not clear to what extent this is due, for 
 example, to a lower- than- expected take- up for 
the full pension at 63, or whether statutory 
pension insurance institutions are still process -
ing applications which will not be completed 
until during the course of this year but will 
 ultimately be assigned to the 2014 accounts.
The actual financial impact of the pension 
benefits package will also affect the projected 
outlook for the current year. If expenditure growth really is weaker than forecast by legisla -
tors, the reserves – which accrued to 1.9 times 
the scheme’s monthly expenditure at the end 
of 2014 – might decline at a slower pace in 
2015 than assumed by the Federal Government 
in its most recent report on the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme, for example. The con -
tribution rate for 2016 would then have to be 
lowered so that at the end of 2016 the reserves 
would no longer exceed the upper limit of 1.5 
times the scheme’s monthly expenditure.Expenditure 
growth so far below estimates for pension benefits  package
Contribution rate cut possible again in 2016 given ongoing favourable  developmentsFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014789101112
1.21.52.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue 1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefits  and short-time
    working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
69

Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency (including civil 
servant pension funds) recorded a €2 billion 
surplus at the end of 2014, which was also 
 better than expected. This constitutes a year-  
on- year improvement of €1½ billion. Although 
it had long been evident that the surplus would 
be higher than the figure estimated in the 
budget plan (€¼ billion), spending on active 
 labour market policy measures as well as on 
short- time working benefits and insolvency 
benefit payments was even lower than ex -
pected. Contributions recorded a steep in -
crease of 4% on the year owing to favourable 
employment and wage developments. Overall, 
revenue increased at a somewhat weaker pace 
(just under 3½%) because central government 
refunds for excess reintegration payments were 
made for the last time in 2013. On the expend -
iture side, payments for unemployment insur -ance benefit (I) remained virtually unchanged 
on the year. While the number of recipients fell 
by around 2½%, per capita payments increased 
at about the same pace. Short- time working 
benefits and insolvency benefit payments re -
corded significant declines, while spending on 
active labour market policy measures rose 
slightly for the first time since the crisis year of 
2009. Overall, expenditure decreased by just 
under 1½%.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
envisages a decline in the surplus to just under 
€½ billion in 2015. However, the estimates for 
spending on active labour market policy meas -
ures and on short- time working benefits and 
insolvency benefit payments seem to be signifi -
cantly overstated in light of the 2014 results, 
which are now available, and the current eco -
nomic outlook. Overall, as things stand today, a 
higher surplus is likely to be recorded for 2015.Clear surplus in 
2014 …
… and probably 
also in 2015Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2015  
70

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ..................  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  .......................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Centr al, state and local government: debt by creditor  .................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank up to end-1998  ..................................................  79•
 9 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 1 0 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 1 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 2 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 3 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2015
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2013          Apr 8.6 4.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.5 0.08 0.21 2.7
         May 8.3 4.6 2.8 2.8 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.08 0.20 2.6         June 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 0.09 0.21 3.0
         July 7.1 4.1 2.1 2.3 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.09 0.22 3.0
         Aug 6.7 4.0 2.2 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.2 0.08 0.23 3.0         Sep 6.6 3.8 2.0 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 0.08 0.22 3.1
         Oct 6.5 3.2 1.4 1.6 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.09 0.23 2.9
         Nov 6.5 3.0 1.5 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.9 0.10 0.22 2.8         Dec 5.7 2.5 1.0 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 1.2 0.17 0.27 2.9
2014          Jan 6.1 2.4 1.2 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 1.2 0.20 0.29 2.8
         Feb 6.1 2.4 1.3 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.16 0.29 2.6
         Mar 5.6 2.2 1.0 1.1 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 1.0 0.19 0.31 2.5
         Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.1 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.25 0.32 2.2
         June 5.4 2.4 1.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.7 0.08 0.24 2.1
         July 5.6 2.5 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.9 2.7 2.0 2.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.2 0.02 0.19 1.7
         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct 6.2 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 6.9 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5
         Dec 7.8 3.5 3.6 ... − 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.1 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.05 0.06 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2013          Apr 
+ 14,745 + 20,707 + 4,297 + 19,962 − 16,130 + 6,877 − 6,457 + 45 1.3026 100.5 97.9
         May + 8,840 + 20,519 + 5,442 − 46,161 − 37,817 + 7,785 + 81,048 + 586 1.2982 100.6 98.1
         June + 24,996 + 20,970 + 131,331 − 11,310 + 48,501 − 929 + 94,397 + 673 1.3189 101.6 99.0
         July + 24,223 + 22,032 + 23,901 − 7,634 + 21,254 + 3,271 + 7,230 − 220 1.3080 101.6 98.9
         Aug + 11,317 + 12,061 + 37,889 + 2,939 + 346 − 4,673 + 37,251 + 2,025 1.3310 102.3 99.5         Sep + 16,679 + 15,206 + 33,738 + 13,242 + 8,551 + 1,909 + 8,894 + 1,143 1.3348 102.1 99.2
         Oct + 23,369 + 21,258 + 37,660 − 7,120 + 182 + 4,540 + 40,864 − 807 1.3635 102.9 99.8
         Nov + 26,478 + 21,802 + 31,364 + 17,655 − 51,535 + 4,413 + 60,990 − 159 1.3493 102.7 99.5         Dec + 34,501 + 16,080 + 100,132 + 16,722 + 18,862 + 3,087 + 60,091 + 1,371 1.3704 103.9 100.7
2014          Jan + 853 + 3,875 − 25,110 − 3,875 − 43,314 − 336 + 19,724 + 2,692 1.3610 103.5 100.3
         Feb + 10,675 + 19,103 + 7,040 + 8,027 − 57,132 + 2,859 + 53,728 − 442 1.3659 103.6 100.4         Mar + 23,654 + 21,706 + 78,644 + 16,890 + 47,840 + 2,978 + 10,682 + 253 1.3823 104.7 101.3
         Apr + 15,884 + 19,226 − 6,350 + 13,960 + 25,221 + 4,731 − 50,657 + 397 1.3813 104.6 101.0
         May + 5,967 + 20,838 + 9,007 − 3,142 − 60,920 + 6,510 + 66,082 + 476 1.3732 103.9 100.1         June + 20,760 + 20,967 + 77,080 − 11,924 − 7,361 + 4,883 + 91,932 − 451 1.3592 103.1 99.3
         July + 27,646 + 25,766 + 18,507 + 9,424 + 14,225 + 3,204 − 7,696 − 650 1.3539 102.7 98.8
         Aug + 12,934 + 11,241 − 920 − 2,479 + 3,009 + 3,479 − 6,169 + 1,240 1.3316 102.0 98.2         Sep + 31,658 + 25,229 + 51,036 + 20,704 + 59,236 + 9,467 − 36,443 − 1,928 1.2901 100.5 96.7
         Oct + 29,745 + 25,515 + 33,257 − 967 + 47,387 + 624 − 14,791 + 1,004 1.2673 99.6 p 95.8
         Nov + 24,649 + 21,473 + 76,624 + 28,086 + 12,242 + 3,899 + 34,213 − 1,816 1.2472 99.6 p 95.7         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2331 99.7 p 95.3
2015          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1621 95.9 p 91.6
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments effective exchange rates of the euro based on consumer price indices are computed
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables for the EMU without Lithuania. The deflator HICP (EMU-19) is not yet available. The
XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the Lithuanian litas is included in the basket of partner country currencies. 
currencies of The-EER-20 group. 4  By derogation from the standard, the real

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2012 − 0.7 0.1 0.4 4.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 6.6 − 0.3 − 2.3 4.8
2013 − 0.5 0.3 0.1 1.6 − 1.3 0.3 − 3.9 0.2 − 1.9 4.2
2014 ... ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2013          Q2 − 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.8 − 1.1 0.5 − 4.2 − 0.2 − 2.3 4.6
         Q3 − 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.3 − 0.2 0.7 − 2.6 1.8 − 1.4 4.6
         Q4 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.7 0.1 0.6 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 1.3 4.4
2014          Q1 1.1 1.2 2.6 0.3 0.0 0.6 − 0.4 4.0 − 0.3 2.8
         Q2 0.8 1.0 1.0 2.0 − 0.3 0.1 0.4 7.3 − 0.6 2.3
         Q3 0.8 1.0 1.2 2.2 0.1 0.2 1.9 3.5 − 0.5 2.3
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2012 − 2.5 − 3.3 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.5 − 6.4 6.2
2013 − 0.7 0.8 0.2 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 0.4
2014 0.6 ... p 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2013          Q3 − 1.1 0.8 − 0.2 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 5.4 − 1.6 − 3.6 0.2
         Q4 1.5 4.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.0 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.6
2014          Q1 1.3 4.0 3.0 − 1.4 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.5 11.9 0.4 − 2.8
         Q2 0.9 4.0 1.1 2.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 3.2 21.0 0.0 − 0.2
         Q3 0.5 0.5 0.8 3.0 − 2.3 0.0 − 4.1 20.1 − 1.8 − 0.2
         Q4 − 0.1 ... p 0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2012 78.8 77.7 83.5 70.2 78.8 82.2 64.9 − 70.1 70.8
2013 78.0 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 70.1 72.0
2014 79.9 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 72.2 72.2
2013          Q4 78.4 78.2 82.3 72.5 77.5 79.6 65.9 − 72.2 72.2
2014          Q1 80.1 79.5 83.3 72.3 79.1 81.8 65.9 − 72.5 72.1
         Q2 79.5 79.0 83.9 72.6 79.9 81.3 67.7 − 71.7 72.0
         Q3 79.9 79.2 84.0 74.0 78.9 82.5 70.4 − 72.5 71.5
         Q4 80.0 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 72.0 73.3
2015          Q1 80.7 79.7 84.8 71.2 78.6 81.9 69.2 − 73.2 71.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2012 11.3 7.6 5.4 10.0 7.7 9.8 24.5 14.7 10.7 15.0
2013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.2 11.9
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 ... 8.7 10.2 ... 11.4 ... ...
2014          July 11.6 8.6 4.6 7.5 8.6 10.3 26.3 11.3 12.8 10.7
         Aug 11.5 8.6 5.1 7.6 8.7 10.3 26.3 11.2 12.8 10.7
         Sep 11.5 8.6 5.1 7.4 8.8 10.3 26.0 11.0 13.0 10.7
         Oct 11.5 8.6 5.0 6.9 8.9 10.2 25.8 10.9 13.3 ...
         Nov 11.5 8.5 5.1 6.6 8.9 10.3 ... 10.7 13.3 ...
         Dec 11.4 8.4 4.8 ... 8.9 10.3 ... 10.5 12.9 ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2012 2.5 2.6 2.1 4.2 3.2 2.2 1.0 1.9 3.3 2.3
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2014 8 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2014          Aug 0.4 0.4 0.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.5 − 0.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.8
         Sep 0.3 0.2 0.8 0.2 1.5 0.4 − 1.1 0.5 − 0.1 1.2
         Oct 0.4 0.3 0.7 0.5 1.2 0.5 − 1.8 0.4 0.2 0.7
         Nov 0.3 0.1 0.5 0.0 1.1 0.4 − 1.2 0.2 0.3 0.9
         Dec − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.3
2015          Jan 9e − 0.6 ... − 0.5 ... ... ... ... ... e − 0.4 ...
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2011 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.9 1.0 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 10.1 − 12.6 − 3.5 − 3.4
2012 − 3.6 − 4.1 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 4.9 − 8.6 − 8.0 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 2.9 − 2.9 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 4.1 − 12.2 − 5.7 − 2.8 − 0.9
 
General government debt 10
 
2011 85.5 102.1 77.6 6.0 48.5 85.0 171.3 111.1 116.4 42.7
2012 88.7 104.0 79.0 9.7 53.0 89.2 156.9 121.7 122.2 40.9
2013 90.7 104.5 76.9 10.1 56.0 92.2 174.9 123.3 127.9 38.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. ta. 3  ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day va-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual riations. 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January,
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted da- April, July and October. Euro area including Lithuania. 6  As a percentage of the

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2015
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
3.8 − 0.2 2.5 − 1.6 0.9 − 3.3 1.6 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 2.4 2012
3.3 2.0 2.5 − 0.7 0.2 − 1.4 1.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 5.4 2013
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2014
3.7 2.4 3.6 − 1.5 0.0 − 1.4 1.3 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 6.1 2013          Q23.0 2.7 2.1 − 0.6 0.4 − 1.2 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 5.0          Q3
3.3 1.0 2.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 2.0 2.1 − 0.1 − 4.9          Q4
3.3 2.5 3.7 0.0 0.6 0.3 2.3 2.1 0.7 − 3.6 2014          Q1
3.4 1.3 3.4 1.1 0.7 0.6 2.6 2.9 1.3 − 1.9          Q2
2.7 4.0 3.8 1.0 − 0.1 1.0 2.4 3.2 1.7 − 1.7          Q3
 
Industrial production1,4
 
3.6 − 4.3 − − 0.5 − 0.3 − 6.1 7.7 − 0.5 − 6.9 − 9.6 20123.4 − 3.4 − 0.6 0.8 0.5 5.3 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 12.7 2013
... ... − ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2014
0.7 − 2.7 − − 0.4 0.5 − 1.5 4.5 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 11.3 2013          Q3
− 2.4 5.1 − 0.3 0.6 3.8 10.9 1.3 1.0 − 10.2          Q4
− 6.8 7.6 − − 7.1 2.2 2.3 6.0 0.1 1.6 − 1.9 2014          Q1
4.7 8.8 − − 1.9 0.9 1.9 5.3 2.0 2.3 − 0.6          Q2
− 0.5 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 2.6 3.0 0.8 0.3          Q3
... ... − ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
72.1 76.4 75.2 78.4 84.6 73.8 69.6 79.1 72.1 56.5 201273.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 60.6 78.3 73.3 49.3 201374.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 54.6 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
74.0 65.8 78.4 77.4 82.6 73.2 54.0 78.6 73.5 50.8 2013          Q474.2 67.7 80.2 79.7 84.1 76.3 57.6 79.7 77.0 52.5 2014          Q1
75.1 64.8 76.8 81.0 85.1 74.8 46.8 79.5 74.1 54.1          Q2
75.1 65.4 77.2 79.6 84.2 75.6 56.5 80.8 75.3 54.5          Q3
75.1 66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 57.3 81.2 76.9 54.5          Q4
74.4 66.4 80.5 80.6 84.1 78.0 75.0 85.1 78.1 54.9 2015          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
13.4 5.1 6.3 5.3 4.3 15.8 14.0 8.9 24.8 11.9 2012
11.8 5.9 6.4 6.7 4.9 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 201310.4 6.0 5.9 6.8 ... 14.1 13.2 9.8 24.5 16.1 2014
10.3 6.0 6.0 6.7 5.0 13.9 13.2 9.6 24.3 16.2 2014          July
9.8 6.0 5.9 6.6 5.0 13.4 13.1 9.7 24.1 16.2          Aug 
9.7 6.0 5.8 6.5 5.1 13.3 12.9 9.7 24.0 16.2          Sep 
9.9 5.9 5.8 6.5 5.0 13.5 12.8 9.7 23.9 16.3          Oct 
9.4 5.9 5.8 6.5 4.9 13.5 12.6 9.7 23.8 16.6          Nov 
9.4 5.9 5.8 6.7 4.9 13.4 12.5 9.7 23.7 16.4          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
3.2 2.9 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.8 3.7 2.8 2.4 3.1 2012
1.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3
p 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
0.3 0.7 0.8 0.4 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.5 0.8 2014          Aug 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.0          Sep 
0.3 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.4 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.2 0.3          Oct 
0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 1.5 0.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.5 0.0          Nov 
− 0.1 − 0.9 0.4 − 0.1
p 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.0          Dec 
... ... ... ... ... − 0.4 ... ... ... ... 2015          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 9.0 0.3 − 2.6 − 4.3 − 2.6 − 7.4 − 4.1 − 6.2 − 9.4 − 5.8 2011− 3.2 0.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 2.3 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 5.8 2012− 2.6 0.6 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 2.6 − 14.6 − 6.8 − 4.9 2013
 
General government debt 10
 
37.3 18.5 69.8 61.3 82.1 111.1 43.5 46.2 69.2 66.0 201139.9 21.4 67.9 66.5 81.7 124.8 52.1 53.4 84.4 79.5 201239.0 23.6 69.8 68.6 81.2 128.0 54.6 70.4 92.1 102.2 2013
civilian labour force; seasonally adjusted. 7  Standardised unemployment rate onwards. 10  As a percentage of GDP (based on ESA 2010); Euro-area aggregate (ex-
of Germany: calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical cluding Lithuania): European Central Bank, member states (Maastricht Treaty
Office. 8  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 9  Including Lithuania from 2015 definition): European Commission. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          May 7.2 − 19.3 0.3 26.5 52.1 77.6 − 0.0 − 77.6 − 5.5 4.6 − 2.1 − 19.5 11.5
         June − 7.3 − 35.8 − 24.8 28.5 36.5 36.0 − 56.6 − 92.5 13.7 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 22.4 37.9
         July − 120.7 − 83.5 − 12.1 − 37.2 − 39.5 − 1.8 − 27.9 − 26.1 − 35.0 − 4.2 − 1.2 − 25.8 − 3.8
         Aug − 53.7 − 35.9 − 6.0 − 17.8 − 2.8 34.3 − 15.8 − 50.1 − 8.8 − 6.3 − 0.8 − 13.7 12.0         Sep 3.2 19.3 − 0.6 − 16.1 − 16.3 23.8 − 31.6 − 55.4 − 8.6 − 4.2 − 1.3 − 2.0 − 1.0
         Oct − 43.1 − 61.4 − 26.5 18.2 5.8 34.1 65.3 31.3 8.4 2.0 − 0.5 15.3 − 8.4         Nov − 18.9 7.6 − 2.5 − 26.5 − 7.8 51.6 5.6 − 46.0 − 2.2 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.4         Dec − 182.0 −107.0 − 38.6 − 75.0 − 73.1 78.0 − 86.3 − 164.4 − 12.0 − 8.9 − 0.5 − 9.8 7.2
2014          Jan 43.5 − 18.9 9.5 62.4 42.6 9.0 125.0 116.0 − 1.1 − 2.7 0.1 − 12.4 13.9
         Feb − 5.1 − 9.2 − 16.4 4.1 12.3 32.5 16.1 − 16.4 − 11.9 − 5.9 0.1 − 11.3 5.2
         Mar 7.7 6.1 − 3.2 1.6 3.9 12.6 − 23.6 − 36.3 10.4 − 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 19.4
         Apr − 6.1 − 6.2 − 17.1 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 64.8 74.2 − 24.9 − 31.1 − 0.3 − 0.9 7.4         May − 25.7 − 36.4 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.6 37.0 − 14.6 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.0         June 9.3 23.6 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.3 − 34.0 − 103.4 − 15.4 − 10.6 − 1.4 − 22.3 18.8
         July − 25.9 − 15.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.2 61.1 34.0 − 6.8 − 12.4 0.6 − 10.3 15.2         Aug − 45.9 − 51.2 − 15.6 5.3 15.9 − 1.8 − 7.1 − 5.2 0.1 − 5.0 1.3 − 5.9 9.7         Sep 35.2 26.6 − 14.5 8.6 9.2 − 24.5 − 16.4 8.1 − 5.9 − 16.5 0.3 − 12.0 22.2
         Oct 5.1 − 23.8 − 9.0 29.0 23.0 10.5 − 3.9 − 14.4 − 36.1 − 13.0 − 0.2 − 26.5 3.6
         Nov 34.0 25.9 5.6 8.0 5.1 60.7 76.4 15.7 − 15.3 0.1 − 0.5 − 13.5 − 1.5
         Dec − 40.7 3.1 5.3 − 43.8 − 52.1 − 8.0 − 120.9 − 113.0 − 23.6 − 0.5 2.3 − 27.8 2.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2013          May − 22.9 − 11.7 − 14.2 − 11.2 − 0.5 21.9 − 2.0 − 23.9 − 11.0 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 11.5 3.4         June 0.2 3.6 − 6.1 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 8.3 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 8.7 8.2
         July − 3.0 − 12.8 0.8 9.8 4.8 − 3.8 − 9.7 − 5.9 − 14.0 − 4.9 − 1.0 − 7.6 − 0.5         Aug − 13.5 − 9.5 − 2.0 − 4.1 1.9 1.2 − 13.4 − 14.6 − 10.1 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 5.1 0.2         Sep − 3.7 2.4 1.3 − 6.1 − 5.1 22.3 − 17.6 − 39.9 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 0.8 3.3 0.2
         Oct 9.4 − 0.6 0.3 10.1 2.3 22.3 25.8 3.5 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov 5.0 7.9 1.7 − 2.9 1.8 14.6 16.1 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 1.3 0.5
         Dec − 17.0 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 8.7 − 2.2 40.7 − 25.6 − 66.3 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 5.7 0.92014          Jan 15.2 9.7 10.4 5.4 − 0.8 − 12.1 32.5 44.7 − 8.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 7.2 0.4
         Feb − 3.1 − 3.9 − 8.7 0.8 4.6 24.4 4.7 − 19.7 − 2.7 − 3.5 0.3 0.2 0.4
         Mar 4.1 7.8 6.0 − 3.7 1.0 15.8 − 3.7 − 19.6 − 5.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.8 0.7
         Apr 21.3 20.5 13.8 0.9 − 0.1 0.4 8.2 7.8 − 15.7 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 12.0 0.1
         May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.8 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.7 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.9 − 11.4 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 2.8 0.5
         Sep 10.2 6.2 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 2.5 − 3.2 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.5 1.5
         Oct 5.3 − 4.2 − 4.5 9.5 2.4 16.5 10.9 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.1
         Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8
         Dec − 17.6 − 1.7 2.9 − 15.9 − 10.1 − 2.1 − 29.5 − 27.4 − 16.0 − 7.4 0.1 − 6.4 − 2.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
62.5 26.6 − 1.1 11.6 25.8 5.0 20.8 − 17.2 3.0 13.2 − 3.4 − 7.4 2013          May
30.3 − 8.6 − − 6.7 25.7 45.1 6.2 38.9 − 19.2 − 0.2 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.1          June
− 26.1 − 55.1 − − 6.4 − 7.0 − 8.3 6.9 − 15.2 − 2.2 3.5 − 48.9 − 1.1 − 6.7          July
− 55.7 12.4 − 32.8 27.4 25.4 1.4 24.0 0.5 1.5 4.4 9.5 1.1          Aug 
11.2 58.1 − − 33.8 − 1.3 23.6 − 0.2 23.8 − 19.2 − 5.6 − 8.0 − 26.4 6.5          Sep 
− 28.0 − 5.3 − 15.7 22.0 38.5 3.9 34.6 − 9.4 − 7.1 − 5.5 1.3 − 12.4          Oct 
18.4 − 11.9 − 28.4 33.9 47.1 5.4 41.7 − 15.1 1.9 3.7 − 1.1 − 4.0          Nov 
− 49.3 − 26.3 − − 16.4 15.7 14.2 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.2 1.7 − 15.5 − 12.8 − 12.9          Dec 
20.4 37.7 − − 4.5 − 39.7 − 36.5 − 13.6 − 23.0 − 15.6 12.5 − 6.9 25.3 − 0.9 2014          Jan 
36.9 − 13.6 − 16.0 14.4 12.2 1.9 10.2 2.3 − 0.0 19.1 − 0.8 − 4.9          Feb 
− 5.3 3.0 − 12.3 38.5 33.0 6.3 26.7 0.6 4.9 − 12.8 − 17.6 3.2          Mar 
− 10.7 − 6.9 − 26.9 28.0 38.2 5.3 32.9 − 7.9 − 2.4 − 8.9 5.4 − 11.9          Apr 
33.1 − 50.1 − 63.8 57.8 54.9 7.1 47.8 1.0 1.9 − 13.9 − 4.1 8.6          May
26.4 51.2 − 16.5 23.0 44.4 6.4 38.0 − 19.4 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.4          June
− 23.1 2.3 − 28.9 15.1 10.3 9.4 0.9 6.4 − 1.6 2.7 16.9 − 7.3          July
− 46.4 − 48.9 − 47.4 40.6 34.8 2.0 32.8 3.4 2.4 2.9 3.7 2.4          Aug 
− 6.1 23.5 − − 0.7 14.7 33.4 0.3 33.1 − 12.8 − 5.8 − 18.3 − 11.6 6.0          Sep 
− 6.5 33.5 − 24.7 8.1 38.4 3.5 34.8 − 21.4 − 8.9 25.6 14.8 − 4.3          Oct 
25.9 − 9.3 − 93.3 91.2 100.6 6.2 94.3 − 13.7 4.4 − 2.7 5.7 0.4          Nov 
− 46.7 7.8 − 13.7 18.7 45.5 23.8 21.6 − 20.2 − 6.6 − 13.7 − 19.4 27.6          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
5.0 1.0 2.9 0.7 4.0 5.4 0.1 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 2013          May
1.1 − 4.6 1.3 1.7 5.7 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 0.2 15.4 − 0.5 − 2.7          June
− 1.8 23.1 3.3 1.4 − 14.1 9.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 23.5 − 0.0 3.9          July
− 8.9 3.4 3.4 − 0.4 3.2 13.0 2.4 0.2 − 9.4 0.0 − 3.0          Aug 
1.1 14.2 3.2 0.2 4.5 12.9 − 6.5 − 0.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.8          Sep 
− 3.3 7.0 2.2 0.6 32.2 27.1 − 0.7 0.0 4.0 − 0.3 2.1          Oct 
0.5 18.8 1.5 1.4 1.9 10.4 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 3.0          Nov 
2.6 31.0 2.5 3.7 − 3.3 − 13.6 7.1 4.1 2.9 − 0.0 − 3.9          Dec 
− 3.1 16.2 10.4 − 13.0 − 1.3 5.1 − 4.9 − 0.6 1.2 0.1 − 2.2 2014          Jan 
3.7 5.1 2.4 0.2 15.2 8.7 4.4 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 1.6          Feb 
− 1.6 37.3 1.6 1.9 − 10.7 − 7.9 3.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.2          Mar 
− 2.3 6.1 2.2 1.4 33.6 35.9 − 3.3 − 1.6 2.5 0.0 0.1          Apr 
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.5 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.0 3.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.7 0.0 0.6          Sep 
− 1.3 6.5 3.2 0.8 18.2 25.6 − 9.3 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.4          Oct 
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8          Nov 
2.4 11.1 3.6 5.0 − 17.3 − 18.4 3.8 3.4 − 6.1 0.0 0.0          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Nov 26,703.9 16,727.0 13,301.5 11,169.7 1,370.3 761.5 3,425.5 1,185.1 2,240.4 4,996.6 4,980.3
         Dec 26,251.1 16,610.8 13,245.1 11,044.3 1,433.8 767.0 3,365.7 1,170.3 2,195.4 4,845.6 4,794.7
2013          Jan 26,397.8 16,646.9 13,249.6 11,053.1 1,415.9 780.7 3,397.3 1,174.2 2,223.1 4,799.6 4,951.2
         Feb 26,517.2 16,640.3 13,243.1 11,048.6 1,418.7 775.8 3,397.2 1,135.6 2,261.7 4,826.1 5,050.8
         Mar 26,567.8 16,698.5 13,262.6 11,044.6 1,433.3 784.7 3,435.9 1,141.2 2,294.8 4,844.2 5,025.1
         Apr 26,709.3 16,730.7 13,270.3 11,014.5 1,440.4 815.4 3,460.3 1,151.1 2,309.3 4,818.7 5,159.9
         May 26,371.6 16,728.1 13,249.1 10,992.1 1,446.8 810.2 3,479.0 1,125.4 2,353.7 4,798.6 4,844.9
         June 25,926.2 16,691.6 13,200.4 10,975.2 1,432.7 792.6 3,491.1 1,116.9 2,374.3 4,669.1 4,565.6
         July 25,675.6 16,573.2 13,113.1 10,895.5 1,432.0 785.7 3,460.0 1,120.3 2,339.8 4,636.9 4,465.6
         Aug 25,458.7 16,417.2 12,977.1 10,767.7 1,427.9 781.6 3,440.0 1,105.3 2,334.8 4,661.9 4,379.6
         Sep 25,420.6 16,423.1 12,996.1 10,781.6 1,421.9 792.7 3,426.9 1,105.5 2,321.4 4,587.6 4,409.9
         Oct 25,463.9 16,386.4 12,927.6 10,732.8 1,401.5 793.3 3,458.8 1,118.1 2,340.7 4,625.3 4,452.2
         Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,647.4 16,161.5 12,802.4 10,649.6 1,360.8 792.1 3,359.1 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,486.8 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,041.1 16,241.9 12,803.5 10,640.4 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,679.9 4,119.3
         Feb 24,985.1 16,222.0 12,771.6 10,635.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,670.9 4,092.2
         Mar 24,905.1 16,233.6 12,772.9 10,638.7 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,638.1 4,033.4
         Apr 25,042.2 16,233.3 12,767.4 10,647.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,696.6 4,112.3
         May 25,173.3 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.2 4,186.0
         June 25,130.7 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,750.5 4,170.9
         July 25,303.0 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,852.4 4,274.6
         Aug 25,536.4 16,140.9 12,650.1 10,537.3 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,875.3 4,520.2
         Sep 25,682.2 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.0 4,509.3
         Oct 25,676.9 16,174.0 12,646.9 10,556.0 1,290.3 800.5 3,527.1 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,968.5 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.0 16,221.5 12,676.1 10,573.1 1,296.8 806.2 3,545.4 1,109.7 2,435.7 5,039.4 4,749.1
         Dec 25,875.7 16,232.8 12,688.6 10,623.4 1,284.5 780.7 3,544.3 1,128.6 2,415.7 4,984.8 4,658.1
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Nov 6,280.7 3,798.0 3,005.5 2,625.8 148.3 231.4 792.5 396.6 395.9 1,194.7 1,288.1
         Dec 6,158.5 3,745.1 2,970.5 2,593.8 147.9 228.9 774.6 385.1 389.5 1,159.8 1,253.7
2013          Jan 6,067.4 3,774.6 2,998.7 2,611.3 146.5 240.9 775.9 386.9 389.0 1,140.9 1,151.9
         Feb 6,062.6 3,765.7 2,998.6 2,614.6 148.2 235.8 767.1 382.0 385.1 1,143.4 1,153.5
         Mar 6,075.5 3,766.8 3,000.8 2,608.8 150.0 242.0 765.9 379.8 386.2 1,154.8 1,154.0
         Apr 6,087.6 3,792.2 3,014.9 2,605.5 148.6 260.7 777.3 390.5 386.9 1,139.0 1,156.4
         May 5,962.4 3,768.8 3,003.0 2,607.6 146.3 249.0 765.9 379.8 386.1 1,132.8 1,060.8
         June 5,846.2 3,766.9 3,005.4 2,616.6 148.4 240.3 761.6 376.7 384.9 1,103.7 975.6
         July 5,814.2 3,762.3 2,990.9 2,601.1 147.7 242.1 771.4 381.7 389.8 1,097.2 954.7
         Aug 5,642.3 3,656.3 2,889.1 2,501.7 145.7 241.7 767.2 375.7 391.5 1,100.0 886.0
         Sep 5,637.5 3,650.6 2,889.5 2,500.3 144.3 244.8 761.2 374.6 386.6 1,070.0 916.9
         Oct 5,668.2 3,659.4 2,887.3 2,497.3 145.4 244.6 772.1 382.6 389.5 1,090.1 918.8
         Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,966.2 3,694.4 2,929.8 2,527.9 143.9 257.9 764.6 364.2 400.5 1,212.7 1,059.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
864.1 10,807.6 10,183.5 10,170.2 3,994.2 1,386.1 309.5 2,365.1 2,013.4 101.9 2012          Nov 
876.8 10,809.5 10,247.1 10,269.7 4,061.3 1,392.7 312.8 2,359.7 2,042.8 100.5          Dec 
857.0 10,821.5 10,224.9 10,253.7 4,036.1 1,380.3 319.7 2,354.8 2,064.1 98.6 2013          Jan 
855.8 10,836.5 10,221.3 10,262.6 4,047.8 1,367.3 330.8 2,347.7 2,072.3 96.7          Feb 
867.5 10,915.5 10,288.3 10,326.1 4,090.3 1,357.1 339.8 2,365.2 2,078.3 95.3          Mar 
874.7 10,895.0 10,325.1 10,354.6 4,147.6 1,320.3 350.5 2,358.7 2,084.1 93.5          Apr 
879.7 10,966.5 10,332.1 10,351.2 4,160.2 1,285.3 363.8 2,363.4 2,087.1 91.5          May
885.9 11,010.7 10,339.5 10,356.6 4,191.4 1,256.1 371.3 2,360.2 2,087.3 90.4          June
892.8 10,958.0 10,321.2 10,341.5 4,181.5 1,243.0 383.2 2,354.4 2,090.2 89.3          July
894.2 10,922.7 10,336.4 10,362.1 4,208.3 1,241.3 385.9 2,346.9 2,091.3 88.4          Aug 
894.0 10,924.4 10,323.2 10,348.0 4,227.6 1,212.3 392.3 2,343.0 2,085.6 87.2          Sep 
898.0 10,915.2 10,342.4 10,372.6 4,264.1 1,193.0 405.6 2,344.3 2,078.9 86.8          Oct 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7          Nov 
921.2 10,901.0 10,352.4 10,401.9 4,311.2 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.6 10,349.2 10,400.0 4,305.2 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.7 10,339.1 10,383.4 4,308.3 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,967.2 10,356.2 10,399.6 4,333.2 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.4 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.7 10,351.3 10,394.8 4,365.3 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.1 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,021.2 10,387.7 10,426.4 4,415.3 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,051.2 10,388.1 10,424.7 4,448.1 1,104.3 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,023.4 10,378.7 10,420.6 4,449.5 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.6 10,414.9 10,455.0 4,478.7 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,018.0 10,418.2 10,466.5 4,523.1 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,005.3 10,403.0 10,466.1 4,558.4 1,106.6 417.2 2,212.9 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,110.2 10,481.1 10,533.1 4,637.7 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,142.4 10,535.0 10,618.2 4,741.8 1,088.8 399.3 2,217.6 2,083.7 87.0          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
214.2 3,162.1 3,088.7 2,929.4 1,311.1 220.5 40.6 743.5 522.4 91.2 2012          Nov 
216.3 3,131.3 3,060.2 2,930.4 1,307.2 222.8 40.0 742.2 528.6 89.6          Dec 
212.7 3,116.1 3,045.2 2,928.9 1,315.4 216.1 39.6 740.4 529.6 87.8 2013          Jan 
212.1 3,103.6 3,034.1 2,921.3 1,320.1 209.7 38.4 736.0 530.9 86.2          Feb 
214.7 3,093.1 3,026.7 2,905.9 1,311.8 207.3 37.1 734.8 529.5 85.4          Mar 
217.1 3,112.2 3,047.8 2,928.5 1,340.3 208.8 36.1 730.7 528.9 83.8          Apr 
217.9 3,120.7 3,051.1 2,925.7 1,343.8 205.7 35.4 730.0 529.0 81.8          May
219.6 3,113.0 3,041.2 2,911.2 1,340.2 198.5 34.3 728.4 528.8 81.0          June
221.0 3,110.3 3,040.5 2,916.4 1,353.3 198.9 33.3 722.9 528.2 79.9          July
220.7 3,111.9 3,051.4 2,924.9 1,365.3 200.3 32.8 719.1 528.4 79.0          Aug 
220.9 3,115.2 3,051.4 2,926.9 1,378.4 193.3 32.5 716.4 528.1 78.2          Sep 
221.5 3,134.5 3,075.3 2,955.7 1,408.4 195.1 32.9 713.0 528.1 78.1          Oct 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.8 3,207.6 3,140.3 3,019.4 1,506.8 190.7 32.8 680.8 532.1 76.2          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2012          Nov 312.3 325.1 143.7 114.0 6.1 43.5 11.9 5.9 421.2 417.4 495.5 2,889.4 2,206.6
         Dec 251.0 288.7 134.9 86.7 6.0 43.9 11.6 5.6 376.4 372.4 467.9 2,853.2 2,183.1
2013          Jan 284.9 282.9 129.2 83.5 6.0 43.4 14.4 6.4 390.1 386.2 459.7 2,807.6 2,172.3
         Feb 290.5 283.3 129.3 83.6 6.0 43.5 14.6 6.3 417.3 412.0 465.9 2,806.9 2,151.4
         Mar 301.2 288.2 126.0 91.0 6.6 44.0 14.4 6.2 440.3 434.2 459.6 2,775.5 2,122.0
         Apr 250.7 289.7 130.1 87.7 6.9 43.7 15.1 6.1 431.3 423.8 459.1 2,747.3 2,102.0
         May 313.2 302.1 137.1 91.8 7.3 44.6 15.3 6.0 444.5 437.7 455.7 2,721.4 2,076.4
         June 343.5 310.6 142.5 95.5 7.6 44.3 14.9 5.9 466.2 459.7 436.0 2,695.8 2,061.8
         July 317.4 299.1 131.9 94.1 7.2 45.1 14.9 5.8 417.1 411.3 434.8 2,656.5 2,031.2
         Aug 261.7 299.0 130.7 95.3 7.5 44.5 15.1 5.8 339.1 332.9 444.4 2,646.2 2,012.9
         Sep 272.9 303.5 133.8 96.8 7.5 44.8 15.0 5.8 331.1 325.3 417.9 2,642.7 2,003.7
         Oct 245.2 297.3 132.3 91.8 7.9 45.0 14.7 5.6 313.9 308.0 419.1 2,638.0 2,006.1
         Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9
         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.5 287.7 404.8 2,586.5 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.8 279.3 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 306.7 295.2 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7
         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 293.9 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7
         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.8 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.6 2,521.4 1,888.8
         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 429.1 2,488.8 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.7 2,474.9 1,824.9
         Dec 217.8 306.5 137.7 96.7 11.3 39.5 16.1 5.1 296.8 290.5 413.2 2,491.8 1,817.5
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2012          Nov 31.9 200.9 62.0 93.4 4.5 38.1 2.5 0.5 107.0 106.6 4.1 644.4 357.6
         Dec 29.2 171.7 58.5 67.5 4.4 38.2 2.5 0.5 80.4 80.1 4.3 627.0 350.3
2013          Jan 30.1 157.0 47.6 64.2 4.4 37.7 2.5 0.6 83.1 82.6 4.4 610.1 345.1
         Feb 27.2 155.1 46.0 63.8 4.4 37.7 2.6 0.6 99.7 98.7 4.6 620.0 346.1
         Mar 25.4 161.9 44.8 70.8 4.9 38.1 2.6 0.6 97.0 95.8 4.7 610.5 338.4
         Apr 22.7 161.0 45.7 69.1 5.1 37.8 2.6 0.6 98.9 96.6 5.3 605.6 340.1
         May 27.8 167.2 47.2 72.6 5.4 38.5 2.8 0.6 98.0 96.7 5.3 593.2 330.7
         June 28.9 172.9 50.1 75.6 5.4 38.3 2.9 0.6 113.3 112.8 4.8 581.3 326.4
         July 27.1 166.7 45.7 73.5 5.0 39.0 2.9 0.6 89.8 89.7 4.8 574.5 322.1
         Aug 18.2 168.9 46.8 74.8 5.1 38.4 3.0 0.7 3.0 2.8 4.8 567.8 316.2
         Sep 19.2 169.2 46.4 75.4 5.1 38.6 3.0 0.7 3.7 3.2 4.3 566.6 316.5
         Oct 16.0 162.9 43.2 71.9 5.4 38.8 3.0 0.7 7.7 6.2 4.0 565.3 316.5
         Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 14.8 173.4 50.8 78.6 7.5 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.4 549.6 282.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2015
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
96.1 91.2 2,702.1 3,940.0 2,408.9 − 67.4 4,944.8 − 5,091.6 8,957.5 9,761.1 7,627.4 114.6 2012          Nov 
87.4 93.8 2,672.1 3,793.4 2,396.4 − 52.1 4,729.6 − 5,168.7 9,045.7 9,809.1 7,578.1 120.0          Dec 
70.1 92.3 2,645.3 3,774.6 2,387.7 − 32.6 4,932.3 − 5,109.7 9,002.2 9,749.0 7,536.2 112.0 2013          Jan 
61.7 88.1 2,657.0 3,812.7 2,378.2 − 38.3 4,982.2 − 5,119.4 9,018.5 9,757.0 7,529.6 111.1          Feb 
59.2 84.1 2,632.1 3,798.4 2,414.3 − 58.9 4,955.7 − 5,170.4 9,081.9 9,805.9 7,557.1 110.9          Mar 
62.5 81.6 2,603.3 3,832.7 2,390.1 − 43.1 5,122.2 − 5,239.7 9,128.2 9,855.0 7,495.4 111.2          Apr 
62.9 74.4 2,584.0 3,755.3 2,377.8 − 54.6 4,825.3 − 5,265.1 9,139.4 9,856.7 7,467.3 111.9          May
66.1 68.4 2,561.4 3,651.9 2,335.9 − 63.2 4,507.1 − 5,309.1 9,165.4 9,850.1 7,398.0 113.0          June
62.1 66.7 2,527.8 3,599.3 2,365.2 − 59.0 4,411.0 − 5,299.1 9,155.4 9,841.6 7,387.5 116.5          July
66.1 63.1 2,517.0 3,572.1 2,391.4 − 61.5 4,310.0 − 5,325.6 9,185.4 9,885.0 7,394.1 115.9          Aug 
76.0 58.3 2,508.5 3,500.7 2,372.9 − 45.1 4,381.9 − 5,347.6 9,181.4 9,846.9 7,362.1 116.6          Sep 
63.7 58.1 2,516.1 3,511.7 2,376.8 − 45.1 4,436.5 − 5,384.3 9,200.5 9,859.6 7,374.6 114.3          Oct 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,308.9 2,339.4 − 62.6 3,953.9 − 5,445.1 9,250.0 9,852.8 7,309.8 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,473.8 2,384.0 − 44.8 4,108.0 − 5,419.2 9,224.8 9,855.2 7,354.0 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,428.0 2,404.6 − 31.4 4,039.0 − 5,428.4 9,235.6 9,867.3 7,337.0 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,391.9 2,421.4 − 30.0 3,981.3 − 5,461.6 9,274.3 9,879.7 7,344.1 106.1          Mar 
37.8 32.6 2,474.0 3,462.9 2,432.9 − 23.1 4,060.2 − 5,499.4 9,301.6 9,903.7 7,323.8 104.5          Apr 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,476.8 2,426.3 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,557.1 9,363.3 9,971.4 7,313.2 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,374.6 2,456.4 − 50.3 4,138.9 − 5,601.4 9,386.5 9,987.1 7,299.9 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,437.8 2,468.4 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,612.0 9,403.0 10,017.3 7,299.8 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,449.8 2,493.0 − 59.9 4,451.8 − 5,648.8 9,446.4 10,067.6 7,317.0 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.2 2,507.9 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.7 9,469.5 10,079.7 7,327.3 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.1 3,562.7 2,490.6 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,727.5 9,477.9 10,104.7 7,261.4 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,572.6 2,503.5 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.9 9,568.9 10,198.1 7,259.2 113.3          Nov 
82.9 42.7 2,366.2 3,549.7 2,470.0 − 37.1 4,568.2 − 5,948.8 9,665.7 10,317.4 7,187.3 109.7          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
17.8 10.8 615.8 857.9 516.9 − 813.3 1,801.6 197.3 1,373.1 2,257.0 2,396.7 2,005.9 − 2012          Nov 
16.0 10.3 600.7 780.0 510.2 − 759.5 1,784.7 200.3 1,365.7 2,231.6 2,342.6 1,981.4 −          Dec 
13.5 8.9 587.7 783.8 507.3 − 715.8 1,678.5 199.4 1,363.0 2,219.5 2,329.4 1,961.3 − 2013          Jan 
14.1 10.0 595.9 782.3 503.7 − 719.8 1,668.6 201.4 1,366.1 2,215.9 2,344.3 1,960.1 −          Feb 
13.5 8.9 588.1 768.2 517.6 − 696.6 1,681.0 203.8 1,356.6 2,208.8 2,332.9 1,964.6 −          Mar 
14.9 9.5 581.1 764.4 508.0 − 696.5 1,689.7 204.1 1,386.1 2,236.6 2,365.2 1,942.0 −          Apr 
14.6 9.0 569.7 740.9 506.2 − 693.4 1,591.5 207.0 1,391.0 2,242.0 2,368.8 1,926.8 −          May
12.3 8.5 560.5 731.8 495.3 − 696.9 1,503.6 208.2 1,390.3 2,235.9 2,374.8 1,904.0 −          June
15.8 8.8 549.9 722.1 503.6 − 681.6 1,490.7 211.5 1,399.1 2,240.8 2,360.0 1,895.9 −          July
13.9 7.8 546.1 719.8 509.3 − 696.3 1,422.0 214.8 1,412.2 2,256.5 2,286.0 1,892.6 −          Aug 
12.0 7.8 546.8 676.5 502.4 − 696.5 1,465.4 218.0 1,424.8 2,262.2 2,290.0 1,883.0 −          Sep 
13.6 8.2 543.6 677.2 501.5 − 694.8 1,472.8 220.2 1,451.6 2,287.9 2,321.4 1,875.6 −          Oct 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 −          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.9 7.6 531.0 633.6 535.6 − 606.8 1,625.4 267.9 1,557.6 2,402.3 2,427.6 1,857.2 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2012          July 666.7 160.7 1 074.9 1.8 280.7 770.6 210.9 892.5 138.8 60.6 111.5 1 774.6
         Aug 678.9 146.0 1 079.9 0.8 281.0 343.1 211.5 897.7 130.7 93.5 510.2 1 751.0
         Sep 676.8 130.6 1 076.8 0.8 279.7 328.6 210.5 897.6 107.0 81.0 540.0 1 766.2
         Oct 681.5 117.6 1 062.8 1.1 279.6 305.4 209.0 892.7 101.4 96.0 538.1 1 736.2
         Nov 708.5 84.4 1 053.8 1.0 278.9 256.1 209.3 890.0 95.7 146.4 529.2 1 675.3
         Dec 708.0 74.0 1 044.1 1.6 277.3 231.8 208.5 889.3 121.1 144.5 509.9 1 631.0
2013          Jan 683.9 78.2 1 036.8 3.7 276.8 238.4 206.6 903.5 100.1 141.7 489.0 1 630.9
         Feb 656.5 127.5 960.3 0.3 273.4 184.3 207.8 883.4 90.8 185.6 466.3 1 534.0
         Mar 655.7 130.5 843.2 0.9 269.9 145.3 205.5 880.5 78.8 187.1 403.0 1 428.8
         Apr 656.8 123.7 782.9 0.5 269.1 133.8 205.5 889.2 89.7 168.7 346.0 1 369.0
         May 657.3 113.0 749.9 0.9 265.7 114.5 204.3 897.1 82.5 166.2 322.2 1 333.8
         June 656.0 104.7 728.4 0.5 259.9 90.5 199.4 904.1 83.1 172.3 300.3 1 294.9
         July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2012          July 180.3 3.1 76.5 0.1 68.6 293.3 152.1 222.3 1.0 − 369.8 29.6 545.2
         Aug 179.6 2.5 76.3 0.2 68.8 102.0 162.9 225.1 4.2 − 351.5 184.8 511.9
         Sep 177.7 1.6 75.4 0.0 68.6 112.1 134.6 224.6 6.0 − 349.1 195.2 531.9
         Oct 181.8 1.7 74.5 0.2 68.7 108.2 124.0 223.4 6.8 − 325.3 189.9 521.4
         Nov 190.7 1.9 72.9 0.1 68.2 76.7 126.2 222.4 7.1 − 291.0 192.5 491.5
         Dec 190.8 1.8 70.5 0.2 67.5 61.3 124.6 222.0 8.9 − 277.5 191.5 474.8
2013          Jan 185.1 2.1 69.7 0.1 67.4 56.1 117.2 225.3 10.0 − 242.5 158.2 439.6
         Feb 176.8 0.7 58.9 0.0 66.3 34.2 109.9 219.2 2.5 − 207.3 144.2 397.5
         Mar 176.4 0.7 34.9 0.0 65.3 30.4 107.3 219.7 2.1 − 203.2 121.0 371.1
         Apr 177.1 0.1 21.8 0.0 65.0 24.4 95.7 221.6 1.9 − 189.2 109.7 355.8
         May 176.7 0.3 16.2 0.0 64.3 26.8 88.2 223.2 1.0 − 182.0 100.3 350.4
         June 175.4 0.2 13.0 0.0 63.0 23.9 93.0 226.0 0.7 − 189.0 97.0 346.9
         July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is includes liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with operations. 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in cir-the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. 2Source: the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in cir-
ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under the Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase culation are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this
programme and the Eurosystem’s securities markets programme. 4From Aug. 2009,

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2015
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 9.9 + 102.6 + 3.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.9 + 11.7 + 21.0 + 84.8 + 0.7 + 12.3 2012          July
+ 12.2 − 14.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 −427.5 + 0.6 + 5.2 − 8.1 + 32.9 + 398.7 − 23.6          Aug − 2.1 − 15.4 − 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 14.5 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 23.7 − 12.5 + 29.8 + 15.2          Sep 
+ 4.7 − 13.0 − 14.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.2 − 1.5 − 4.9 − 5.6 + 15.0 − 1.9 − 30.0          Oct 
+ 27.0 − 33.2 − 9.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 49.3 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 5.7 + 50.4 − 8.9 − 60.9          Nov − 0.5 − 10.4 − 9.7 + 0.6 − 1.6 − 24.3 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 25.4 − 1.9 − 19.3 − 44.3          Dec 
− 24.1 + 4.2 − 7.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 6.6 − 1.9 + 14.2 − 21.0 − 2.8 − 20.9 − 0.1 2013          Jan 
− 27.4 + 49.3 − 76.5 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 54.1 + 1.2 − 20.1 − 9.3 + 43.9 − 22.7 − 96.9          Feb − 0.8 + 3.0 − 117.1 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 39.0 − 2.3 − 2.9 − 12.0 + 1.5 − 63.3 − 105.2          Mar 
+ 1.1 − 6.8 − 60.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 11.5 +
 0.0 + 8.7 + 10.9 − 18.4 − 57.0 − 59.8          Apr 
+
0.5 − 10.7 − 33.0 + 0.4 − 3.4 − 19.3 − 1.2 + 7.9 − 7.2 − 2.5 − 23.8 − 35.2          May
− 1.3 − 8.3 − 21.5 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 24.0 − 4.9 + 7.0 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 21.9 − 38.9          June− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 16.4 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 − 20.7 + 0.3 + 19.2 2012          July− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 −191.3 + 10.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 18.3 + 155.2 − 33.2          Aug − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 10.0 − 28.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 2.4 + 10.4 + 20.0          Sep 
+ 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 23.8 − 5.3 − 10.5          Oct 
+ 8.9 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 31.5 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 − 29.9          Nov + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 15.3 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 13.5 − 1.0 − 16.7          Dec 
− 5.8 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.2 − 7.4 + 3.3 + 1.1 + 35.0 − 33.3 − 35.2 2013          Jan 
− 8.3 − 1.3 − 10.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 21.9 − 7.3 − 6.1 − 7.5 + 35.3 − 14.0 − 42.1          Feb − 0.3 − 0.1 − 23.9 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.8 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 4.1 − 23.2 − 26.4          Mar 
+ 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 11.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 14.0 − 11.2 − 15.4          Apr 
− 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 − 7.6 + 1.6 − 0.8 + 7.2 − 9.4 − 5.4          May− 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.8 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 7.0 − 3.3 − 3.5          June
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5          July
− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
adjustment
is shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of
with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accounteuro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under holdings”. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2014 May                30 2,197.1 326.5 245.9 81.3 164.6 23.8 19.6 19.6 −
         June                  6 2,172.3 326.5 248.3 81.7 166.6 22.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              13 2,124.3 326.5 247.5 81.6 165.9 23.4 18.8 18.8 −
                              20 2,080.0 326.5 244.4 81.0 163.5 25.5 18.4 18.4 −
                              27 2,088.1 326.5 244.4 80.6 163.8 24.4 18.6 18.6 −
         July                  4 2,070.3 334.4 249.6 81.7 167.9 23.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              11 2,057.1 334.4 249.2 81.6 167.6 22.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              18 2,062.5 334.4 248.2 81.6 166.5 24.5 19.5 19.5 −
                              25 2,044.3 334.4 248.1 81.6 166.5 25.2 18.6 18.6 −
         Aug                  1 2,059.7 334.4 248.5 81.7 166.8 24.9 18.5 18.5 −
                                8 2,025.3 334.4 249.4 81.1 168.3 24.5 18.9 18.9 −
                              15 2,023.2 334.4 249.1 80.8 168.3 24.5 19.3 19.3 −
                              22 2,013.0 334.4 249.3 80.8 168.5 24.3 19.9 19.9 −
                              29 2,038.7 334.4 249.5 80.9 168.7 24.2 20.9 20.9 −
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 334.4 249.8 81.4 168.4 25.4 21.8 21.8 −
                              12 2,003.8 334.4 250.1 81.4 168.7 25.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              19 1,988.2 334.4 247.3 81.1 166.1 26.9 19.9 19.9 −
                              26 2,038.2 334.4 248.4 81.2 167.2 26.5 20.5 20.5 −
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 334.5 263.1 84.5 178.6 27.8 20.6 20.6 −
                              10 2,042.7 334.5 263.0 84.3 178.7 28.7 21.1 21.1 −
                              17 2,029.7 334.5 262.4 84.3 178.1 27.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              24 2,032.8 334.5 263.6 84.3 179.3 26.9 21.2 21.2 −
                              31 2,052.1 334.5 262.9 84.3 178.6 27.9 22.3 22.3 −
2014 Nov                  7 2,029.7 334.5 261.4 83.9 177.5 28.1 22.1 22.1 −
                              14 2,028.2 334.5 263.2 83.8 179.4 28.0 22.6 22.6 −
                              21 2,033.2 334.5 264.4 83.6 180.8 28.1 19.7 19.7 −
                              28 2,053.9 334.5 264.3 83.6 180.6 28.8 18.7 18.7 −
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 334.5 267.5 83.7 183.8 27.5 18.2 18.2 −
                              12 2,034.7 334.5 266.3 81.2 185.1 27.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              19 2,134.8 334.5 265.9 80.3 185.6 27.8 19.3 19.3 −
                              26 2,150.2 334.5 266.1 80.3 185.8 28.7 19.4 19.4 −
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 343.8 273.5 81.5 192.0 28.7 19.7 19.7 −
                                9 2,168.8 343.9 272.6 81.5 191.2 32.6 20.4 20.4 −
                              16 2,158.2 343.9 273.0 81.3 191.7 33.2 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 2,159.8 343.9 274.9 81.3 193.6 32.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 2,182.0 343.9 273.7 81.3 192.5 35.5 18.6 18.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Mar 906.7 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.6 3.4−−−
         Apr 916.9 136.5 52.0 22.4 29.7 2.8−−−
         May 891.6 136.5 52.0 22.3 29.7 0.8−−−
         June 839.7 100.3 50.5 21.9 28.6 0.9−−−
         July 838.1 100.3 49.9 21.9 28.0 0.7−−−
         Aug 832.2 100.3 50.3 21.5 28.8 0.2−−−
         Sep 835.0 107.8 48.6 21.3 27.3 0.4−−−
         Oct 823.5 107.7 48.4 21.1 27.3 0.1−−−
         Nov 806.9 107.7 48.8 21.0 27.8 0.1−−−
         Dec 800.7 94.9 48.9 20.8 28.1 0.1−−−
2014          Jan 768.1 94.9 48.5 20.8 27.7 0.1−−−
         Feb 752.9 94.9 47.6 20.6 27.1 0.1−−−
         Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
679.7 174.0 505.7 − − 0.1 0.0 57.4 573.7 215.3 358.5 27.3 243.2 2014 May                30
653.3 149.4 503.9 − − 0.0 − 61.1 570.9 212.8 358.0 27.3 242.3          June                  6
607.6 136.8 470.8 − − 0.0 − 63.8 570.0 212.5 357.4 27.3 239.4                               13
565.0 97.9 467.1 − − 0.0 − 62.9 569.4 209.9 359.5 27.3 240.6                               20
568.4 115.0 453.3 − − 0.1 − 65.2 570.6 209.9 360.7 27.3 242.8                               27
545.9 97.1 448.8 − − − − 61.6 566.9 205.2 361.7 26.7 243.6          July                  4
529.2 94.2 434.8 − − 0.2 − 60.9 568.8 204.8 364.0 26.7 246.5                               11
531.7 99.9 431.1 − − 0.7 0.0 68.3 565.8 204.1 361.7 26.7 243.4                               18
507.8 97.9 409.6 − − 0.4 − 74.2 566.3 203.5 362.8 26.7 242.8                               25
533.5 133.3 400.2 − − 0.0 0.0 74.2 556.8 199.0 357.8 26.7 242.1          Aug                  1504.9 107.9 397.0 − − 0.0 − 66.1 559.1 199.0 360.1 26.7 241.1                                 8
501.0 108.2 392.8 − − 0.0 − 66.8 560.9 199.0 361.9 26.7 240.5                               15
497.6 107.6 390.0 − − 0.0 0.1 61.9 557.7 195.4 362.3 26.7 241.1                               22517.6 131.8 384.9 − − 0.9 − 62.6 559.9 195.4 364.4 26.7 242.9                               29
492.7 111.2 381.4 − − 0.1 0.0 62.4 560.7 195.4 365.3 26.7 238.1          Sep                  5483.1 110.7 372.3 − − 0.2 − 63.5 561.6 195.1 366.5 26.7 237.5                               12
472.3 105.7 366.3 − − 0.3 − 63.3 561.4 194.5 366.9 26.7 236.0                               19
520.2 90.3 429.6 − − 0.3 0.0 66.3 561.8 194.5 367.3 26.7 233.3                               26
513.9 89.1 424.7 − − 0.1 − 67.0 561.9 194.6 367.2 26.7 238.1          Oct                  3
506.8 84.2 422.4 − − 0.1 − 65.7 561.1 194.0 367.0 26.7 235.1                               10
499.2 82.5 416.6 − − 0.1 − 65.6 559.1 191.2 367.9 26.7 234.3                               17
503.9 92.9 410.8 − − 0.2 0.0 60.8 561.2 192.4 368.8 26.7 234.0                               24
527.6 118.2 408.5 − − 1.0 − 59.8 557.1 192.9 364.2 26.7 233.1                               31
502.8 98.2 404.6 − − 0.0 − 57.7 560.5 195.6 365.0 26.7 235.8 2014 Nov                  7
496.7 98.4 398.2 − − 0.1 − 56.0 563.0 198.0 365.0 26.7 237.3                               14
499.0 102.6 396.2 − − 0.0 0.1 61.0 563.4 199.0 364.5 26.7 236.3                               21513.8 114.3 398.8 − − 0.7 − 58.1 570.2 204.2 366.1 26.7 238.8                               28
491.1 98.0 392.9 − − 0.1 − 58.2 574.8 207.5 367.2 26.7 239.7          Dec                  5
484.2 105.2 378.9 − − 0.1 − 54.6 579.9 211.5 368.4 26.7 241.9                               12
579.4 99.0 480.4 − − 0.0 − 58.0 585.9 215.5 370.4 26.7 237.2                               19
592.5 119.2 473.3 − − 0.0 − 58.7 587.5 216.9 370.6 26.7 236.1                               26
629.7 156.1 473.3 − − 0.3 0.0 60.4 592.4 217.2 375.2 26.7 241.0 2015 Jan                  2585.6 112.3 473.3 − − 0.0 0.0 58.4 593.2 218.9 374.3 26.7 235.4                                 9573.8 114.0 459.1 − − 0.7 − 59.0 594.6 220.7 373.9 26.7 234.5                               16
572.1 125.3 445.3 − − 1.6 − 58.7 599.6 224.7 374.9 26.7 232.5                               23
579.6 163.8 415.6 − − 0.2 − 62.1 603.4 227.1 376.3 26.7 238.4                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
21.8 0.1 21.6 − − 0.2 − 5.7 65.0 65.0 − 4.4 617.9 2013          Mar 
14.8 0.5 14.3 − − 0.0 − 5.8 63.8 63.8 − 4.4 636.7          Apr 
12.3 0.1 12.1 − − 0.0 − 4.9 62.9 62.9 − 4.4 617.8          May
12.8 0.9 11.8 − − 0.0 − 4.8 61.9 61.9 − 4.4 604.1          June
12.2 1.0 11.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 61.1 61.1 − 4.4 605.0          July
10.8 0.2 10.6 − − 0.0 − 4.6 59.5 59.5 − 4.4 602.1          Aug 
10.8 0.2 9.9 − − 0.7 − 4.9 58.6 58.6 − 4.4 599.5          Sep 
9.3 0.2 8.7 − − 0.4 − 5.0 57.6 57.6 − 4.4 591.0          Oct 
9.2 0.7 8.4 − − 0.1 − 5.1 57.0 57.0 − 4.4 574.5          Nov 
52.1 38.2 13.8 − − 0.1 − 4.7 55.8 55.8 − 4.4 539.8          Dec 
31.3 20.3 11.0 − − − − 5.1 54.2 54.2 − 4.4 529.5 2014          Jan 
18.2 7.1 11.0 − − 0.1 − 5.7 53.8 53.8 − 4.4 528.2          Feb 
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2014 May                30 2,197.1 953.8 352.2 209.4 39.9 102.9 − 0.0 1.7 − 163.0 119.8 43.3
         June                  6 2,172.3 957.8 343.7 187.1 37.3 119.2 − 0.1 1.8 − 141.6 100.3 41.3
                              13 2,124.3 956.5 325.8 199.8 17.2 108.7 − 0.2 2.7 − 124.1 89.2 34.9
                              20 2,080.0 955.9 237.8 211.2 26.5 − − 0.0 8.0 − 168.3 130.1 38.2
                              27 2,088.1 958.3 243.2 217.7 25.4 − − 0.0 8.6 − 171.6 131.9 39.7
         July                  4 2,070.3 963.9 241.5 214.2 27.3 − − 0.0 3.7 − 141.1 100.3 40.9
                              11 2,057.1 965.2 226.3 206.2 20.2 − − 0.0 4.2 − 144.1 107.2 36.8
                              18 2,062.5 965.6 233.9 211.1 22.7 − − 0.1 5.0 − 140.9 103.2 37.7
                              25 2,044.3 965.5 217.7 196.4 21.3 − − 0.0 4.8 − 139.9 107.1 32.8
         Aug                  1 2,059.7 971.4 263.9 219.7 44.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 105.8 70.9 34.9
                                8 2,025.3 973.4 235.9 214.5 21.1 − − 0.3 5.0 − 96.7 66.6 30.2
                              15 2,023.2 975.6 241.5 221.6 19.8 − − 0.0 4.8 − 86.3 57.7 28.6
                              22 2,013.0 970.3 230.9 205.2 25.6 − − 0.0 4.8 − 95.1 66.4 28.7
                              29 2,038.7 971.3 253.7 222.8 30.9 − − 0.0 4.9 − 93.1 63.8 29.3
         Sep                  5 2,012.1 972.6 220.4 193.7 26.7 − − 0.0 4.9 − 98.5 70.7 27.8
                              12 2,003.8 971.9 200.3 179.2 21.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 111.4 80.0 31.4
                              19 1,988.2 970.4 185.5 162.4 23.1 − − 0.0 4.9 − 115.8 86.0 29.8
                              26 2,038.2 970.0 234.1 209.4 24.7 − − 0.0 4.8 − 116.6 87.1 29.5
         Oct                  3 2,053.7 975.1 237.1 206.8 30.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 100.0 69.5 30.5
                              10 2,042.7 974.3 227.8 204.6 23.1 − − 0.1 4.8 − 103.2 72.6 30.7
                              17 2,029.7 972.9 213.9 184.8 29.0 − − 0.0 4.7 − 108.5 75.6 32.9
                              24 2,032.8 971.1 197.2 170.0 27.1 − − 0.0 4.8 − 134.0 102.2 31.8
                              31 2,052.1 975.2 250.0 211.6 38.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 93.1 56.8 36.2
2014 Nov                  7 2,029.7 977.2 225.2 183.1 42.0 − − 0.0 4.4 − 93.7 58.2 35.5
                              14 2,028.2 976.9 212.7 187.0 25.6 − − 0.0 4.5 − 103.4 67.5 35.9
                              21 2,033.2 975.1 197.6 175.5 22.0 − − 0.0 4.8 − 120.8 84.7 36.1
                              28 2,053.9 981.0 244.1 208.3 35.8 − − 0.0 4.7 − 92.3 56.1 36.2
         Dec                  5 2,038.1 988.9 205.8 177.8 28.0 − − 0.0 4.8 − 107.7 71.0 36.8
                              12 2,034.7 992.6 215.2 188.7 26.5 − − 0.0 4.8 − 92.3 64.8 27.5
                              19 2,134.8 1,003.8 284.0 245.1 38.9 − − − 4.9 − 106.8 80.6 26.3
                              26 2,150.2 1,017.2 300.0 256.4 43.5 − − − 4.9 − 93.0 66.4 26.6
2015 Jan                  2 2,216.0 1,017.1 364.5 302.8 61.7 − − 0.0 6.2 − 71.9 43.9 28.0
                                9 2,168.8 1,006.9 316.1 242.4 73.7 − − 0.0 6.3 − 84.9 56.9 28.0
                              16 2,158.2 1,001.4 288.9 223.3 65.6 − − 0.0 6.9 − 94.7 64.9 29.8
                              23 2,159.8 1,002.3 243.8 189.3 54.5 − − 0.0 5.7 − 114.7 81.0 33.7
                              30 2,182.0 1,004.2 264.5 227.4 36.6 − − 0.6 5.6 − 111.4 76.3 35.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          Mar 906.7 223.1 222.9 108.7 20.8 93.3 − − − − 10.9 0.5 10.4
         Apr 916.9 224.5 215.5 102.9 30.8 81.8 − − − − 28.7 0.9 27.7
         May 891.6 225.4 198.3 88.3 20.6 89.4 − − − − 20.6 0.6 20.1
         June 839.7 226.9 195.1 89.6 23.5 82.1 − − − − 8.1 0.5 7.6
         July 838.1 227.9 187.0 90.2 20.1 76.7 − − − − 12.5 0.5 12.0
         Aug 832.2 228.1 179.2 90.8 15.1 73.4 − − − − 10.6 0.5 10.0
         Sep 835.0 227.9 173.7 97.7 17.5 58.5 − − − − 13.5 1.9 11.6
         Oct 823.5 229.3 139.0 61.5 12.3 65.3 − − − − 33.0 1.4 31.5
         Nov 806.9 230.1 135.5 64.0 13.9 57.6 − − − − 19.1 1.0 18.1
         Dec 800.7 237.3 141.5 83.9 10.7 46.9 − − − − 10.5 2.0 8.5
2014          Jan 768.1 220.6 123.2 64.1 10.7 48.4 − − − − 9.5 1.0 8.5
         Feb 752.9 220.9 115.0 53.0 9.1 53.0 − − − − 11.8 1.2 10.7
         Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2015
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
76.5 1.0 5.3 5.3 − 52.8 209.2 − 288.9 92.6 2014 May                30
78.3 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 206.3 − 288.9 93.4          June                  6
67.1 1.0 6.6 6.6 − 52.8 205.3 − 288.9 93.4                               13
61.6 1.1 6.2 6.2 − 52.8 204.0 − 288.9 95.3                               20
59.7 0.8 5.5 5.5 − 52.8 203.4 − 288.9 95.3                               27
56.9 1.0 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 206.6 − 301.4 95.3          July                  4
53.2 1.1 4.8 4.8 − 53.4 208.1 − 301.4 95.3                               11
52.2 1.3 5.0 5.0 − 53.4 208.5 − 301.4 95.3                               18
48.5 1.1 5.6 5.6 − 53.4 211.1 − 301.4 95.3                               25
44.2 1.3 5.4 5.4 − 53.4 212.8 − 301.4 95.3          Aug                  1
43.8 1.0 6.3 6.3 − 53.4 213.1 − 301.4 95.3                                 8
43.8 1.0 6.1 6.1 − 53.4 213.9 − 301.4 95.3                               15
42.0 1.1 5.9 5.9 − 53.4 213.0 − 301.4 95.3                               22
41.6 1.1 6.1 6.1 − 53.4 217.1 − 301.4 95.3                               29
43.2 0.9 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.7 − 301.4 95.3          Sep                  5
40.6 0.9 7.6 7.6 − 53.4 216.2 − 301.4 95.3                               12
40.9 1.0 6.2 6.2 − 53.4 213.4 − 301.4 95.3                               19
40.3 0.8 7.0 7.0 − 53.4 214.5 − 301.4 95.3                               26
41.0 0.9 7.3 7.3 − 55.5 221.1 − 315.5 95.3          Oct                  3
39.1 1.2 7.5 7.5 − 55.5 218.4 − 315.5 95.3                               10
36.8 1.1 5.7 5.7 − 55.5 219.7 − 315.5 95.3                               17
36.2 1.1 6.4 6.4 − 55.5 215.7 − 315.5 95.3                               24
39.1 1.3 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 215.9 − 315.5 95.3                               31
40.5 1.3 5.3 5.3 − 55.5 215.8 − 315.5 95.3 2014 Nov                  7
39.7 1.1 6.7 6.7 − 55.5 216.9 − 315.5 95.3                               14
41.1 1.1 6.9 6.9 − 55.5 219.5 − 315.5 95.3                               21
39.9 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 219.5 − 315.5 94.0                               28
39.7 1.5 6.1 6.1 − 55.5 218.5 − 315.5 94.0          Dec                  5
40.5 1.1 6.3 6.3 − 55.5 216.9 − 315.5 94.0                               12
46.9 1.3 7.0 7.0 − 55.5 214.9 − 315.5 94.0                               19
47.2 1.3 6.8 6.8 − 55.5 214.8 − 315.5 94.0                               26
46.9 1.3 5.5 5.5 − 56.4 220.9 − 330.9 94.4 2015 Jan                  2
50.8 2.4 5.0 5.0 − 56.4 214.5 − 330.9 94.7                                 9
60.3 1.7 6.5 6.5 − 56.4 215.9 − 330.9 94.7                               16
86.7 1.6 6.4 6.4 − 56.4 216.0 − 330.9 95.2                               23
84.4 1.5 7.3 7.3 − 56.4 220.4 − 330.9 95.2                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
70.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.0 203.8 132.1 5.0 2013          Mar 
67.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 24.4 204.1 132.1 5.0          Apr 
63.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.1 25.0 207.0 132.1 5.0          May
61.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 25.3 208.2 95.0 5.0          June
59.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.9 25.5 211.5 95.0 5.0          July
58.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.9 26.0 214.8 95.0 5.0          Aug 
54.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 13.7 26.6 218.0 101.6 5.0          Sep 
54.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 13.7 27.0 220.2 101.6 5.0          Oct 
52.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 27.4 221.7 101.6 5.0          Nov 
52.0 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 13.5 26.8 224.3 88.1 5.0          Dec 
45.3 0.4 0.8 0.8 − 13.5 27.2 234.7 88.1 5.0 2014          Jan 
33.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 13.5 27.8 237.1 88.1 5.0          Feb 
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 16.4 2,314.4 1,718.6 1,138.6 580.0 595.8 376.8 219.0 3,462.1 3,085.5 2,536.1 2,241.9
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,791.6 19.1 2,021.6 1,530.9 1,147.5 383.4 490.7 333.7 157.0 3,652.3 3,237.3 2,659.2 2,385.0
2013          Mar 8,063.0 16.9 2,228.8 1,727.6 1,290.0 437.6 501.1 332.8 168.3 3,710.8 3,302.6 2,715.8 2,451.0
         Apr 8,080.3 15.7 2,220.5 1,715.6 1,281.3 434.3 504.9 337.1 167.8 3,736.2 3,329.5 2,732.4 2,446.6
         May 7,937.6 16.0 2,196.9 1,692.8 1,258.9 433.9 504.1 335.6 168.5 3,713.8 3,302.1 2,720.5 2,451.6         June 7,833.2 15.8 2,189.1 1,676.4 1,243.9 432.5 512.7 344.5 168.2 3,713.6 3,307.8 2,727.1 2,464.1
         July 7,752.9 15.1 2,149.0 1,650.0 1,223.2 426.9 499.0 333.5 165.5 3,708.9 3,300.7 2,711.5 2,449.8
         Aug 7,684.9 16.4 2,256.6 1,752.4 1,327.1 425.3 504.2 336.9 167.2 3,604.4 3,197.1 2,613.8 2,351.7
         Sep 7,682.1 15.3 2,250.2 1,741.8 1,317.7 424.0 508.4 342.6 165.9 3,599.5 3,197.8 2,615.6 2,352.6
         Oct 7,670.3 15.9 2,205.2 1,701.8 1,283.3 418.4 503.4 338.9 164.5 3,607.9 3,207.9 2,615.7 2,351.6
         Nov 7,704.8 15.3 2,221.4 1,713.0 1,294.7 418.3 508.3 342.0 166.3 3,612.6 3,208.8 2,619.5 2,356.1         Dec 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014          Jan 7,610.4 14.9 2,156.0 1,653.3 1,240.7 412.6 502.7 336.9 165.8 3,610.2 3,210.8 2,620.3 2,351.3
         Feb 7,563.0 15.1 2,145.2 1,653.5 1,244.9 408.6 491.7 328.2 163.5 3,604.7 3,204.2 2,616.6 2,354.6         Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4
         Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,791.6 19.1 2,021.6 1,530.9 1,147.5 383.4 490.7 333.7 157.0 3,652.3 3,237.3 2,659.2 2,385.0
 Changes 3
2007 518.3 1.5 218.9 135.5 156.3 − 20.8 83.4 47.4 36.0 54.1 − 1.0 38.7 53.2
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 −454.5 − 0.5 −189.0 −166.4 −182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 −136.3 − 0.7 −111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 −129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 −703.6 − 0.5 −257.1 −249.2 −216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 213.9 0.4 −125.0 −127.0 − 94.2 − 32.8 1.9 8.1 − 6.1 55.0 39.2 50.2 37.1
2013          Apr 27.6 − 1.3 − 6.9 − 11.2 − 8.1 − 3.1 4.3 4.9 − 0.5 27.6 28.4 18.1 − 2.8
         May −142.7 0.3 − 23.5 − 22.8 − 22.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.4 0.7 − 22.0 − 27.1 − 11.6 5.5
         June −102.1 − 0.2 − 7.2 − 16.1 − 14.9 − 1.1 8.8 9.1 − 0.3 1.1 6.6 7.3 12.9
         July − 72.5 − 0.6 − 38.9 − 25.6 − 20.3 − 5.4 − 13.2 − 10.5 − 2.8 − 2.8 − 6.0 − 14.6 − 13.1         Aug − 87.5 1.2 7.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 12.1 − 11.6 − 5.9 − 6.4
         Sep − 14.6 − 1.0 − 5.4 − 10.1 − 8.9 − 1.2 4.7 6.1 − 1.4 − 2.7 2.3 3.4 2.8
         Oct − 5.5 0.6 − 44.2 − 39.4 − 34.0 − 5.4 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 1.6 9.9 11.2 1.2 0.5         Nov 32.6 − 0.6 15.3 11.0 11.2 − 0.2 4.2 2.3 1.9 5.6 1.3 4.0 4.8
         Dec −169.8 3.4 − 75.2 − 57.6 − 55.3 − 2.3 − 17.6 − 16.9 − 0.7 − 15.8 − 4.7 − 1.6 − 0.7
2014          Jan 71.1 − 3.8 9.8 − 2.1 1.0 − 3.1 11.9 11.4 0.5 16.3 9.5 4.9 − 2.4
         Feb − 37.7 0.2 − 9.3 1.0 4.7 − 3.7 − 10.3 − 8.0 − 2.3 − 3.1 − 4.9 − 2.0 5.1         Mar − 50.8 − 0.6 − 34.5 − 28.5 − 25.2 − 3.3 − 6.0 − 6.1 0.1 4.1 3.4 7.9 2.4
         Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 27.7 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.2 10.2 9.6 9.6 7.1         Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 47.0 3.6 − 52.1 − 32.3 − 26.9 − 5.4 − 19.8 − 17.5 − 2.3 − 15.6 − 13.5 0.8 − 0.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.1 549.5 390.2 159.2 376.6 228.1 85.2 148.5 26.1 122.4 1,172.7 936.2 188.8 2006
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013274.2 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.1 270.3 142.7 144.7 31.9 112.9 1,051.5 805.1 1,047.0 2014
264.8 586.8 345.2 241.6 408.1 284.8 157.6 123.4 30.1 93.2 965.3 740.5 1,141.2 2013          Mar 285.8 597.1 355.2 241.9 406.6 282.3 158.7 124.4 30.8 93.5 964.2 736.2 1,143.8          Apr 
268.9 581.6 344.6 237.0 411.8 282.3 155.8 129.5 30.7 98.8 962.8 733.7 1,048.1          May262.9 580.8 342.3 238.5 405.7 278.1 152.3 127.6 29.9 97.7 951.9 723.2 962.7          June
261.7 589.2 347.3 241.9 408.2 279.2 151.0 129.0 29.9 99.1 937.8 706.4 942.0          July
262.1 583.3 340.6 242.8 407.2 275.1 149.8 132.1 30.7 101.5 934.2 703.9 873.3          Aug 263.0 582.2 340.0 242.2 401.7 273.6 147.5 128.0 30.2 97.8 912.8 681.8 904.2          Sep 
264.1 592.2 347.2 245.0 400.0 271.3 145.5 128.6 30.9 97.7 935.2 704.6 906.1          Oct 
263.4 589.3 342.6 246.7 403.8 274.8 146.4 129.0 30.8 98.1 952.7 721.5 902.8          Nov 262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7          Dec 
268.9 590.5 345.4 245.0 399.4 272.6 146.9 126.9 27.9 99.0 960.8 729.9 868.4 2014          Jan 
262.0 587.6 341.1 246.5 400.6 270.1 145.8 130.4 28.4 102.1 959.2 735.1 838.8          Feb 267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1          Mar 
284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6          Sep 
270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 274.2 578.0 327.9 250.2 415.1 270.3 142.7 144.7 31.9 112.9 1,051.5 805.1 1,047.0          Dec 
Changes 3
− 14.6 − 39.6 − 29.3 − 10.3 55.1 73.6 41.5 − 18.6 0.0 − 18.6 222.7 136.5 21.1 2007
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 −182.5 −162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 −420.8 2013
13.1 − 11.0 − 13.9 2.9 15.8 1.1 − 3.2 14.7 0.9 13.8 96.1 82.3 187.5 2014
20.9 10.3 10.1 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.8 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.3 5.7 2.1 2.5 2013          Apr 
− 17.1 − 15.5 − 10.5 − 4.9 5.1 − 0.1 − 3.0 5.1 − 0.1 5.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 95.6          May
− 5.6 − 0.7 − 2.3 1.6 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 8.4 − 8.8 − 87.3          June
− 1.4 8.5 5.1 3.5 3.3 1.8 − 0.5 1.5 − 0.0 1.5 − 9.2 − 11.8 − 21.0          July
0.5 − 5.7 − 6.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 3.5 − 1.1 3.1 0.8 2.3 − 14.4 − 13.3 − 69.9          Aug 
0.5 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 5.0 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 16.8 − 17.6 11.4          Sep 
0.7 10.0 7.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 0.6 0.7 − 0.1 26.1 26.6 2.1          Oct 
− 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 1.9 4.3 3.9 1.5 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 15.8 15.5 − 3.4          Nov 
− 0.9 − 3.1 − 3.4 0.3 − 11.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 4.4 − 3.1 − 1.3 − 27.1 − 26.8 − 55.2          Dec 
7.4 4.6 6.2 − 1.6 6.8 4.8 1.8 2.0 0.1 2.0 33.4 33.3 15.3 2014          Jan 
− 7.1 − 2.8 − 4.3 1.5 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 3.6 0.5 3.1 5.0 11.5 − 30.5          Feb 
5.5 − 4.4 − 4.5 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 1.0 − 4.4 − 12.0 − 15.4          Mar 
16.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 4.0 − 0.2 4.2 − 12.8 − 17.7 − 17.4          Sep 
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 1.3 − 14.3 − 6.0 − 8.4 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 − 18.4 − 22.8 35.6          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2006 7,154.4 1,637.7 1,348.6 289.0 2,449.2 2,341.6 745.8 1,009.3 310.1 586.5 487.4 62.0 13.9
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,791.6 1,323.1 1,111.4 211.7 3,197.8 3,103.9 1,513.8 981.4 294.0 608.7 532.4 79.7 34.6
2013          Mar 8,063.0 1,333.9 1,093.6 240.3 3,082.3 2,979.7 1,310.5 1,054.7 307.1 614.4 529.3 77.2 35.3
         Apr 8,080.3 1,348.6 1,089.7 258.9 3,083.6 2,984.0 1,322.3 1,049.5 305.9 612.3 528.7 77.0 35.4
         May 7,937.6 1,320.9 1,071.5 249.4 3,100.0 2,998.0 1,337.7 1,049.6 306.6 610.7 529.1 74.3 32.7         June 7,833.2 1,301.2 1,060.2 241.1 3,104.9 2,997.9 1,345.3 1,043.0 302.4 609.6 528.9 78.2 37.1
         July 7,752.9 1,292.8 1,050.1 242.7 3,097.8 2,994.5 1,351.7 1,034.7 298.3 608.1 528.3 76.3 34.9
         Aug 7,684.9 1,388.6 1,148.9 239.7 3,101.4 3,006.8 1,367.7 1,031.7 298.5 607.4 528.6 76.5 34.0         Sep 7,682.1 1,387.4 1,147.4 240.0 3,101.7 3,005.5 1,375.9 1,023.3 293.7 606.3 528.2 78.5 36.9
         Oct 7,670.3 1,375.2 1,141.5 233.7 3,101.5 3,011.3 1,387.4 1,017.6 291.1 606.3 528.3 75.1 32.0
         Nov 7,704.8 1,391.9 1,161.9 230.0 3,123.8 3,030.2 1,409.9 1,014.1 289.9 606.3 528.3 77.8 33.8         Dec 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014          Jan 7,610.4 1,363.2 1,138.4 224.9 3,126.9 3,034.2 1,411.3 1,013.8 292.6 609.1 531.8 77.7 33.9
         Feb 7,563.0 1,357.9 1,148.8 209.2 3,137.8 3,042.7 1,416.9 1,016.0 297.4 609.8 532.3 77.2 34.1         Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,791.6 1,323.1 1,111.4 211.7 3,197.8 3,103.9 1,513.8 981.4 294.0 608.7 532.4 79.7 34.6
 Changes 4
2007 518.3 148.4 134.8 13.6 185.1 177.3 24.5 183.9 167.8 − 31.1 − 41.4 13.6 5.6
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 −454.5 −235.4 −224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 −220.4 −259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 −136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 −129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 −703.6 −106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 213.9 − 27.7 − 31.5 3.8 63.8 68.7 106.2 − 36.2 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 2.2 0.4
2013          Apr 27.6 15.8 − 3.2 19.1 1.9 4.9 12.5 − 5.4 − 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 0.1
         May −142.7 − 27.7 − 18.1 − 9.6 16.0 14.0 15.5 0.1 0.7 − 1.6 0.4 − 3.1 − 2.2         June −102.1 − 19.8 − 11.6 − 8.2 5.4 0.3 7.6 − 6.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 4.0 4.5
         July − 72.5 − 7.7 − 9.6 2.0 − 6.6 − 3.0 6.8 − 8.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 2.1
         Aug − 87.5 12.9 18.5 − 5.7 3.5 12.2 15.9 − 3.0 0.2 − 0.7 0.2 0.1 − 1.0         Sep − 14.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 8.4 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 3.0
         Oct − 5.5 − 11.5 − 5.5 − 6.1 0.3 6.2 11.8 − 5.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 − 3.4 − 4.9
         Nov 32.6 16.2 20.3 − 4.1 22.1 18.8 22.4 − 3.5 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 1.8
         Dec −169.8 − 45.9 − 21.3 − 24.6 7.1 1.7 − 4.3 2.1 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.6 0.1
2014          Jan 71.1 16.0 − 2.5 18.5 − 4.4 2.0 5.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 0.0
         Feb − 37.7 − 4.4 11.0 − 15.3 11.6 8.4 6.2 1.5 4.0 0.7 0.5 − 0.4 0.2
         Mar − 50.8 − 10.4 − 16.6 6.2 − 6.6 − 7.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 2.1 0.2
         Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 27.7 − 13.1 − 8.4 − 4.7 0.4 − 1.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 4.5 0.6 0.1 0.9 3.2         Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 47.0 − 24.9 − 4.7 − 20.2 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 4.1 3.4 3.5 3.4 − 1.2 − 2.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
45.9 9.3 2.3 1.9 45.5 41.9 17.1 32.0 1,636.7 136.4 638.5 389.6 353.7 2006
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 200749.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201341.8 15.6 3.3 2.7 14.1 14.0 3.4 3.6 1,076.3 40.2 535.3 535.5 1,116.7 2014
38.3 13.0 3.6 2.8 25.4 23.4 97.0 6.8 1,201.5 49.5 600.1 502.9 1,238.6 2013          Mar 38.0 13.1 3.6 2.8 22.6 21.8 98.9 7.4 1,192.5 50.2 602.5 502.7 1,244.1          Apr 
38.0 12.5 3.6 2.8 27.7 22.5 98.0 7.3 1,177.8 48.5 585.4 506.6 1,141.6          May37.5 11.5 3.6 2.8 28.8 21.9 113.3 5.7 1,166.0 45.5 574.3 517.2 1,050.5          June
37.8 12.4 3.6 2.8 27.0 23.5 89.8 5.7 1,149.8 49.5 565.9 518.3 1,032.7          July
39.0 14.5 3.5 2.8 18.1 16.7 3.0 5.7 1,142.8 46.2 560.2 522.6 960.6          Aug 38.1 12.7 3.5 2.8 17.6 15.4 3.7 5.3 1,139.7 43.9 523.1 521.3 999.8          Sep 
39.5 14.2 3.5 2.7 15.2 13.9 7.7 4.7 1,131.1 44.0 525.3 520.5 1,004.2          Oct 
40.5 13.6 3.5 2.7 15.8 14.3 3.9 4.6 1,129.7 42.4 535.2 515.2 1,000.6          Nov 44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5          Dec 
40.3 13.2 3.5 2.7 15.1 11.7 7.9 4.3 1,107.6 35.8 518.9 517.5 964.1 2014          Jan 
39.6 13.5 3.5 2.7 17.9 12.0 8.0 4.2 1,098.5 37.4 511.3 514.6 930.7          Feb 41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6          Sep 
40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 41.8 15.6 3.3 2.7 14.1 14.0 3.4 3.6 1,076.3 40.2 535.3 535.5 1,116.7          Dec 
Changes 4
8.0 12.9 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 4.3 8.1 − 3.4 20.9 49.3 48.7 42.3 68.3 2007
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 −104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 −106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 −107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 −104.9 − 17.6 −134.1 18.9 −417.1 2013− 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 57.4 1.9 41.0 26.3 171.8 2014
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 1.9 0.7 − 4.3 0.8 6.0 0.9 4.7 2013          Apr 
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 14.7 − 1.7 − 17.6 4.0 −101.7          May− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.6 15.4 − 1.6 − 10.8 − 3.0 − 10.1 10.8 − 91.2          June
0.3 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.8 1.5 − 23.5 − 0.0 − 12.7 4.0 − 5.7 2.0 − 18.3          July1.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 8.9 − 6.8 − 9.4 0.0 − 8.4 − 3.4 − 17.6 3.6 − 72.1          Aug 
− 2.2 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 34.5 − 0.5 21.4          Sep 
1.5 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 1.5 4.0 − 0.5 − 5.9 0.1 4.2 − 0.1 4.2          Oct 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 1.6 9.3 − 5.5 − 3.8          Nov 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 2.9 − 0.5 − 11.7 − 3.3 − 53.7 − 11.5 − 56.5          Dec 
− 3.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 4.2 1.2 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.3 37.2 13.5 19.8 2014          Jan − 0.6 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 3.6 1.1 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.1 1.7 − 4.5 − 2.2 − 33.2          Feb 
2.0 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.3 − 9.9 − 3.1 − 9.7          Mar 
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.7 0.0 − 4.4 0.8 5.7 − 2.6 − 10.9          Sep 
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.7 0.6 0.0 0.0 2.4 3.4 − 6.2 0.0 − 7.3 0.2 − 26.7 − 5.9 24.2          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2014          July 1,834 7,707.7 79.2 2,617.4 2,003.7 603.1 3,893.6 388.4 2,742.7 0.5 750.7 132.2 985.3
         Aug 1,831 7,801.6 90.5 2,616.1 2,003.5 601.4 3,888.8 376.8 2,752.9 0.5 748.0 132.1 1,074.1
         Sep 1,822 7,797.7 113.5 2,587.4 1,973.0 603.3 3,906.0 380.2 2,756.6 0.5 760.4 132.8 1,058.0
         Oct 1,812 7,807.4 91.3 2,613.3 2,004.9 597.3 3,907.4 374.2 2,767.3 0.5 756.5 133.0 1,062.5
         Nov 1,807 7,891.9 82.5 2,637.8 2,029.0 597.8 3,928.8 377.9 2,775.5 0.5 765.7 132.7 1,110.1
         Dec 1,807 7,844.3 113.7 2,551.2 1,950.5 590.6 3,902.4 350.5 2,776.6 0.6 767.5 130.1 1,146.9
Commercial banks 6
2014          Nov 276 3,059.2 38.3 1,040.3 944.2 92.7 1,109.5 196.5 679.7 0.2 227.1 67.4 803.7
         Dec 276 3,034.1 59.2 992.2 897.6 91.3 1,092.6 178.9 680.9 0.3 229.4 65.2 825.0
   Big banks 7
2014          Nov 4 1,965.0 9.1 651.5 599.8 48.7 477.0 106.0 253.9 0.1 112.7 59.4 768.0
         Dec 4 1,935.6 9.7 619.9 569.3 47.7 459.5 90.0 253.0 0.2 114.1 57.0 789.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2014          Nov 163 849.0 16.1 229.4 186.6 42.3 567.2 70.5 391.0 0.1 105.2 6.7 29.7
         Dec 163 846.4 23.2 219.7 177.6 41.6 567.4 68.3 392.5 0.1 106.1 6.6 29.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2014          Nov 109 245.2 13.1 159.5 157.8 1.7 65.4 20.1 34.8 − 9.2 1.3 6.0
         Dec 109 252.1 26.3 152.6 150.6 2.0 65.7 20.6 35.4 0.0 9.3 1.6 6.0
Landesbanken
2014          Nov 9 1,082.4 2.9 360.1 252.6 104.9 557.1 63.1 379.3 0.1 112.7 12.6 149.7
         Dec 9 1,060.6 6.7 340.3 235.2 102.5 547.4 59.2 379.3 0.1 106.3 12.4 153.8
Savings banks
2014          Nov 416 1,122.6 14.9 219.1 86.4 132.0 856.2 53.1 667.1 0.1 135.9 15.5 16.9
         Dec 416 1,126.8 19.4 216.2 85.4 130.4 858.3 53.2 667.4 0.1 137.5 15.2 17.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2014          Nov 2 280.1 0.2 158.6 125.6 33.0 62.5 9.9 22.5 0.0 30.0 14.3 44.4
         Dec 2 281.2 0.6 155.0 122.0 32.8 62.8 9.7 22.2 0.0 30.5 14.4 48.5
Credit cooperatives
2014          Nov 1,047 786.2 10.9 174.9 57.1 117.4 566.7 32.2 448.0 0.1 86.4 14.3 19.4
         Dec 1,047 786.6 12.4 170.8 54.2 116.4 569.4 32.4 449.1 0.1 87.8 14.4 19.6
Mortgage banks
2014          Nov 17 400.7 0.6 96.8 61.6 32.2 287.8 5.5 212.7 − 69.5 0.6 15.0
         Dec 17 398.5 0.4 93.8 59.0 31.9 288.2 4.8 212.5 − 70.9 0.6 15.5
Building and loan associations
2014          Nov 21 210.8 0.1 61.6 45.1 16.5 143.3 1.6 121.3 . 20.5 0.3 5.4
         Dec 21 211.7 0.1 62.1 45.5 16.6 143.8 1.6 121.6 . 20.6 0.3 5.4
Special purpose banks
2014          Nov 19 949.7 14.6 526.3 456.4 69.0 345.6 15.9 245.0 − 83.6 7.7 55.5
         Dec 19 944.9 15.0 520.7 451.7 68.7 340.1 10.8 243.6 − 84.4 7.7 61.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2014          Nov 145 896.1 24.4 337.4 294.9 39.5 426.2 67.6 242.8 0.1 112.6 5.8 102.3
         Dec 145 894.3 42.8 313.3 270.3 40.1 427.1 67.4 242.7 0.2 114.7 5.5 105.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2014          Nov 36 650.9 11.3 177.9 137.1 37.9 360.9 47.5 208.0 0.1 103.4 4.5 96.3
         Dec 36 642.2 16.5 160.7 119.6 38.1 361.4 46.8 207.4 0.1 105.4 4.0 99.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,722.0 454.7 1,267.2 3,343.0 1,602.3 319.4 724.7 92.4 613.8 535.1 82.8 1,160.1 460.1 1,022.5 2014          July
1,716.7 418.4 1,298.3 3,349.9 1,599.8 328.5 724.3 85.8 615.3 535.7 82.0 1,164.6 463.8 1,106.5          Aug 1,715.5 448.3 1,267.1 3,352.8 1,609.9 319.4 724.5 80.6 615.8 535.7 83.2 1,168.4 464.9 1,096.2          Sep 
1,720.2 438.0 1,282.2 3,357.3 1,632.0 307.2 720.3 83.1 615.3 535.4 82.4 1,162.0 465.0 1,102.9          Oct 
1,743.6 457.1 1,286.5 3,375.0 1,650.0 308.8 721.4 76.4 614.6 535.1 80.2 1,157.0 466.6 1,149.7          Nov 1,721.0 404.9 1,316.1 3,339.2 1,630.8 297.3 714.3 43.3 617.0 538.8 79.8 1,147.9 464.6 1,171.6          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
730.1 292.0 438.0 1,246.3 732.4 170.0 204.2 53.6 114.3 99.1 25.5 144.8 158.6 779.5 2014          Nov 722.6 259.6 463.0 1,218.2 717.3 156.9 203.5 29.7 114.8 99.4 25.7 143.1 158.2 792.1          Dec 
Big banks 7
499.8 217.3 282.5 541.9 298.2 89.8 73.8 53.4 70.8 68.4 9.2 105.7 95.1 722.6 2014          Nov 484.8 189.2 295.6 513.3 284.9 74.5 73.6 29.3 71.0 68.4 9.4 104.5 95.2 737.8          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
134.3 40.0 94.3 572.3 350.1 60.1 103.8 0.2 43.2 30.5 15.1 38.5 54.4 49.4 2014          Nov 136.7 36.2 100.5 569.5 347.5 60.3 103.0 0.4 43.5 30.8 15.1 38.0 54.5 47.8          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
96.0 34.8 61.2 132.1 84.1 20.1 26.6 − 0.2 0.2 1.2 0.6 9.1 7.5 2014          Nov 
101.1 34.2 66.9 135.4 84.9 22.1 26.9 − 0.3 0.2 1.2 0.6 8.5 6.5          Dec 
Landesbanken
313.4 56.6 256.8 305.4 113.3 56.4 121.1 19.9 14.5 10.9 0.1 251.6 59.7 152.4 2014          Nov 301.7 42.8 258.9 294.9 111.3 55.3 113.8 11.8 14.5 10.9 0.1 249.0 58.4 156.4          Dec 
Savings banks
146.9 12.2 134.7 826.8 448.8 25.6 15.0 − 297.2 256.8 40.3 14.3 90.0 44.6 2014          Nov 
148.0 12.2 135.8 829.5 450.0 26.5 15.0 − 298.3 257.8 39.7 14.5 90.0 44.7          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
137.0 36.2 100.8 30.2 8.9 8.9 10.3 1.5 − − 2.2 54.7 15.6 42.6 2014          Nov 
135.6 36.2 99.4 30.2 8.3 9.5 10.1 1.0 − − 2.2 53.4 15.6 46.5          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
102.6 5.2 97.3 581.9 325.8 36.0 20.9 − 188.1 167.8 11.1 9.1 60.0 32.6 2014          Nov 102.8 5.3 97.6 581.9 325.1 36.3 20.6 − 188.9 170.1 11.0 9.2 60.1 32.6          Dec 
Mortgage banks
98.0 8.2 89.9 148.4 8.3 7.8 132.1 − 0.2 0.2 . 118.4 16.6 19.3 2014          Nov 98.4 7.6 90.8 147.4 8.3 7.6 131.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 . 116.5 16.3 19.9          Dec 
Building and loan associations
23.5 2.8 20.7 159.2 0.5 0.6 156.8 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.9 9.1 16.0 2014          Nov 23.2 1.6 21.6 162.1 0.6 0.6 159.6 − 0.4 0.4 1.0 2.8 9.2 14.5          Dec 
Special purpose banks
192.2 43.9 148.3 76.9 12.2 3.7 61.0 1.4 − − . 561.2 56.8 62.7 2014          Nov 188.7 39.6 149.1 75.0 10.0 4.5 60.6 0.8 − − . 559.4 56.8 64.9          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
226.0 82.0 144.0 485.3 314.7 61.2 77.0 9.4 21.6 21.2 10.7 25.7 49.0 110.2 2014          Nov 225.1 77.9 147.2 485.0 315.9 59.9 76.8 8.2 21.7 21.3 10.6 25.1 48.4 110.7          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
130.1 47.3 82.8 353.1 230.6 41.2 50.5 9.4 21.4 21.0 9.5 25.1 39.9 102.7 2014          Nov 124.0 43.7 80.3 349.5 230.9 37.8 50.0 8.2 21.5 21.1 9.4 24.5 39.9 104.2          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2005 15.1 47.9 1,684.5 1,096.8 0.0 6.7 580.9 2.1 2,995.1 2,632.7 2.4 2.4 357.6
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.7 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2013          July 14.5 89.9 1,536.2 1,132.8 0.0 2.0 401.4 2.3 3,230.8 2,796.7 0.4 2.0 431.7
         Aug 15.1 91.5 1,637.1 1,235.3 − 1.9 399.9 2.3 3,127.2 2,691.9 0.4 1.9 433.1
         Sep 14.7 97.8 1,620.4 1,219.6 − 1.7 399.0 2.2 3,127.5 2,691.9 0.4 2.1 433.1
         Oct 15.6 60.7 1,617.5 1,222.3 − 1.5 393.6 2.2 3,138.2 2,698.4 0.4 1.6 437.7
         Nov 15.0 62.5 1,627.0 1,231.9 0.0 1.4 393.8 2.2 3,139.2 2,698.3 0.4 1.8 438.6
         Dec 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014          Jan 14.7 63.3 1,566.3 1,177.0 0.0 1.7 387.6 2.2 3,140.7 2,696.3 0.4 1.2 442.7
         Feb 14.9 51.6 1,578.3 1,192.8 0.0 1.7 383.8 1.6 3,134.5 2,695.3 0.4 1.4 437.4
         Mar 14.4 50.5 1,551.1 1,168.8 0.0 1.5 380.8 1.6 3,136.4 2,692.5 0.4 1.4 442.1
         Apr 15.3 65.2 1,527.8 1,146.6 0.0 1.3 379.8 1.6 3,158.0 2,696.1 0.4 1.7 459.8
         May 15.2 58.4 1,550.5 1,170.8 0.0 1.2 378.5 1.6 3,154.3 2,702.7 0.4 1.4 449.9
         June 14.7 59.9 1,511.7 1,136.0 0.0 2.6 373.0 1.6 3,147.3 2,697.0 0.3 1.8 448.1
         July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8
         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
         Oct 15.2 61.8 1,493.6 1,126.5 0.0 2.3 364.8 1.6 3,169.0 2,711.8 0.3 1.2 455.7
         Nov 15.4 52.8 1,486.8 1,121.2 0.0 2.3 363.3 1.6 3,178.9 2,719.7 0.3 0.9 458.1
         Dec 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.7 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
Changes *
2006 + 0.9 + 1.5 − 3.6 + 24.5 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 30.6 − 0.2 − 12.4 − 20.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 8.8
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.8 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.9
2013          July − 0.4 − 1.8 − 24.5 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 9.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.4
         Aug + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 5.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.7 − 12.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.4         Sep − 0.4 + 6.3 − 16.7 − 15.6 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 0.9 − 37.0 − 2.9 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − 5.4 − 0.0 + 10.8 + 6.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 4.6
         Nov − 0.6 + 1.8 + 9.5 + 9.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8         Dec + 3.5 + 23.1 − 81.4 − 78.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 7.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.3
2014          Jan − 3.8 − 22.3 + 20.8 + 23.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 + 9.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 5.6
         Feb + 0.2 − 11.7 + 12.0 + 15.9 − − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.0 − 6.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 5.3
         Mar − 0.6 − 1.0 − 27.2 − 24.0 − − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.7
         Apr + 0.9 + 14.7 − 23.3 − 22.2 − − 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.7
         May − 0.1 − 6.8 + 22.7 + 24.1 − − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 3.7 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 9.9
         June − 0.6 + 1.5 − 38.9 − 34.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 5.5 + 0.1 − 6.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.7
         July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
         Oct + 0.1 − 19.0 + 5.1 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Nov + 0.2 − 9.0 − 6.9 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.4
         Dec + 3.6 + 28.5 − 60.8 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 11.6 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 56.6 108.5 1,300.0 120.5 1,179.4 0.1 26.5 2,276.6 717.0 864.4 603.4 91.9 42.4 2005
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.1 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.7 66.0 30.9 2014
− 32.8 91.0 1,049.2 121.8 927.4 0.0 34.1 3,105.2 1,374.8 1,042.7 608.1 79.6 34.4 2013          July
− 32.6 91.0 1,148.5 140.4 1,008.2 0.0 34.0 3,023.6 1,372.9 964.4 607.5 78.8 34.4          Aug − 31.9 91.1 1,147.2 146.3 1,000.9 0.0 33.9 3,020.6 1,379.4 956.9 606.4 78.0 33.5          Sep 
− 31.6 91.1 1,141.4 150.1 991.2 0.0 33.4 3,027.2 1,392.9 950.6 606.4 77.3 33.4          Oct 
− 31.6 91.0 1,161.7 162.1 999.7 0.0 33.7 3,044.4 1,413.4 947.8 606.3 76.9 33.3          Nov − 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9          Dec 
− 31.2 92.0 1,138.1 143.5 994.6 0.0 33.1 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 609.1 75.4 32.9 2014          Jan 
− 28.0 91.6 1,148.8 153.5 995.3 0.0 12.1 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 609.8 74.4 32.7          Feb − 27.8 92.3 1,131.6 149.1 982.5 0.0 12.0 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 608.6 73.7 32.5          Mar 
− 27.6 92.5 1,153.3 148.1 1,005.2 0.0 11.8 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 606.7 72.0 32.4          Apr 
− 27.6 92.9 1,163.8 152.4 1,011.4 0.0 11.9 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 606.0 70.9 31.9          May− 27.5 94.0 1,144.5 166.2 978.3 0.0 12.0 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 604.5 70.5 31.4          June
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.2 155.7 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
− 26.5 95.2 1,122.7 149.1 973.6 0.0 11.5 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 606.1 68.6 31.1          Oct 
− 26.5 95.1 1,116.1 155.8 960.2 0.0 11.5 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 605.3 66.5 31.1          Nov − 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.1 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.7 66.0 30.9          Dec 
Changes *
− − 3.7 − 2.2 + 79.0 + 8.6 + 70.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 + 118.0 + 30.0 + 97.7 − 16.8 + 7.2 − 4.1 2006− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 28.2 + 2.2 − 30.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 0.5 − 0.1 − 10.2 − 3.0 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 24.5 + 5.0 − 26.5 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 2013          July
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 2.8 + 12.2 − − 0.1 + 0.1 + 13.3 − 11.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.7 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 5.9 − 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 3.0 + 6.4 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5          Sep 
− − 0.4 − 0.0 − 5.8 + 3.9 − 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 13.5 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1          Oct 
− + 0.0 − 0.1 + 20.3 + 11.9 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 17.3 + 20.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.0 + 1.3 − 21.5 − 36.5 + 15.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 4.3 − 3.5 + 4.1 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 0.4          Dec 
− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 17.9 − 20.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 17.1 − 4.4 − 12.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.2 + 0.2 + 21.7 − 1.0 + 22.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 6.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6          May− − 0.1 + 1.1 − 19.2 + 13.8 − 33.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5          June
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.6 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 6.7 + 12.1 − − 0.3 + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 6.8 − 13.4 − − 0.0 + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 4.2 − 28.0 + 23.9 − + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2005 0.2 1,038.8 860.0 648.5 211.5 5.8 173.0 1.5 712.0 387.9 132.8 255.1 9.3 314.8
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.3 884.9 618.8 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.4
2013          July 0.7 1,024.5 791.2 542.0 249.2 5.4 228.0 2.5 730.8 429.4 108.9 320.6 10.1 291.3
         Aug 1.3 1,032.2 796.0 548.1 247.9 5.2 230.9 2.5 723.6 425.0 108.6 316.4 12.7 285.9
         Sep 0.6 1,021.7 786.8 542.1 244.7 5.8 229.0 2.5 712.2 415.1 102.2 312.8 9.4 287.8
         Oct 0.4 1,040.7 806.7 564.2 242.5 5.6 228.5 2.5 709.1 413.0 102.8 310.2 10.6 285.5
         Nov 0.3 1,060.2 822.5 579.9 242.6 6.8 230.8 2.5 718.5 418.1 109.1 309.0 10.0 290.4
         Dec 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014          Jan 0.2 1,051.7 813.1 577.8 235.3 6.9 231.7 2.5 715.2 417.7 110.5 307.2 8.0 289.6
         Feb 0.2 1,043.7 805.9 572.5 233.5 7.2 230.6 1.7 711.1 418.1 113.4 304.7 8.4 284.6
         Mar 0.2 1,030.9 792.4 554.2 238.2 7.4 231.1 1.7 715.6 413.9 108.9 305.1 9.9 291.8
         Apr 0.2 1,037.1 796.9 560.9 235.9 8.2 232.0 1.7 719.9 423.0 118.6 304.4 10.7 286.2
         May 0.2 1,064.1 823.0 580.9 242.1 8.4 232.6 1.2 723.0 422.8 116.3 306.5 9.9 290.3
         June 0.2 1,072.0 830.7 595.3 235.4 8.4 232.8 1.1 726.9 422.7 116.9 305.9 9.9 294.3
         July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2
         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
         Oct 0.2 1,119.6 878.5 628.7 249.8 8.6 232.5 1.1 738.3 429.8 110.3 319.5 7.7 300.8
         Nov 0.2 1,151.0 907.8 658.2 249.7 8.7 234.5 1.1 749.8 433.9 113.5 320.4 8.3 307.6
         Dec 0.2 1,125.3 884.9 618.8 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.4
Changes *
2006 + 0.1 + 238.3 + 153.5 + 109.7 + 43.8 + 7.5 + 77.2 − 0.7 + 81.4 + 51.6 + 25.9 + 25.8 − 1.8 + 31.5
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.0 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.6
2013          July − 0.2 − 23.3 − 21.8 − 19.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.6 − 5.5 − 8.2 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 + 2.6 − 5.6
         Sep − 0.6 − 7.2 − 6.0 − 4.2 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 9.0 − 8.1 − 6.2 − 2.0 − 3.3 + 2.4
         Oct − 0.2 + 23.5 + 24.4 + 25.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 1.2 + 1.2 − 1.6
         Nov − 0.1 + 19.4 + 15.9 + 15.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 7.8 + 3.7 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.6 + 4.8
         Dec − 0.1 − 37.5 − 37.3 − 31.7 − 5.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 15.3 − 11.5 − 8.5 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0
2014          Jan − 0.0 + 35.5 + 34.4 + 36.9 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.7 + 10.0 + 9.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Feb − 0.0 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0 − − 0.8 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 4.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 13.0 − 14.0 − 18.4 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 4.4 − 4.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 6.9
         Apr + 0.0 + 7.7 + 5.3 + 7.2 − 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 9.5 + 9.8 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 6.2
         May − 0.0 + 22.7 + 22.0 + 17.5 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 3.5         June + 0.0 + 8.1 + 8.0 + 14.6 − 6.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 4.0
         July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 23.9 + 24.7 + 23.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.9 − 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.2
         Nov + 0.0 + 32.4 + 29.3 + 30.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 6.0
         Dec − 0.0 − 33.1 − 30.8 − 44.4 + 13.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 20.8 − 23.1 − 20.2 − 2.9 − 1.9 + 4.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
10.6 37.2 651.7 102.9 548.8 420.4 128.4 0.6 316.4 62.0 254.4 119.4 135.0 1.2 2005
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.1 277.1 332.0 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.1 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
32.0 46.3 641.4 277.6 363.8 260.3 103.5 0.1 250.6 126.4 124.2 63.7 60.5 1.1 2013          July
32.0 46.3 627.6 254.2 373.3 269.3 104.0 0.1 253.6 129.3 124.3 65.0 59.3 1.1          Aug 31.7 46.1 601.4 273.2 328.2 225.5 102.7 0.1 246.8 123.1 123.7 63.6 60.0 1.1          Sep 
31.5 46.1 594.9 258.7 336.2 235.7 100.5 0.1 246.8 124.2 122.6 62.3 60.3 1.1          Oct 
31.8 44.1 591.4 274.9 316.4 216.2 100.2 0.1 257.7 126.6 131.1 68.7 62.4 1.1          Nov 30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0          Dec 
31.0 41.6 574.8 274.6 300.2 206.7 93.5 0.1 257.4 127.1 130.3 67.1 63.2 1.0 2014          Jan 
14.4 40.0 554.1 256.2 297.9 205.6 92.3 0.1 256.1 128.6 127.5 66.2 61.3 1.0          Feb 14.4 39.7 554.2 257.3 297.0 200.1 96.9 0.1 251.9 129.4 122.5 62.8 59.7 1.0          Mar 
14.4 39.7 567.4 254.6 312.8 215.7 97.0 0.1 255.4 134.1 121.3 61.6 59.7 1.0          Apr 
14.4 39.7 564.4 256.4 308.0 212.7 95.3 0.1 260.8 140.6 120.2 59.7 60.6 1.0          May14.2 38.6 556.0 272.6 283.5 190.5 92.9 0.1 256.5 144.2 112.2 53.0 59.3 1.1          June
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
14.6 37.8 597.5 289.0 308.5 220.4 88.2 0.1 260.0 137.5 122.5 62.6 59.9 1.3          Oct 
14.7 37.6 627.5 301.3 326.3 238.4 87.8 0.1 258.6 132.1 126.5 65.7 60.8 1.3          Nov 14.0 35.6 609.1 277.1 332.0 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.1 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7          Dec 
Changes *
− 5.1 + 13.8 + 56.2 + 68.3 − 12.1 − 13.7 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 21.2 − 22.0 − 5.1 − 17.0 − 0.2 2006− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 75.5 + 47.8 + 27.7 + 38.2 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 5.7 + 8.9 − 14.6 − 13.9 − 0.6 − − 4.0 + 0.3 − 4.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 2013          July
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 24.9 − 34.0 + 9.1 + 8.8 + 0.3 − − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 0.0          Aug − 0.3 − 0.2 − 23.9 + 19.5 − 43.5 − 42.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.8 − 13.7 + 8.9 + 10.8 − 1.9 − + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.2 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 15.7 − 18.5 − 18.1 − 0.4 − + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 4.8 + 2.0 − 0.0          Nov − 0.9 − 5.1 − 73.9 − 51.7 − 22.2 − 19.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 8.2 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.2 + 2.5 + 56.6 + 51.1 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 4.2 − − 1.5 + 8.6 − 10.1 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 2014          Jan 
− 0.1 − 1.6 − 18.0 − 17.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − − 0.3 + 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 5.5 + 4.6 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 0.7 − 5.0 − 3.4 − 1.5 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 2.4 + 16.0 + 15.8 + 0.2 − + 3.7 + 4.9 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.9 − 6.3 − 4.1 − 2.2 − + 4.4 + 6.0 − 1.6 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.2 + 16.2 − 24.4 − 22.1 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.3 + 3.7 − 8.0 − 6.7 − 1.3 + 0.0          June
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 − 0.7 − − 0.3 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 30.0 + 12.2 + 17.8 + 18.1 − 0.3 − − 1.4 − 5.4 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 2.1 − 22.8 − 26.0 + 3.1 + 2.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 39.3 − 19.8 − 19.5 − 18.4 − 1.1 − 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2005 2,995.1 2,635.1 309.7 273.5 272.9 0.6 36.2 34.4 1.8 2,685.4 2,141.3
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.9
2013          July 3,230.8 2,797.1 376.1 319.9 319.3 0.6 56.1 54.7 1.4 2,854.8 2,323.0
         Aug 3,127.2 2,692.3 269.9 220.6 220.1 0.6 49.3 48.0 1.3 2,857.3 2,324.5
         Sep 3,127.5 2,692.3 276.7 226.0 225.3 0.8 50.7 49.4 1.3 2,850.8 2,320.5
         Oct 3,138.2 2,698.8 279.4 220.9 220.3 0.6 58.5 57.5 1.0 2,858.7 2,326.0
         Nov 3,139.2 2,698.7 270.3 216.8 216.2 0.6 53.5 52.3 1.2 2,868.8 2,334.0
         Dec 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014          Jan 3,140.7 2,696.8 272.9 214.7 213.9 0.8 58.2 57.8 0.4 2,867.8 2,335.9
         Feb 3,134.5 2,695.7 271.7 216.6 215.9 0.7 55.1 54.5 0.6 2,862.7 2,330.7
         Mar 3,136.4 2,692.9 271.7 220.6 219.8 0.7 51.2 50.5 0.7 2,864.7 2,333.1
         Apr 3,158.0 2,696.5 269.9 217.2 216.6 0.7 52.6 51.6 1.0 2,888.1 2,356.7
         May 3,154.3 2,703.1 271.1 216.5 215.7 0.9 54.5 54.0 0.5 2,883.2 2,350.5
         June 3,147.3 2,697.3 273.3 223.4 222.6 0.8 49.9 48.8 1.0 2,874.1 2,342.6
         July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6
         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.3 220.9 220.3 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.7
         Oct 3,169.0 2,712.1 265.6 212.6 211.8 0.8 53.0 52.5 0.5 2,903.4 2,364.9
         Nov 3,178.9 2,720.0 265.7 214.6 214.1 0.4 51.1 50.7 0.4 2,913.3 2,375.5
         Dec 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.9
Changes *
2006 − 12.4 − 20.8 − 7.1 − 4.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 23.6
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.8 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 5.0 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 6.0 − 0.6 + 48.4 + 51.6
2013          July − 7.2 − 9.3 − 13.8 − 18.8 − 18.8 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 6.6 + 3.3
         Aug − 10.7 − 12.0 − 16.4 − 9.6 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 6.7 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 4.7
         Sep + 0.3 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 6.6 − 4.1
         Oct + 10.8 + 6.7 + 2.9 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 0.2 + 7.7 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 7.9 + 5.5
         Nov + 1.0 − 0.1 − 7.3 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 4.9 − 5.2 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.2
         Dec − 7.5 − 5.5 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 5.4
2014          Jan + 9.1 + 3.6 + 3.5 − 3.3 − 3.4 + 0.2 + 6.8 + 7.1 − 0.3 + 5.6 + 7.7
         Feb − 6.2 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.4 + 0.3 − 5.0 − 5.3
         Mar + 2.1 − 2.7 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.5
         Apr + 21.5 + 3.6 − 1.9 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 23.4 + 23.2
         May − 3.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 4.9 − 6.2
         June − 6.0 − 4.7 + 2.2 + 6.8 + 6.9 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 8.2 − 7.1
         July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
         Oct + 4.1 + 4.7 − 4.7 − 8.3 − 8.5 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 4.1
         Nov + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 9.8 + 10.7
         Dec − 11.6 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.3 − 6.0 − 0.3 − 3.5 + 4.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,953.4 194.7 1,758.8 187.9 52.1 544.1 374.4 32.9 341.4 169.7 − 4.5 2005
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 20061,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,130.5 252.0 1,878.5 192.4 29.6 531.8 292.6 41.2 251.4 239.2 − 3.1 2013          July
2,131.7 249.5 1,882.2 192.8 29.5 532.8 292.6 41.2 251.3 240.3 − 3.1          Aug 
2,127.1 247.6 1,879.4 193.4 29.3 530.3 290.6 40.7 249.9 239.7 − 2.7          Sep 
2,131.3 248.0 1,883.4 194.7 29.0 532.8 289.7 39.3 250.4 243.1 − 2.6          Oct 
2,139.9 249.5 1,890.5 194.1 29.0 534.8 290.3 39.1 251.3 244.5 − 2.6          Nov 2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7          Dec 
2,137.4 248.6 1,888.8 198.5 28.6 531.8 287.6 38.4 249.2 244.2 − 2.7 2014          Jan 
2,138.7 248.5 1,890.2 192.0 25.8 532.1 286.6 38.0 248.6 245.4 − 2.3          Feb 2,136.4 249.1 1,887.3 196.7 25.5 531.6 286.2 37.4 248.8 245.4 − 2.3          Mar 
2,143.2 251.0 1,892.3 213.4 25.4 531.4 285.1 36.7 248.4 246.3 − 2.2          Apr 
2,149.2 250.1 1,899.1 201.3 25.4 532.8 284.2 36.8 247.4 248.6 − 2.2          May2,144.5 248.9 1,895.6 198.1 25.3 531.5 281.4 36.1 245.4 250.0 − 2.2          June
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 534.0 277.8 32.3 245.5 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
2,167.0 251.8 1,915.3 197.8 24.4 538.6 280.7 34.5 246.3 257.9 − 2.1          Oct 
2,175.1 252.6 1,922.5 200.5 24.3 537.7 280.1 33.8 246.3 257.6 − 2.1          Nov 2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1          Dec 
Changes *
+ 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 21.2 − 3.9 − 28.8 − 16.4 − 1.4 − 15.0 − 12.4 − + 0.3 2006
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.1 + 5.6 + 33.5 + 12.6 − 1.8 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 5.0 − 2.6 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 4.5 + 1.2 + 3.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 − − 0.1 2013          July
+ 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.0 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.6 − − 0.5          Sep 
+ 4.2 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 + 0.6 + 3.4 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 6.8 + 1.2 + 5.7 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − + 0.0          Nov 
− 3.0 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 1.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2014          Jan 
+ 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 6.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.1 + 16.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 6.0 − 0.9 + 6.9 − 12.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.3 − − 0.0          May
− 4.0 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 + 1.4 − − 0.0          June
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.1 + 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 7.8 − − 0.0          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2012 2,435.9 1,170.6 1,135.0 922.4 212.6 1,377.6 311.2 131.1 92.7 59.6 126.1 44.5 76.7 195.4
2013          Dec 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Mar 2,356.3 1,179.3 1,160.3 936.4 223.8 1,283.4 320.0 129.1 97.0 59.5 124.2 46.0 68.9 107.1
         June 2,367.1 1,181.3 1,166.6 940.0 226.7 1,288.3 320.9 129.1 98.1 59.9 124.3 47.0 68.7 104.7         Sep 2,380.6 1,187.9 1,177.1 945.6 231.5 1,293.2 322.9 127.1 98.7 60.3 125.9 47.8 69.4 110.2         Dec 2,384.8 1,225.2 1,188.3 983.8 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
 Short-term lending
2012 316.4 − 7.9 − 7.9 277.7 3.8 34.8 6.9 12.0 43.0 3.3 6.8 112.8
2013          Dec 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Mar 219.9 − 8.6 − 8.6 183.5 4.4 35.4 5.9 12.7 41.5 3.6 6.4 23.8
         June 222.6 − 8.6 − 8.6 186.1 4.3 36.3 6.2 12.8 41.5 4.0 6.6 22.3
         Sep 220.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 184.2 4.3 34.5 5.6 12.7 42.9 4.0 6.3 25.6
         Dec 212.1 − 7.7 − 7.7 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
 Medium-term lending
2012 249.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 11.8 25.6 7.0 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.0 35.9
2013          Dec 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Mar 249.1 − 35.0 − 35.0 175.0 12.3 25.3 5.9 9.3 16.5 4.0 11.4 35.8
         June 248.9 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.2 12.8 24.7 5.4 9.3 16.9 4.1 11.5 35.5
         Sep 250.3 − 35.3 − 35.3 176.7 12.7 24.5 5.6 9.7 16.9 4.2 11.7 35.9
         Dec 251.7 − 35.9 − 35.9 178.3 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
 Long-term lending
2012 1,869.8 1,170.6 1,091.8 922.4 169.4 923.2 295.6 70.7 78.8 38.3 66.6 37.2 58.9 46.7
2013          Dec 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Mar 1,887.3 1,179.3 1,116.7 936.4 180.3 924.9 303.3 68.4 85.2 37.5 66.1 38.5 51.1 47.5
         June 1,895.6 1,181.3 1,122.8 940.0 182.9 926.1 303.8 68.1 86.5 37.8 66.0 38.9 50.7 46.9         Sep 1,910.0 1,187.9 1,133.4 945.6 187.8 932.4 305.8 68.2 87.5 38.0 66.0 39.6 51.4 48.8         Dec 1,921.0 1,225.2 1,144.8 983.8 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2013          Q4 + 2.0 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 2.6 + 3.5 − 1.5 + 2.1 − 2.4 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.6
2014          Q1 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1 + 2.3
         Q2 + 11.2 + 1.3 + 6.3 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.4         Q3 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 4.6 + 2.0 − 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 3.7         Q4 + 6.9 + 5.9 + 9.0 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 2.5 + 3.4 − 4.2 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 4.2
 Short-term lending
2013          Q4 − 6.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9
2014          Q1 + 2.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.6         Q3 − 2.2 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.3         Q4 − 8.1 − − 0.8 − − 0.8 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.3
 Medium-term lending
2013          Q4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
2014          Q1 + 1.3 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5
         Q2 + 1.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3         Q3 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3         Q4 + 1.6 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.2
 Long-term lending
2013          Q4 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 2.6 + 3.4 + 4.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.7
2014          Q1 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Q2 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 2.5 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.4         Q3 + 14.2 + 6.6 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 4.3 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.7         Q4 + 13.4 + 5.9 + 9.5 + 7.8 + 1.6 + 7.4 + 3.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.3
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
651.6 184.6 39.0 178.5 388.4 51.0 1,044.9 820.3 224.6 147.2 13.0 13.4 3.5 2012
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5 2013          Dec 
651.5 192.1 37.1 175.9 387.5 49.4 1,059.4 836.8 222.6 148.0 12.0 13.5 3.5 2014          Mar 
656.5 192.8 39.1 176.4 388.0 49.6 1,065.5 842.3 223.2 148.7 11.8 13.3 3.5          June653.8 192.3 38.0 175.4 389.3 49.1 1,074.2 850.7 223.5 149.3 11.9 13.2 3.5          Sep 644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.2 222.4 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8          Dec 
Short-term lending
58.0 9.3 7.9 12.9 30.0 7.2 37.7 4.0 33.7 2.1 13.0 1.1 0.0 2012
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0 2013          Dec 
54.0 8.9 6.6 12.4 27.8 7.0 35.4 4.2 31.2 1.8 12.0 1.0 0.0 2014          Mar 
56.5 8.8 7.8 12.6 28.0 7.2 35.7 4.2 31.5 1.7 11.8 0.9 0.0          June52.6 8.5 6.3 12.2 27.3 6.9 35.3 4.1 31.2 1.6 11.9 0.8 0.0          Sep 52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
67.5 8.9 7.9 20.2 32.2 3.5 72.5 23.5 49.0 44.1 − 0.5 0.0 2012
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0 2013          Dec 
66.8 9.9 6.7 20.1 32.1 3.5 73.6 22.6 51.0 45.8 − 0.4 0.0 2014          Mar 
68.8 10.4 7.2 20.5 31.7 3.6 72.2 22.5 49.7 44.6 − 0.5 0.0          June
68.2 9.9 7.2 20.0 32.0 3.6 73.1 22.5 50.6 45.4 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
526.1 166.4 23.2 145.5 326.2 40.3 934.7 792.8 142.0 100.9 − 11.8 3.5 2012
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5 2013          Dec 
530.6 173.3 23.9 143.4 327.6 38.9 950.4 810.0 140.4 100.4 − 12.0 3.5 2014          Mar 
531.2 173.6 24.2 143.3 328.3 38.8 957.6 815.6 142.0 102.3 − 12.0 3.5          June
533.0 173.8 24.5 143.2 330.0 38.6 965.8 824.1 141.7 102.2 − 11.8 3.5          Sep 
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.1 141.5 102.8 − 13.3 3.7          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.0 + 3.3 + 4.0 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 2013          Q4− 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 5.2 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.6 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.9 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Q3
+ 4.8 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 4.3 + 5.4 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.2          Q4
Short-term lending
− 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013          Q4
− 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.5 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 4.0 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
− 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − − 0.0 2013          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 3.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2013          Q4
− 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q1
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 + 8.3 + 7.9 + 0.4 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 5.9 − 0.3 + 0.4 − + 0.3 + 0.3          Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2012 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 341.3 731.2 32.0 699.2 617.6 93.6 34.9 31.7 82.9
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.7 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2014          Jan 3,047.2 1,416.0 946.7 250.8 695.9 29.0 666.9 609.1 75.4 32.9 29.1 2.5
         Feb 3,056.6 1,422.6 949.8 255.8 694.0 29.1 664.9 609.8 74.4 32.7 29.0 3.1
         Mar 3,048.0 1,416.9 948.8 257.3 691.5 28.8 662.7 608.6 73.7 32.5 28.8 1.9
         Apr 3,057.2 1,431.5 947.0 258.2 688.8 28.4 660.4 606.7 72.0 32.4 28.7 4.3
         May 3,072.1 1,446.2 949.0 262.0 687.0 28.4 658.6 606.0 70.9 31.9 28.6 0.9
         June 3,066.2 1,442.8 948.4 263.7 684.7 28.4 656.3 604.5 70.5 31.4 28.2 1.7
         July 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 264.3 681.1 28.0 653.1 604.4 69.2 31.3 27.9 2.7
         Aug 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 265.6 679.7 28.2 651.5 605.9 68.4 31.3 27.6 2.3
         Sep 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 262.0 679.9 28.2 651.7 606.5 69.4 31.2 27.4 2.8
         Oct 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 252.2 676.0 28.1 647.8 606.1 68.6 31.1 27.2 1.9
         Nov 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 250.6 676.1 29.2 646.9 605.3 66.5 31.1 26.6 1.7
         Dec 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.7 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
Changes*
2013 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 22.8 − 31.1 − 0.2 − 30.8 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 − 2.7 + 3.6
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.2 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2014          Jan − 1.5 + 6.1 − 5.4 − 4.0 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.9
         Feb + 9.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 5.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.6         Mar − 8.7 − 5.8 − 0.9 + 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.2
         Apr + 9.2 + 14.6 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 2.4
         May + 15.0 + 14.7 + 2.0 + 3.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.4         June − 5.9 − 3.4 − 0.6 + 1.7 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8
         July + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Aug + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4         Sep + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 − 3.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Oct + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 9.8 − 3.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.8
         Nov + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2         Dec + 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.7 − 6.7 − 0.1 − 6.5 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2012 186.2 50.8 130.7 73.0 57.7 4.5 53.1 3.1 1.6 32.7 5.9 3.1
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.5 52.4 128.0 84.4 43.6 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2014          Jan 172.1 43.4 123.7 75.3 48.4 5.6 42.8 3.5 1.4 30.7 4.8 0.8
         Feb 178.1 47.1 125.9 76.9 49.0 6.1 43.0 3.6 1.5 30.6 4.8 1.5
         Mar 180.5 47.3 128.2 79.4 48.8 6.1 42.7 3.5 1.5 30.5 4.7 0.7
         Apr 178.1 46.4 126.7 78.1 48.6 6.1 42.5 3.5 1.5 30.4 4.7 2.9
         May 183.4 49.2 129.0 80.5 48.4 6.1 42.4 3.6 1.6 29.9 4.7 0.0
         June 190.1 50.0 135.0 86.6 48.4 6.0 42.4 3.5 1.6 29.5 4.7 0.9
         July 187.1 47.4 134.6 86.5 48.0 5.9 42.2 3.5 1.7 29.5 4.7 1.7
         Aug 189.7 51.1 133.4 85.3 48.1 5.9 42.1 3.4 1.8 29.5 4.7 1.1
         Sep 189.2 47.8 136.1 88.3 47.8 5.7 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.4 4.6 1.6
         Oct 178.4 44.6 128.4 80.6 47.9 5.8 42.1 3.4 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.8
         Nov 182.6 46.6 130.7 82.3 48.3 6.4 42.0 3.5 1.9 29.3 4.6 0.5
         Dec 186.5 52.4 128.0 84.4 43.6 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 − 9.0 + 0.8 − 9.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.6
2014 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 3.1 + 3.2 − 6.3 + 0.9 − 7.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2014          Jan − 10.9 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 3.9         Feb + 5.5 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.7
         Mar + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8
         Apr − 2.6 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.2
         May + 5.3 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2.9         June + 7.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 2.8 − 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Aug + 2.6 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6         Sep − 0.6 − 3.4 + 2.7 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Oct − 10.7 − 3.1 − 7.7 − 7.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8
         Nov + 4.1 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3         Dec + 0.7 + 4.2 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 6.2 + 0.2 − 6.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2012 2,904.0 1,255.7 941.7 268.3 673.5 27.5 646.0 614.5 92.0 2.2 25.8 79.8
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.72014 2,931.6 1,465.4 798.6 172.6 626.0 21.9 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2014          Jan 2,875.1 1,372.6 822.9 175.5 647.4 23.4 624.1 605.6 74.0 2.2 24.3 1.7
         Feb 2,878.5 1,375.5 823.9 178.9 644.9 23.0 621.9 606.2 72.9 2.1 24.2 1.6         Mar 2,867.4 1,369.6 820.6 177.9 642.7 22.7 620.0 605.0 72.2 2.1 24.1 1.2
         Apr 2,879.1 1,385.1 820.3 180.1 640.2 22.2 618.0 603.2 70.5 2.0 24.0 1.4
         May 2,888.8 1,397.0 820.0 181.5 638.6 22.4 616.2 602.4 69.3 2.0 23.8 0.9         June 2,876.1 1,392.8 813.4 177.1 636.2 22.4 613.9 601.1 68.9 1.9 23.5 0.8
         July 2,886.8 1,407.6 810.9 177.8 633.1 22.1 610.9 600.9 67.5 1.9 23.2 1.0
         Aug 2,901.9 1,421.0 811.9 180.3 631.6 22.3 609.4 602.4 66.6 1.8 22.9 1.3         Sep 2,903.4 1,427.1 805.8 173.7 632.1 22.4 609.6 603.1 67.5 1.8 22.7 1.2
         Oct 2,918.9 1,449.9 799.7 171.6 628.1 22.3 605.8 602.6 66.7 1.8 22.6 1.1
         Nov 2,933.8 1,471.3 796.0 168.3 627.7 22.8 604.9 601.8 64.6 1.8 22.0 1.2         Dec 2,931.6 1,465.4 798.6 172.6 626.0 21.9 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
Changes*
2013 + 43.9 + 121.3 − 52.5 − 30.4 − 22.1 − 1.1 − 21.0 − 7.9 − 17.1 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 2.0
2014 + 69.9 + 105.9 − 22.2 − 0.7 − 21.5 − 1.5 − 20.0 − 2.6 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2014          Jan + 9.4 + 10.9 + 0.4 + 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.0
         Feb + 4.0 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Mar − 11.1 − 5.9 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 11.8 + 15.5 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2
         May + 9.7 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5         June − 12.9 − 4.1 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1
         July + 10.6 + 14.8 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2
         Aug + 15.1 + 13.4 + 1.0 + 2.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Sep + 1.6 + 6.1 − 6.1 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Oct + 15.5 + 22.8 − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 15.0 + 21.5 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1         Dec + 1.1 − 4.4 + 4.3 + 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2012 1,105.3 414.2 668.5 185.9 482.5 10.4 472.2 6.5 16.1 2.2 18.2 79.8
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,008.1 457.1 529.3 104.2 425.1 10.5 414.6 6.8 14.9 1.8 16.5 1.2
2014          Jan 1,016.9 434.6 559.6 107.6 452.1 9.9 442.2 7.4 15.2 2.2 17.5 1.7
         Feb 1,011.5 429.4 559.6 110.8 448.8 9.7 439.1 7.4 15.0 2.1 17.4 1.6
         Mar 1,004.6 426.1 555.9 109.7 446.2 9.6 436.6 7.5 15.1 2.0 17.5 1.2
         Apr 1,008.4 430.5 555.8 112.1 443.6 9.4 434.3 7.5 14.7 2.0 17.5 1.4
         May 1,008.7 432.0 554.7 113.3 441.3 9.6 431.7 7.4 14.6 2.0 17.5 0.9
         June 996.5 427.9 546.4 108.1 438.3 9.5 428.9 7.5 14.7 1.8 17.2 0.8
         July 1,000.1 434.5 543.7 108.7 435.0 9.3 425.6 7.5 14.5 1.8 17.2 1.0
         Aug 1,004.8 438.0 544.5 111.5 433.0 9.5 423.5 7.5 14.8 1.8 17.1 1.3
         Sep 1,011.6 449.5 538.4 105.8 432.6 9.3 423.3 7.5 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.2
         Oct 1,014.9 458.3 532.8 104.2 428.6 9.5 419.1 7.6 16.2 1.8 17.1 1.1
         Nov 1,008.1 456.6 529.2 100.9 428.2 10.6 417.7 7.4 14.9 1.8 16.7 1.2
         Dec 1,008.1 457.1 529.3 104.2 425.1 10.5 414.6 6.8 14.9 1.8 16.5 1.2
Changes*
2013 − 12.0 + 30.3 − 42.3 − 16.4 − 25.9 + 1.9 − 27.8 + 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2014 − 1.7 + 28.7 − 29.7 − 1.2 − 28.6 + 0.5 − 29.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2014          Jan + 5.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 + 1.9 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
         Feb − 4.7 − 4.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar − 6.9 − 3.3 − 3.7 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr + 4.2 + 4.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         May + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5         June − 12.5 − 4.0 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July + 3.6 + 6.5 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
         Aug + 4.7 + 3.5 + 0.9 + 2.8 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep + 6.8 + 11.5 − 6.1 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct + 3.3 + 8.9 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov − 6.8 − 1.7 − 3.7 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1         Dec + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 3.7 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,798.7 841.5 816.5 147.1 548.6 120.8 25.0 273.3 256.6 18.8 219.3 18.6
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.5 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.1 41.8
2014          July 1,886.7 973.1 942.7 168.0 642.3 132.5 30.4 267.2 251.1 17.2 218.9 15.0
         Aug 1,897.1 983.0 952.2 170.6 648.9 132.8 30.7 267.4 251.1 17.1 219.2 14.9
         Sep 1,891.9 977.6 946.5 166.7 647.4 132.4 31.1 267.4 251.4 17.0 219.6 14.7
         Oct 1,904.0 991.5 958.8 172.9 652.7 133.2 32.8 266.9 251.1 17.0 219.5 14.7
         Nov 1,925.8 1,014.8 983.0 174.0 673.1 135.9 31.8 266.9 251.1 16.8 219.5 14.8
         Dec 1,923.5 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.1 41.8
Changes*
2013 + 56.0 + 91.0 + 89.7 + 14.2 + 62.1 + 13.5 + 1.3 − 10.1 − 9.4 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 2.6
2014 + 71.7 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 7.6 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2014          July + 7.1 + 8.2 + 8.2 + 5.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Aug + 10.4 + 9.9 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Sep − 5.3 − 5.4 − 5.8 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Oct + 12.1 + 14.0 + 12.3 + 5.9 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Nov + 21.8 + 23.2 + 24.2 + 1.0 + 20.4 + 2.8 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Dec + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 2.3 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.2 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2012 186.2 25.9 3.7 6.0 16.2 0.1 16.4 47.2 9.1 13.7 24.2 0.2 15.9
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.5 14.3 2.8 6.0 5.5 0.1 14.6 39.9 13.2 10.3 15.7 0.7 14.1
2014          July 187.1 11.8 3.3 3.5 4.9 0.1 14.8 51.0 13.2 15.0 22.7 0.2 14.3
         Aug 189.7 10.6 2.3 3.4 4.9 0.1 14.9 49.9 12.2 14.9 22.7 0.2 14.2
         Sep 189.2 11.5 2.7 3.8 4.9 0.1 14.9 54.3 11.6 20.0 22.6 0.2 14.2
         Oct 178.4 11.2 2.6 3.6 4.9 0.1 14.8 48.7 11.2 14.8 22.5 0.2 14.1
         Nov 182.6 10.6 2.3 3.3 5.0 0.1 14.8 44.0 10.8 10.3 22.7 0.2 14.1
         Dec 186.5 14.3 2.8 6.0 5.5 0.1 14.6 39.9 13.2 10.3 15.7 0.7 14.1
Changes*
2013 − 3.8 − 9.8 − 0.8 + 1.8 − 10.8 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 4.2 + 0.8 − 3.8 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.9
2014 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 7.3 + 0.5 − 0.5
2014          July − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug + 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Sep − 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.4 − 0.6 + 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct − 10.7 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec + 0.7 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.4 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 6.9 + 0.5 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
16.7 82.3 190.9 17.1 173.8 608.0 597.8 10.2 76.0 0.0 7.6 − 2012
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 201314.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.1 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
16.1 69.1 198.1 12.8 185.3 593.4 584.0 9.5 52.9 0.0 6.0 − 2014          July
16.3 68.8 198.6 12.8 185.9 594.9 585.5 9.5 51.8 0.0 5.9 −          Aug 16.0 67.9 199.5 13.1 186.4 595.6 586.1 9.5 51.3 0.0 5.7 −          Sep 
15.7 67.4 199.5 12.8 186.6 595.0 585.6 9.5 50.5 0.0 5.4 −          Oct 
15.8 67.4 199.5 12.3 187.2 594.4 585.1 9.3 49.7 0.0 5.3 −          Nov 14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.1 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 −          Dec 
Changes*
− 0.7 − 14.0 + 3.9 − 3.0 + 6.8 − 8.7 − 8.3 − 0.4 − 16.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 2013
− 0.1 + 0.4 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2014          July
+ 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
− 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Sep 
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.8 − − 0.2 −          Oct 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Nov 
− 0.2 + 1.0 + 2.4 − 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Dec 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
43.8 23.0 11.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 69.3 15.0 42.0 11.4 0.8 0.0 2012
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 201348.0 25.4 11.1 7.0 4.5 0.4 84.4 11.1 57.0 15.4 0.9 − 2014
40.5 18.5 11.3 6.5 4.2 0.4 83.8 12.4 56.8 13.9 0.8 0.0 2014          July
46.2 22.9 12.4 6.6 4.3 0.4 83.0 13.7 54.8 13.9 0.7 0.0          Aug 43.5 20.7 11.9 6.6 4.3 0.4 79.8 12.7 52.6 13.8 0.8 0.0          Sep 
41.9 19.7 11.2 6.7 4.3 0.4 76.7 11.1 51.0 13.7 0.8 0.0          Oct 
44.2 21.8 11.4 6.7 4.3 0.4 83.8 11.7 57.2 14.1 0.8 −          Nov 48.0 25.4 11.1 7.0 4.5 0.4 84.4 11.1 57.0 15.4 0.9 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 9.1 − 3.4 + 10.1 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2013+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 + 3.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014
− 2.7 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 2014          July
+ 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 1.3 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug − 2.7 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 3.2 − 1.0 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Sep 
− 1.6 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Oct 
+ 2.4 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 7.0 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          Nov + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2012 628.2 617.6 528.4 418.1 89.2 77.7 10.6 8.1 9.8 110.5 93.6 68.6 16.9
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014 617.0 607.7 531.4 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2014          Aug 615.3 605.9 528.2 402.7 77.7 64.7 9.4 7.5 0.2 82.0 68.4 53.5 13.7
         Sep 615.8 606.5 528.3 402.3 78.2 65.2 9.3 7.5 0.2 83.2 69.4 54.6 13.8
         Oct 615.3 606.1 528.0 400.6 78.0 65.0 9.3 7.4 0.3 82.4 68.6 53.9 13.7
         Nov 614.6 605.3 527.7 399.6 77.7 64.5 9.2 7.4 0.3 80.2 66.5 51.8 13.7
         Dec 617.0 607.7 531.4 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 3.4 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
Changes*
2013 − 8.0 − 7.4 + 4.0 − 4.4 − 11.3 − 12.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 . − 18.4 − 17.0 − 9.3 − 1.4
2014 − 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2014          Aug + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.0
         Sep + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.1
         Oct − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Nov − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.1 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0
         Dec + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2012 1,265.1 346.8 31.6 362.3 58.9 76.4 3.0 51.3 4.4 1,137.4 0.3 0.3 38.6 1.1
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014 1,114.2 286.3 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 2.1 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2014          Aug 1,129.9 302.4 28.6 353.6 80.2 96.8 2.6 29.3 5.2 1,003.8 1.3 0.2 34.7 1.1
         Sep 1,135.5 299.4 29.0 362.3 78.7 96.2 2.5 29.7 5.2 1,009.5 1.3 0.2 32.9 1.1
         Oct 1,129.1 292.8 28.0 358.6 77.4 92.1 2.5 28.9 5.2 1,008.0 1.1 0.2 33.0 1.1
         Nov 1,123.8 290.1 25.9 355.2 73.3 86.5 2.3 27.1 5.2 1,010.2 1.1 0.2 33.2 1.1
         Dec 1,114.2 286.3 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 2.1 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
Changes*
2013 − 122.4 − 30.9 − 5.3 − 41.2 − 4.1 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 16.6 + 0.1 − 98.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.4 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2014          Aug + 7.8 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 10.1 + 8.3 + 9.7 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
         Sep + 5.3 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 8.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7 −
         Oct − 6.4 − 6.7 − 1.0 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 3.4 − 4.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0         Dec − 9.6 − 3.7 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 4.1 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 22 200.6 42.2 0.0 17.5 24.0 78.3 16.0 14.5 1.3 21.0 141.9 6.4 4.9 8.7 101.8
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014          Oct 21 209.9 44.7 0.0 16.5 19.3 86.2 17.2 20.3 1.8 21.5 153.6 5.1 2.9 9.1 7.8
         Nov 21 210.8 45.2 0.0 16.5 19.1 86.6 17.2 20.5 1.8 21.7 154.1 5.1 2.9 9.1 7.8         Dec 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 9.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Oct 12 146.5 27.3 − 9.5 13.6 67.6 14.7 9.0 1.1 17.7 101.3 5.0 2.9 6.1 4.9         Nov 12 146.9 27.8 − 9.5 13.5 67.8 14.7 8.9 1.2 17.9 101.6 4.9 2.9 6.1 4.9         Dec 12 147.5 28.2 − 9.5 13.3 68.3 14.7 8.9 1.2 17.7 103.4 4.9 2.8 6.1 6.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Oct 9 63.4 17.4 0.0 7.0 5.7 18.6 2.5 11.3 0.6 3.7 52.3 0.1 − 3.0 2.9         Nov 9 63.8 17.4 0.0 7.1 5.6 18.7 2.5 11.6 0.6 3.9 52.5 0.1 − 3.0 2.8         Dec 9 64.2 17.4 0.0 7.1 5.5 18.9 2.5 11.7 0.6 3.6 53.4 0.3 − 3.0 3.4
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2012 28.5 2.6 6.8 48.3 31.0 40.8 18.3 4.1 6.8 3.7 15.7 13.2 7.7 12.1 10.1 0.4
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014          Oct 2.9 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.3 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.5 14.7 8.1 0.8 0.0
         Nov 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.6 2.2 3.1 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.4 14.9 8.2 0.8 0.0
         Dec 2.5 2.2 0.6 3.5 2.1 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.6 14.5 8.0 0.9 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Oct 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.7 2.6 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.2 10.2 4.8 0.6 0.0
         Nov 1.5 0.0 0.2 2.6 1.4 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.1 10.3 4.8 0.6 0.0         Dec 1.7 1.5 0.3 2.5 1.5 2.5 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.2 10.2 4.8 0.7 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2014          Oct 1.4 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.3 0.2 0.0         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.4 0.2 0.0         Dec 0.9 0.8 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.2 0.3 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2011 56 209 2,316.6 603.9 584.9 199.1 385.8 19.0 642.5 504.3 23.2 481.0 138.2 1,070.2 885.0
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014          Feb 56 210 1,769.7 485.5 472.1 147.8 324.3 13.5 543.5 436.9 9.9 426.9 106.7 740.7 433.8
         Mar 56 209 1,695.7 469.6 455.3 159.0 296.3 14.3 558.2 450.2 9.6 440.6 108.1 667.9 425.2
         Apr 56 209 1,731.7 473.1 459.1 157.4 301.7 14.0 569.0 458.2 9.7 448.5 110.8 689.5 431.7
         May 56 207 1,766.9 478.5 465.8 154.9 310.9 12.7 570.9 454.3 9.3 445.0 116.6 717.6 443.0
         June 56 206 1,741.9 483.2 469.0 148.3 320.7 14.3 584.6 469.5 9.0 460.5 115.1 674.1 430.4
         July 56 206 1,828.9 511.1 496.3 137.7 358.6 14.8 603.0 484.9 13.0 471.9 118.1 714.8 428.6
         Aug 56 206 1,876.9 539.9 525.2 170.6 354.5 14.7 564.0 454.2 14.1 440.1 109.8 773.0 468.6
         Sep 56 206 1,826.4 503.6 488.5 154.1 334.4 15.2 615.9 500.5 13.7 486.8 115.4 706.9 487.0
         Oct 56 205 1,910.0 525.1 509.5 154.7 354.9 15.6 609.9 494.0 13.5 480.5 115.9 775.0 509.7
         Nov 56 205 1,982.6 540.6 525.7 173.6 352.1 14.9 616.5 499.1 14.0 485.1 117.3 825.5 549.8
Changes *
2012 − 1 + 1 − 261.8 − 45.7 − 41.0 − 19.6 − 21.4 − 4.7 − 86.9 − 73.0 − 6.4 − 66.7 − 13.9 − 129.3 − 213.2
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2014          Mar − − 1 − 74.5 − 16.4 − 17.3 + 11.1 − 28.4 + 0.9 + 14.7 + 13.3 − 0.4 + 13.7 + 1.4 − 72.8 − 8.6
         Apr − − + 37.7 + 4.7 + 5.0 − 1.6 + 6.5 − 0.3 + 11.4 + 8.5 + 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.9 + 21.7 + 6.5
         May − − 2 + 23.7 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 2.5 + 4.1 − 1.4 − 3.7 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 8.1 + 4.8 + 27.3 + 11.3
         June − − 1 − 24.4 + 5.5 + 3.9 − 6.6 + 10.5 + 1.6 + 13.5 + 15.0 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.5 − 43.4 − 12.6
         July − − + 74.4 + 21.9 + 21.5 − 10.6 + 32.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 + 10.3 + 4.0 + 6.4 + 2.1 + 40.1 − 1.8
         Aug − − + 38.9 + 23.9 + 24.0 + 32.9 − 8.9 − 0.1 − 42.7 − 33.7 + 1.1 − 34.8 − 8.9 + 57.6 + 40.0
         Sep − − − 80.5 − 51.9 − 52.1 − 16.5 − 35.5 + 0.2 + 39.6 + 35.9 − 0.4 + 36.2 + 3.7 − 68.2 + 18.4
         Oct − − 1 + 82.2 + 20.6 + 20.1 + 0.6 + 19.6 + 0.4 − 6.3 − 6.7 − 0.2 − 6.6 + 0.4 + 67.9 + 22.7
         Nov − − + 73.4 + 15.4 + 16.0 + 19.0 − 3.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 5.4 + 1.7 + 50.5 + 40.1
    
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2011 35 87 478.6 210.3 172.8 95.3 77.5 37.5 210.5 165.1 35.6 129.5 45.5 57.7 −
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014          Feb 33 74 408.3 170.0 142.7 75.9 66.8 27.4 181.5 145.5 25.5 120.0 35.9 56.8 −
         Mar 32 73 407.3 171.3 145.7 80.0 65.7 25.5 181.5 146.4 25.0 121.4 35.1 54.6 −
         Apr 32 73 401.4 168.3 143.3 79.1 64.1 25.1 178.1 143.0 25.1 117.9 35.2 54.9 −
         May 32 72 404.9 166.4 141.9 77.5 64.4 24.5 177.2 140.9 24.7 116.1 36.3 61.3 −
         June 32 71 410.4 169.0 145.5 84.8 60.7 23.5 181.7 145.9 24.7 121.2 35.8 59.7 −
         July 31 70 403.1 167.3 146.0 86.6 59.4 21.2 172.2 137.5 21.4 116.1 34.7 63.7 −
         Aug 31 70 407.3 169.4 148.8 89.7 59.1 20.5 170.8 136.6 21.5 115.1 34.2 67.1 −
         Sep 30 66 399.3 166.3 146.7 90.3 56.4 19.6 169.1 136.1 21.5 114.6 33.1 63.9 −
         Oct 29 64 393.2 160.0 143.0 88.7 54.3 17.0 173.6 139.5 21.5 118.0 34.0 59.6 −
         Nov 29 64 395.0 155.5 138.1 84.7 53.4 17.4 174.5 140.1 21.4 118.7 34.3 65.1 −
Changes *
2012 − − 4 − 18.2 − 9.9 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 4.1 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 5.0 + 2.7 − 2.9 − 3.1 −
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2014          Mar − 1 − 1 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 2.2 −
         Apr − − − 5.6 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
         May − − 1 + 2.0 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 6.3 −
         June − − 1 + 5.7 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 7.3 − 3.7 − 1.0 + 4.5 + 5.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 9.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 10.2 − 9.1 − 3.3 − 5.8 − 1.1 + 3.9 −
         Aug − − + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 3.4 −
         Sep − 1 − 4 − 11.8 − 5.5 − 4.2 + 0.6 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 3.2 −         Oct − 1 − 2 − 6.4 − 6.5 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 4.3 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 1.0 − 4.3 −
         Nov − − + 1.8 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 4.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 5.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2015
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,179.6 814.0 406.6 407.4 365.6 35.9 30.3 5.6 329.7 141.2 38.6 957.2 880.2 2011
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,008.5 664.1 336.0 328.1 344.4 28.0 23.0 5.0 316.4 130.1 40.4 590.6 450.4 2014          Feb 
964.2 625.5 340.9 284.6 338.7 29.0 24.0 5.0 309.7 125.3 40.5 565.7 435.1          Mar 
1,001.9 653.8 341.1 312.7 348.1 27.4 22.4 4.9 320.7 127.1 40.4 562.4 436.0          Apr 1,011.4 663.0 349.1 313.9 348.4 25.8 20.9 4.9 322.6 134.1 40.3 581.2 452.3          May1,003.6 668.2 351.1 317.1 335.4 23.1 18.7 4.5 312.3 134.3 41.0 563.1 436.7          June
1,103.3 732.0 371.2 360.8 371.4 22.8 18.3 4.5 348.6 133.6 41.6 550.4 434.8          July
1,093.1 727.8 370.2 357.6 365.3 23.7 19.3 4.4 341.6 139.0 41.7 603.0 473.2          Aug 1,027.4 691.8 364.7 327.1 335.6 22.5 18.1 4.4 313.1 139.3 42.1 617.7 493.4          Sep 
1,077.6 733.8 390.9 342.8 343.9 22.1 17.7 4.5 321.7 133.3 41.9 657.2 517.3          Oct 
1,099.5 753.2 411.7 341.5 346.3 21.8 17.3 4.4 324.5 132.7 42.9 707.6 555.5          Nov 
Changes *
− 114.6 − 80.1 − 35.3 − 44.8 − 34.5 − 1.3 − 3.4 + 2.1 − 33.2 − 14.3 + 1.4 − 134.3 − 209.4 2012− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013
− 44.6 − 38.8 + 4.9 − 43.8 − 5.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 6.8 − 4.9 + 0.0 − 25.0 − 15.3 2014          Mar 
+ 38.8 + 29.0 + 0.2 + 28.7 + 9.9 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 11.5 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 0.9          Apr 
+ 1.9 + 5.2 + 8.0 − 2.8 − 3.3 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 1.8 + 7.0 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 16.3          May− 7.3 + 5.6 + 2.0 + 3.6 − 12.9 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 18.1 − 15.6          June
+ 91.5 + 59.2 + 20.1 + 39.0 + 32.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 32.8 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 17.0 − 1.9          July
− 16.4 − 7.7 − 1.0 − 6.7 − 8.7 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 9.6 + 5.5 + 0.1 + 49.7 + 38.4          Aug − 87.0 − 48.1 − 5.6 − 42.5 − 39.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 37.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 20.2          Sep 
+ 49.4 + 41.4 + 26.2 + 15.1 + 8.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 5.9 − 0.3 + 39.0 + 23.9          Oct 
+ 22.2 + 19.3 + 20.8 − 1.4 + 2.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 50.9 + 38.2          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
377.5 229.6 142.4 87.2 147.9 26.7 19.8 6.9 121.2 25.1 30.8 45.2 − 2011
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
320.7 186.5 94.5 92.0 134.2 19.8 17.8 2.0 114.3 21.0 28.9 37.7 − 2014          Feb 
319.5 186.3 95.0 91.3 133.2 19.6 17.6 2.0 113.6 20.3 29.1 38.4 −          Mar 
312.7 181.1 94.5 86.6 131.5 19.2 17.2 2.0 112.3 20.9 29.2 38.7 −          Apr 
316.4 186.7 95.6 91.1 129.7 18.8 16.7 2.1 110.9 20.5 28.5 39.4 −          May
322.8 189.7 106.4 83.2 133.1 18.6 15.2 3.4 114.5 20.4 27.3 39.9 −          June
315.1 184.0 97.8 86.3 131.1 20.4 15.4 5.0 110.7 20.4 26.8 40.9 −          July
311.3 178.6 98.5 80.1 132.7 19.9 14.8 5.1 112.8 20.3 28.2 47.5 −          Aug 
304.5 173.6 99.1 74.6 130.9 20.5 15.2 5.3 110.4 19.4 27.6 47.8 −          Sep 
302.4 175.5 99.4 76.1 126.9 19.7 14.3 5.5 107.2 16.1 26.4 48.2 −          Oct 
304.2 179.1 100.6 78.5 125.2 20.6 14.5 6.1 104.6 16.1 26.3 48.4 −          Nov 
Changes *
− 19.6 − 21.3 − 22.0 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 6.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2012
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 2014          Mar 
− 6.6 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 4.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Apr 
+ 2.6 + 4.8 + 1.1 + 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 −          May
+ 6.5 + 3.1 + 10.8 − 7.7 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 −          June
− 9.1 − 6.5 − 8.7 + 2.2 − 2.6 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.6 −          July
− 4.8 − 6.0 + 0.7 − 6.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 6.4 −          Aug 
− 9.7 − 6.7 + 0.6 − 7.3 − 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 −          Sep 
− 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 −          Oct 
+ 1.7 + 3.5 + 1.2 + 2.3 − 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2015
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2009 10,530.2 210.6 210.1 211.3 1.2 0.0
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 8 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2014          Oct 10,616.9 106.2 105.7 188.3 82.6 0.0
         Nov 10,691.3 106.9 106.5 185.4 79.0 0.0
         Dec  9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015          Jan  p 10,800.5 108.0 107.5 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2009 2,507,906 23.8 50,158 49,971 50,297 326 0
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 8 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2014          Oct 2,843,205 26.8 28,432 28,257 57,557 29,300 0
         Nov 2,868,958 26.8 28,690 28,515 55,526 27,011 0
         Dec 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015          Jan  p 2,921,579 27.1 29,216 29,041 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Special purpose Regional institutions
Maintenance Regional banks banks and build- of credit cooperatives
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and and credit ing and loan
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks cooperatives Mortgage banks associations beginning in 1 
2009 11,165 7,885 1,461 18,040 9,400 652 1,368
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,914 556 1,409
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 10,230 601 1,531
2012 8 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 5,262 248 871
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,479 239 906
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2014          Oct 5,322 4,882 1,469 9,642 5,758 222 961
         Nov 5,520 4,921 1,495 9,647 5,735 219 977
         Dec 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2015          Jan  p 5,907 4,940 1,519 9,741 5,819 212 905
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and depo- money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are sits with building and loan associa- of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but tions) with agreed maturities of up Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 to 2 years to banks in non-euro-
years requirements area countries to 2 years institution beginning in 1 
2009 1,473,296 6,814 309,908 572,127 145,759
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 8 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2014          Oct 1,889,325 1,389 260,917 601,106 90,475
         Nov 1,896,808 3,282 276,688 601,782 90,393
         Dec 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015          Jan  p 1,932,264 1,264 305,908 600,771 81,428
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of allowance. 8The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, was 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012 ,i t
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve has stood at 1%. 9Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance,
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years is 1%. including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required reserves of the
4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2015
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2015 Jan                  6 112,335 112,335 0.05−−−8
         Jan                14 113,986 113,986 0.05−−−7
         Jan                21 125,256 125,256 0.05−−−7
         Jan                28 163,821 163,821 0.05−−−7
         Feb                  4 151,768 151,768 0.05−−−7
         Feb                11 104,539 104,539 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2014 Nov                27 18,348 18,348 2 ... − − − 91
         Dec                17 129,840 129,840 0.15−−− 1,379
         Dec                18 22,349 22,349 2 ... − − − 91
2015 Jan                29 34,132 34,132 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2014          July 0.04 0.05 0.10 0.21 0.30 0.40 0.49
         Aug 0.02 0.04 0.09 0.19 0.29 0.38 0.47
         Sep 0.01 − 0.01 0.02 0.10 0.20 0.27 0.36
         Oct 0.00 − 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.18 0.26 0.34
         Nov − 0.01 − 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.18 0.26 0.33
         Dec − 0.03 − 0.01 0.02 0.08 0.18 0.25 0.33
2015          Jan − 0.05 − 0.04 0.01 0.06 0.15 0.22 0.30
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Dec 1.03 96,913 1.97 226,745 0.48 81,898 3.07 20,531
2014          Jan 1.01 95,966 1.95 227,207 0.48 83,425 3.04 20,595
         Feb 0.99 95,572 1.94 227,617 0.44 86,581 3.02 20,561
         Mar 0.97 95,257 1.92 227,604 0.45 85,751 3.01 20,226
         Apr 0.95 94,627 1.91 226,848 0.45 86,699 2.98 19,598
         May 0.92 94,570 1.89 226,619 0.46 87,856 2.95 19,903
         June 0.91 95,671 1.87 226,527 0.44 84,165 2.92 19,989
         July 0.87 95,197 1.85 225,989 0.41 85,704 2.87 19,674
         Aug 0.84 94,384 1.84 225,881 0.39 86,373 2.83 19,536
         Sep 0.81 93,703 1.82 225,992 0.39 83,870 2.81 19,601
         Oct 0.79 92,778 1.81 225,657 0.37 83,587 2.78 19,663
         Nov 0.76 92,016 1.80 225,585 0.37 83,312 2.73 19,554
         Dec 0.71 91,909 1.77 227,262 0.36 80,582 2.74 19,202
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Dec 3.29 5,683 3.12 28,778 3.98 978,740 7.61 59,488 5.01 77,624 5.01 307,844
2014          Jan 3.16 5,704 3.10 28,563 3.96 977,215 7.66 57,235 4.99 77,651 5.00 308,100
         Feb 3.20 5,602 3.08 28,337 3.94 979,347 7.61 56,749 4.97 77,550 4.98 308,406
         Mar 3.22 5,707 3.06 28,267 3.92 980,208 7.75 58,723 4.97 77,679 4.97 307,181
         Apr 3.17 5,744 3.03 28,198 3.90 981,947 7.53 57,688 4.91 76,672 4.99 309,107
         May 3.17 5,764 3.01 28,197 3.88 984,889 7.51 56,479 4.94 75,911 4.98 309,887
         June 3.17 5,762 2.99 28,112 3.86 986,700 7.59 59,098 4.92 76,099 4.96 308,827
         July 3.08 5,812 2.96 28,148 3.83 989,997 7.51 56,579 4.89 76,766 4.94 309,761
         Aug 3.09 5,667 2.94 28,220 3.82 994,510 7.36 55,731 4.86 77,128 4.91 309,772
         Sep 3.09 5,630 2.91 28,295 3.80 997,116 7.54 58,107 4.83 77,166 4.89 308,303
         Oct 3.05 5,766 2.87 28,278 3.77 1,000,934 7.36 56,716 4.79 77,707 4.87 308,423
         Nov 2.98 5,631 2.84 28,396 3.75 1,004,378 7.25 54,676 4.77 77,140 4.84 308,879
         Dec 3.04 5,163 2.82 28,189 3.72 1,002,092 7.15 56,291 4.78 76,871 4.85 307,589
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Dec 3.13 131,319 2.86 124,094 3.24 585,809
2014          Jan 3.10 129,373 2.86 124,931 3.24 585,957
         Feb 3.11 131,524 2.84 125,835 3.23 586,261
         Mar 3.23 133,290 2.84 126,844 3.22 582,771
         Apr 3.17 132,664 2.83 130,113 3.21 583,996
         May 3.14 133,191 2.81 130,069 3.20 586,337
         June 3.11 138,116 2.76 129,524 3.18 582,780
         July 2.97 133,446 2.72 129,959 3.15 583,339
         Aug 2.96 131,893 2.71 130,271 3.14 585,897
         Sep 2.98 132,902 2.65 129,887 3.11 584,473
         Oct 2.90 130,017 2.60 131,515 3.07 586,281
         Nov 2.88 132,058 2.57 131,532 3.05 588,938
         Dec 2.80 129,715 2.52 128,812 3.01 579,191
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation methods cover
the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related charges which
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guaranteesindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home improvements;banks and other financial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim credits as wellharmonised basis in the euro area from January 2003 are collected in Germany on a as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name and for theirsample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional. own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially of personal use in the consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtBundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking statistics / MFI interest consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 13 to 15
rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the end of p 47
   ). 
the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either as annualised agreed

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Dec 
0.39 931,980 0.66 7,630 1.06 700 1.48 1,406 0.79 532,012 0.99 77,698
2014          Jan 0.38 937,354 0.75 8,957 1.10 837 1.58 1,785 0.77 531,516 0.96 77,239
         Feb 0.38 945,510 0.78 7,933 0.99 810 1.34 1,514 0.80 531,906 0.94 77,471
         Mar 0.37 942,554 0.69 7,426 0.98 583 1.33 1,496 0.72 530,731 0.92 77,451
         Apr 0.36 953,725 0.68 8,300 1.03 808 1.29 1,523 0.73 529,024 0.91 77,285
         May 0.36 964,096 0.66 7,869 0.92 690 1.33 1,895 0.72 528,416 0.88 77,128
         June 0.35 963,948 0.65 7,904 1.02 595 1.36 1,420 0.70 528,104 0.84 76,049
         July 0.30 972,397 0.53 8,497 0.87 691 1.26 1,493 0.66 527,278 0.82 76,712
         Aug 0.30 982,182 0.54 6,962 0.96 600 1.11 1,293 0.61 527,851 0.83 77,648
         Sep 0.29 976,579 0.52 7,217 0.87 611 1.16 1,224 0.60 527,990 0.81 78,170
         Oct 0.27 990,310 0.51 7,406 0.98 560 1.04 1,104 0.56 527,680 0.79 77,990
         Nov 0.26 1,013,535 0.52 7,410 0.90 616 1.18 1,098 0.54 527,234 0.77 77,625
         Dec 0.26 1,003,813 0.35 8,589 0.81 570 1.14 1,168 0.52 531,892 0.75 76,209
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Dec 
0.16 328,291 0.23 23,419 0.79 367 1.63 428
2014          Jan 0.15 320,229 0.24 25,407 0.66 391 1.36 417
         Feb 0.15 315,847 0.23 22,970 0.65 371 2.07 265
         Mar 0.17 313,232 0.22 22,601 0.67 525 1.03 389
         Apr 0.17 315,372 0.26 26,114 0.68 576 1.04 345
         May 0.16 318,469 0.25 27,178 0.60 432 0.91 390
         June 0.14 314,270 0.18 24,006 0.54 313 1.02 615
         July 0.12 320,536 0.18 17,300 0.53 335 1.06 436
         Aug 0.12 326,545 0.16 15,252 0.48 188 0.82 186
         Sep 0.11 336,903 0.16 12,441 0.34 279 1.13 281
         Oct 0.10 345,504 0.17 13,388 0.48 608 0.74 292
         Nov 0.09 343,396 0.14 12,311 0.52 1,448 0.52 486
         Dec 0.09 347,561 0.16 14,633 0.47 731 1.55 725
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors 10 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2013          Dec 
1.87 6,139 3.45 1,098 2.90 2,922 2.01 3,261 3.57 858 2.85 1,729
2014          Jan 1.98 5,139 3.38 1,102 2.91 2,188 2.31 2,887 3.49 806 2.83 1,438
         Feb 1.89 3,836 3.32 902 2.94 2,153 2.21 2,252 3.63 622 2.85 1,223
         Mar 2.06 4,627 3.50 1,162 2.89 2,841 2.32 2,832 3.68 694 2.86 1,427
         Apr 2.02 4,931 3.47 1,092 2.91 2,814 2.23 2,924 3.64 778 2.88 1,368
         May 1.96 4,047 3.52 1,023 2.84 2,136 2.26 2,277 3.74 789 2.75 1,213
         June 2.04 4,245 3.46 947 2.77 2,325 2.29 2,615 3.62 712 2.72 1,346
         July 1.88 4,952 3.33 1,196 2.71 2,713 2.15 3,073 3.50 888 2.66 1,470
         Aug 2.14 3,449 3.51 799 2.59 1,996 2.24 2,089 3.66 622 2.57 1,314
         Sep 1.93 4,709 3.48 859 2.51 2,586 2.02 2,858 3.61 632 2.42 1,400
         Oct 1.80 4,726 3.26 972 2.58 2,521 1.94 2,869 3.50 694 2.47 1,437
         Nov 1.98 3,301 3.21 847 2.46 2,215 1.99 2,175 3.42 619 2.35 1,221
         Dec 1.68 5,089 2.88 1,236 2.37 3,053 1.87 3,219 3.00 928 2.35 1,699
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of averagebusiness covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. 8Including non-financial
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of corporations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from June 2010. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2013          Dec 5.97 5.87 4,327 5.32 588 5.00 2,254 7.41 1,485
2014          Jan 6.56 6.47 5,445 5.73 538 5.20 2,478 7.93 2,429
         Feb 6.40 6.32 5,076 5.87 591 5.09 2,300 7.73 2,185
         Mar 6.19 6.12 5,954 5.72 832 4.99 2,702 7.51 2,420
         Apr 6.26 6.20 5,613 5.44 395 4.92 2,606 7.59 2,612
         May 6.34 6.25 5,665 5.33 497 5.02 2,520 7.59 2,648
         June 6.26 6.24 5,571 5.17 406 5.00 2,438 7.51 2,727
         July 6.31 6.23 5,983 5.28 414 4.96 2,704 7.57 2,865
         Aug 6.21 6.14 6,277 5.21 486 4.86 2,782 7.47 3,009
         Sep 6.08 5.98 6,207 5.02 543 4.77 2,836 7.37 2,828
         Oct 6.07 6.03 6,460 5.03 392 4.71 2,962 7.41 3,106
         Nov 5.97 5.88 5,730 5.02 472 4.71 2,657 7.23 2,601
         Dec 5.67 5.62 4,952 4.49 510 4.67 2,323 6.94 2,119
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Dec . 4.24 247 3.48 42 4.63 149 3.79 56
2014          Jan . 4.04 245 2.65 61 4.73 122 4.06 62
         Feb . 4.35 217 3.11 33 4.84 119 4.10 65
         Mar . 4.23 261 3.41 53 4.75 138 3.84 70
         Apr . 3.99 248 2.15 52 4.63 133 4.14 63
         May . 4.32 220 3.57 22 4.64 129 3.97 69
         June . 4.21 215 3.43 28 4.64 121 3.76 66
         July . 3.85 299 2.68 102 4.79 128 3.82 69
         Aug . 4.42 193 3.33 20 4.74 120 4.11 53
         Sep . 4.12 203 2.79 27 4.66 116 3.65 60
         Oct . 3.96 1,018 2.72 86 4.52 454 3.66 478
         Nov . 4.07 791 3.23 26 4.57 381 3.62 384
         Dec . 3.83 625 3.13 25 4.52 298 3.20 302
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
Total floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Dec 2.90 2.83 14,896 2.75 2,436 2.45 2,119 2.85 6,169 3.04 4,172
2014          Jan 2.94 2.84 16,675 2.70 3,082 2.54 2,460 2.86 6,752 3.07 4,381
         Feb 2.90 2.83 15,089 2.85 2,762 2.43 2,061 2.81 5,540 3.02 4,726
         Mar 2.82 2.75 16,442 2.75 2,449 2.36 2,266 2.73 6,455 2.94 5,272
         Apr 2.85 2.75 17,947 2.69 2,754 2.40 2,574 2.71 7,202 3.02 5,417
         May 2.73 2.66 16,015 2.70 2,259 2.33 2,229 2.63 6,506 2.84 5,021
         June 2.65 2.58 15,767 2.49 2,436 2.31 2,091 2.55 6,359 2.79 4,881
         July 2.55 2.50 19,296 2.50 2,866 2.21 2,638 2.48 7,957 2.65 5,835
         Aug 2.52 2.45 16,207 2.59 2,398 2.17 2,018 2.40 6,422 2.55 5,369
         Sep 2.39 2.34 16,831 2.44 2,127 2.08 2,063 2.31 6,907 2.44 5,734
         Oct 2.34 2.29 18,118 2.38 2,543 2.07 2,197 2.22 7,383 2.40 5,995
         Nov 2.29 2.23 16,479 2.42 2,176 1.99 2,185 2.15 6,376 2.33 5,742
         Dec 2.22 2.17 18,746 2.25 2,644 1.98 2,095 2.12 7,778 2.24 6,229
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Dec . 2.74 6,812 2.55 895 2.34 1,066 2.80 2,849 2.95 2,002
2014          Jan . 2.79 7,816 2.68 1,079 2.48 1,271 2.80 3,255 3.01 2,211
         Feb . 2.80 7,211 2.87 1,276 2.37 1,011 2.76 2,664 2.99 2,260
         Mar . 2.69 7,808 2.69 954 2.31 1,152 2.66 3,125 2.90 2,577
         Apr . 2.73 8,786 2.61 1,159 2.35 1,336 2.65 3,499 3.07 2,792
         May . 2.60 7,592 2.61 923 2.24 1,110 2.58 3,109 2.80 2,450
         June . 2.53 7,151 2.41 901 2.20 1,017 2.50 2,955 2.76 2,278
         July . 2.44 9,007 2.45 1,163 2.14 1,371 2.42 3,718 2.61 2,755
         Aug . 2.39 7,432 2.54 900 2.08 992 2.33 3,015 2.52 2,525
         Sep . 2.28 7,574 2.44 810 1.97 1,014 2.21 3,065 2.41 2,685
         Oct . 2.23 8,249 2.41 987 1.95 1,107 2.15 3,358 2.38 2,797
         Nov . 2.13 7,782 2.32 889 1.81 1,310 2.06 2,959 2.29 2,624
         Dec . 2.10 8,528 2.27 1,002 1.82 1,059 2.04 3,493 2.21 2,974
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2015
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 16 Volume 16 Volume 2 Volume 16 Volume 16 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2013          Dec 
9.30 45,730 9.41 38,335 14.62 4,358 4.28 66,825 4.30 66,572
2014          Jan 9.36 43,888 9.38 37,050 14.51 4,288 4.27 65,336 4.29 65,106
         Feb 9.31 43,418 9.29 36,571 14.55 4,259 4.28 66,556 4.31 66,281
         Mar 9.33 45,617 9.34 38,706 14.58 4,313 4.39 68,638 4.41 68,379
         Apr 9.20 43,618 9.27 37,048 15.35 3,587 4.38 66,730 4.39 66,493
         May 9.21 42,626 9.22 36,563 15.42 3,566 4.39 66,148 4.41 65,901
         June 9.26 44,696 9.30 38,374 15.43 3,657 4.35 69,615 4.37 69,358
         July 9.20 42,604 9.21 36,390 15.36 3,630 4.17 65,960 4.19 65,707
         Aug 9.08 41,864 9.14 35,283 15.34 3,721 4.13 65,743 4.14 65,562
         Sep 9.16 44,311 9.23 37,656 15.31 3,783 4.17 66,516 4.18 66,287
         Oct 9.06 42,611 9.09 36,051 15.32 3,770 4.14 62,839 4.16 62,600
         Nov 9.00 40,795 8.92 34,390 15.32 3,788 4.03 64,435 4.05 64,185
         Dec 9.00 42,546 9.03 35,874 15.30 3,816 3.95 63,532 3.97 63,329
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  17 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 
1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2013          Dec 3.01 7,750 3.59 1,032 2.74 1,380 1.86 44,537 2.62 3,368 2.75 8,311
2014          Jan 2.92 7,777 3.50 995 2.93 1,164 1.85 40,304 2.41 1,534 2.82 4,479
         Feb 2.97 6,822 3.67 726 2.87 1,009 1.71 32,393 2.14 1,285 2.91 3,721
         Mar 3.01 8,295 3.54 1,018 2.80 1,121 1.91 37,918 2.53 1,289 2.77 4,529
         Apr 2.95 8,017 3.54 1,087 2.73 1,156 1.83 44,756 2.34 1,752 2.87 4,473
         May 3.06 7,005 3.64 919 2.63 1,102 1.74 36,580 2.19 1,457 2.66 3,829
         June 2.97 7,708 3.62 897 2.59 1,098 1.65 43,000 2.31 2,259 2.42 5,386
         July 2.82 8,292 3.36 1,336 2.55 1,355 1.61 48,992 2.56 2,124 2.58 5,078
         Aug 2.77 6,172 3.26 1,080 2.47 1,156 1.46 36,472 2.22 1,864 2.40 4,379
         Sep 2.77 7,503 3.24 1,178 2.35 1,248 1.57 44,139 2.37 1,608 2.22 5,639
         Oct 2.70 8,199 3.21 1,286 2.29 1,260 1.53 45,100 2.59 2,975 2.18 6,336
         Nov 2.82 7,996 3.14 1,057 2.16 1,117 1.52 33,405 2.42 1,520 2.02 5,095
         Dec 2.78 7,949 2.97 1,584 2.12 1,709 1.61 48,841 1.99 2,990 2.01 10,718
of which: collateralised loans 12
2013          Dec 2.83 912 2.75 154 2.55 449 2.24 6,744 2.35 1,542 2.73 3,014
2014          Jan 2.71 1,122 2.69 161 2.85 324 2.16 8,627 2.65 519 2.87 1,224
         Feb 2.86 772 2.72 105 2.66 316 2.16 4,281 2.39 300 2.73 796
         Mar 2.81 1,000 2.72 145 2.70 320 2.27 5,618 2.74 408 2.66 994
         Apr 2.66 1,161 2.73 152 2.60 340 2.09 9,522 2.31 658 2.98 1,495
         May 2.86 862 2.71 118 2.48 358 2.23 5,063 2.60 477 2.64 984
         June 2.87 952 2.67 109 2.46 344 2.07 4,950 2.33 1,055 2.22 1,518
         July 2.61 1,318 2.55 196 2.44 461 2.05 8,769 2.64 786 2.85 1,477
         Aug 2.79 776 2.46 127 2.32 326 1.90 4,212 2.61 854 2.41 815
         Sep 2.68 920 2.52 129 2.23 361 1.97 6,190 3.13 488 2.09 1,535
         Oct 2.52 1,188 2.42 139 2.22 369 1.81 9,300 3.58 803 2.38 1,697
         Nov 2.64 794 2.36 93 2.00 341 1.69 4,649 2.24 618 2.12 1,049
         Dec 2.55 1,050 2.17 196 1.96 493 1.72 8,019 1.93 1,194 1.85 3,329
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in thefinancial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billingthe loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may due. 16From January 2003 up to May 2010 estimated. The volume of outstanding
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice amounts reported was extrapolated to form the underlying total using theto the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds Horvitz-Thompson estimator. From June 2010 the data are based on monthlyare borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no balance sheet statistics. 17The amount refers to the single loan transaction
obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit considered as new business. 
balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2012          Q3 2,128.8 2,062.6 566.0 275.5 276.6 223.5 594.0 62.9 64.1 66.2
         Q4 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013          Q1 2,196.3 2,129.1 559.9 304.0 280.3 225.2 629.3 64.9 65.6 67.2
         Q2 2,190.5 2,122.6 554.2 306.4 280.5 224.6 626.6 64.7 65.6 67.9
         Q3 2,207.7 2,138.3 546.9 311.8 284.0 224.3 641.8 64.6 64.9 69.4
         Q4 2,236.8 2,164.6 540.1 322.9 285.2 225.6 660.7 64.9 65.2 72.2
2014          Q1 2,289.8 2,216.5 541.6 339.1 286.2 227.2 694.7 64.2 63.5 73.3
         Q2 2,337.1 2,263.2 538.7 355.5 288.1 228.0 723.8 65.5 63.7 73.9
         Q3 2,370.9 2,295.8 530.5 372.9 288.2 228.7 745.8 65.4 64.3 75.1
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2012          Q3 1,671.2 1,628.1 410.4 235.7 250.6 211.3 408.6 58.8 52.7 43.0
         Q4 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013          Q1 1,726.1 1,682.3 402.1 261.5 253.5 212.5 438.2 60.7 53.8 43.8
         Q2 1,719.6 1,675.3 397.2 262.2 253.8 211.9 436.1 60.5 53.7 44.3
         Q3 1,730.7 1,685.2 390.1 266.6 256.8 211.3 447.2 60.4 52.8 45.5
         Q4 1,743.4 1,697.0 383.5 273.6 257.9 211.1 458.2 60.6 52.2 46.4
2014          Q1 1,788.4 1,741.3 381.6 289.1 259.1 212.2 488.4 59.7 51.2 47.0
         Q2 1,823.4 1,776.1 378.3 302.9 260.9 212.9 509.0 61.0 51.2 47.4
         Q3 1,849.6 1,801.2 371.8 316.4 261.1 213.3 526.0 60.8 51.7 48.4
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2012          Q3 457.7 434.5 155.6 39.9 26.0 12.2 185.4 4.0 11.4 23.2
         Q4 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013          Q1 470.3 446.8 157.8 42.5 26.8 12.7 191.1 4.2 11.8 23.4
         Q2 470.9 447.3 157.0 44.2 26.7 12.8 190.6 4.2 11.9 23.6
         Q3 477.0 453.1 156.8 45.2 27.3 12.9 194.6 4.3 12.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 467.6 156.6 49.3 27.3 14.5 202.6 4.3 13.0 25.8
2014          Q1 501.5 475.2 159.9 50.0 27.2 15.0 206.4 4.5 12.4 26.3
         Q2 513.6 487.1 160.5 52.6 27.2 15.1 214.8 4.5 12.5 26.5
         Q3 521.3 494.6 158.7 56.4 27.1 15.4 219.9 4.5 12.6 26.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the Europe-
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market an System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pen-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures for 2012 have been re- sionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangementsvised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbriefe of moneta- (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supplementary pen-
ry financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance. 3Inclu- sion funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security
ding participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension funds“ refers funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2015
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2012          Q3 2,128.8 19.3 77.2 141.1 1,688.1 1,418.0 270.0 71.5 131.8
         Q4 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013          Q1 2,196.3 21.4 78.1 169.7 1,739.0 1,460.7 278.3 72.8 115.3
         Q2 2,190.5 17.8 79.0 172.1 1,751.6 1,474.0 277.6 73.1 97.0
         Q3 2,207.7 16.5 79.6 177.0 1,766.0 1,488.6 277.3 73.4 95.3
         Q4 2,236.8 16.9 80.1 197.7 1,793.0 1,514.4 278.6 73.8 75.3
2014          Q1 2,289.8 16.3 83.1 191.3 1,819.9 1,537.9 282.0 71.7 107.5
         Q2 2,337.1 16.2 83.9 184.1 1,842.5 1,556.4 286.1 72.3 138.1
         Q3 2,370.9 17.6 83.6 188.0 1,853.6 1,569.6 284.0 72.3 155.9
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2012          Q3 1,671.2 19.3 73.2 135.0 1,268.5 998.9 269.6 69.6 105.6
         Q4 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013          Q1 1,726.1 21.4 74.0 162.3 1,308.8 1,031.0 277.8 70.9 88.6
         Q2 1,719.6 17.8 74.8 164.5 1,317.7 1,040.5 277.2 71.2 73.7
         Q3 1,730.7 16.5 75.4 169.2 1,326.8 1,050.0 276.9 71.4 71.4
         Q4 1,743.4 16.9 75.8 188.8 1,338.3 1,060.2 278.1 71.8 51.8
2014          Q1 1,788.4 16.3 78.8 182.7 1,361.1 1,079.5 281.5 69.8 79.8
         Q2 1,823.4 16.2 79.5 175.8 1,376.7 1,091.1 285.6 70.4 104.8
         Q3 1,849.6 17.6 79.1 179.5 1,383.5 1,099.9 283.5 70.3 119.6
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2012          Q3 457.7 − 4.0 6.1 419.5 419.1 0.4 1.9 26.2
         Q4 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013          Q1 470.3 − 4.1 7.4 430.1 429.7 0.5 1.9 26.7
         Q2 470.9 − 4.2 7.5 433.9 433.5 0.5 1.9 23.3
         Q3 477.0 − 4.2 7.8 439.1 438.7 0.5 2.0 23.9
         Q4 493.3 − 4.3 8.9 454.7 454.2 0.5 2.0 23.5
2014          Q1 501.5 − 4.3 8.6 458.8 458.3 0.5 2.0 27.8
         Q2 513.6 − 4.4 8.2 465.8 465.3 0.5 1.9 33.3
         Q3 521.3 − 4.4 8.5 470.1 469.6 0.5 1.9 36.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial tal assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net worth and
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sec-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tor “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds thus com-from 2013 are partially estimated. Figures for 2012 have been revised. 1Including de- prise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by
posits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Schei- BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public,
ne“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and premium reser- church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pension sche-
ves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As defined in mes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference between to-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2015
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2003 184,679 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 50,224 105,557 35,748 . 69,809 79,122
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 36,638 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 23,064 − 17,173 − 94,793 36,805 40,814 53,811
2012 54,965 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,382 7,184 − 42,017 − 3,573 52,774 47,781
2013 − 11,186 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 90,429 24,256 − 25,778 − 12,708 62,744 − 35,442
2014 63,943 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,904 47,108 − 12,131 − 11,951 71,191 16,835
2014          Feb 4,043 691 − 8,978 409 9,260 3,352 − 9,935 − 1,895 − 560 − 7,480 13,978
         Mar 5,306 − 14,577 − 12,262 − 1,890 − 425 19,883 15,646 641 − 203 15,208 − 10,340
         Apr − 6,811 − 23,586 − 12,132 635 − 12,088 16,775 7,854 1,680 − 1,786 7,960 − 14,665
         May 32,039 28,566 11,336 − 1,127 18,357 3,473 5,235 1,764 − 966 4,437 26,804
         June 1,737 − 5,765 − 9,400 − 4,686 8,321 7,502 3,553 − 2,240 − 1,632 7,425 − 1,816
         July 3 − 2,955 − 2,229 5,062 − 5,788 2,958 6,192 32 − 1,640 7,800 − 6,188
         Aug 9,038 14,890 4,695 − 1,327 11,523 − 5,853 − 6,643 − 2,744 − 1,666 − 2,233 15,680
         Sep 9,738 − 7,661 − 4,017 − 218 − 3,426 17,398 17,557 7,579 − 373 10,351 − 7,819
         Oct 5,469 − 2,321 − 6,304 − 1,626 5,609 7,790 6,297 − 5,699 − 981 12,977 − 827
         Nov 20,064 2,177 − 4,561 − 305 7,044 17,887 10,287 8,392 − 660 2,555 9,778
         Dec − 23,306 − 23,897 − 7,257 227 − 16,867 590 − 4,456 − 15,492 27 11,009 − 18,850
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2003 11,896 16,838 − 4,946 − 15,121 7,056 − 22,177 27,016
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 23,718 21,713 2,005 38,558 670 37,888 − 14,838
2012 19,164 5,120 14,044 18,022 10,259 7,763 1,142
2013 30,015 10,106 19,910 24,993 11,991 13,002 5,022
2014 44,764 18,778 25,986 33,375 16,652 16,723 11,389
2014          Feb − 4,284 599 − 4,883 − 9,985 − 11,608 1,623 5,701
         Mar 5,095 111 4,984 9,181 10,246 − 1,065 − 4,086
         Apr 2,250 136 2,114 12,035 9,932 2,103 − 9,785
         May 9,679 868 8,811 3,517 − 7,328 10,845 6,162
         June 11,395 9,015 2,380 117 168 − 51 11,278
         July 3,313 1,770 1,543 6,650 3,182 3,468 − 3,337
         Aug − 1,493 291 − 1,784 − 2,884 − 2,003 − 881 1,391
         Sep 4,725 4,218 507 − 3,088 1,111 − 4,199 7,813
         Oct − 2,000 1,221 − 3,221 − 4,430 − 4,565 135 2,430
         Nov − 292 245 − 537 − 2,332 2,047 − 4,379 2,040
         Dec 12,445 189 12,256 13,068 6,884 6,184 − 623
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2014          May 126,094 76,179 147 1,356 58,774 15,902 5,531 44,384 −
         June 97,623 59,724 2,532 816 42,949 13,427 3,509 34,390 −
         July 116,843 61,883 2,752 1,431 43,306 14,394 9,710 45,250 −
         Aug 109,326 75,365 932 940 54,900 18,594 2,172 31,789 −
         Sep 101,795 60,749 4,805 1,218 37,935 16,792 8,843 32,204 −
         Oct 123,390 69,634 2,072 1,771 54,826 10,965 6,850 46,907 −
         Nov 105,190 67,032 2,191 315 50,578 13,948 6,956 31,202 −
         Dec 98,708 66,890 731 928 50,249 14,981 6,515 25,303 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2014          May 35,993 12,714 147 856 3,161 8,551 3,794 19,485 −
         June 34,521 11,498 2,122 632 5,037 3,707 2,280 20,743 −
         July 39,896 13,217 2,585 1,280 4,513 4,839 7,835 18,845 −
         Aug 21,235 8,481 717 410 1,715 5,639 463 12,291 −         Sep 39,315 16,184 2,937 952 3,856 8,439 7,704 15,427 −
         Oct 35,987 9,295 1,419 609 4,042 3,225 4,826 21,865 −
         Nov 32,395 15,177 1,117 212 8,119 5,728 3,878 13,340 −         Dec 27,575 11,748 731 858 2,963 7,195 3,729 12,098 −
Net sales  6 
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,9902004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2014          May 31,808 12,395 − 1,996 − 614 11,034 3,971 − 257 19,671 −
         June − 5,487 − 5,439 − 544 − 5,692 6,003 − 5,206 − 3,862 3,813 −
         July − 7,850 − 7,611 − 1,612 − 992 − 3,445 − 1,562 5,283 − 5,522 −
         Aug 16,022 4,579 − 1,287 437 595 4,834 − 1,109 12,552 −         Sep − 3,467 − 2,745 493 − 1,208 − 1,082 − 949 1,166 − 1,888 −
         Oct − 4,570 − 7,639 − 281 − 1,069 35 − 6,325 − 1,655 4,724 −
         Nov 5,589 − 3,094 1,248 − 3,078 − 444 − 818 312 8,372 −         Dec − 27,860 − 12,169 − 734 − 1,623 − 4,150 − 5,662 523 − 16,214 − 122
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2015
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2014          June 3,133,444 1,260,119 123,501 92,967 577,765 465,886 227,829 1,645,496 7,919
         July 3,125,595 1,252,508 121,889 91,975 574,320 464,324 233,112 1,639,975 7,919
         Aug 3,141,617 1,257,088 120,602 92,412 574,915 469,158 232,002 1,652,527 7,919
         Sep 3,138,149 1,254,343 121,095 91,204 573,834 468,209 233,168 1,650,639 7,919
         Oct 3,133,579 1,246,703 120,815 90,135 573,869 461,885 231,513 1,655,363 7,919
         Nov 3,139,168 1,243,609 122,062 87,057 573,424 461,066 231,825 1,663,734 7,919
         Dec 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2014 
1,151,768 561,216 46,865 41,296 239,014 234,041 42,800 547,754 2,991    less than 2
637,302 278,628 34,637 21,260 143,164 79,566 36,657 322,017 1,362 2 to less than 4
468,501 173,983 22,962 11,189 90,410 49,425 41,810 252,709 289 4 to less than 6
273,948 87,729 9,713 5,633 45,039 27,344 19,908 166,311 266 6 to less than 8
230,017 49,573 5,668 3,415 22,134 18,356 12,585 167,858 1,340 8 to less than 10
79,811 25,150 1,325 2,279 11,567 9,979 10,355 44,307 571 10 to less than 15
70,613 11,538 30 206 5,285 6,017 6,420 52,656 10 15 to less than 20
199,346 43,630 128 156 12,797 30,549 61,808 93,909 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2014          June 172,946 1,548 1,434 20 233 − − 7 − 24 − 108 1,445,714
         July 173,470 524 668 255 31 − − 48 − 219 − 164 1,409,428
         Aug 173,650 180 189 474 − − − 145 − 115 − 223 1,389,822
         Sep 175,138 1,488 1,621 125 23 − − 29 − 125 − 127 1,401,240
         Oct 176,375 1,237 563 − 780 − − 15 − 27 − 63 1,389,691
         Nov 176,551 176 235 − − − 35 17 − 111 1,483,086
         Dec 177,097 546 178 1 625 − − 11 13 − 260 1,478,063
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2015
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2014          Aug 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 1.5 2.7 138.12 112.28 450.83 9,470.17
         Sep 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.7 1.4 2.7 137.92 111.89 449.76 9,474.30
         Oct 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.6 1.3 2.6 138.01 112.37 444.13 9,326.87
         Nov 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 1.1 2.5 138.40 113.23 474.80 9,980.85         Dec 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 1.0 2.4 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015          Jan 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.8 2.3 140.04 116.78 509.65 10,694.32
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2003 47,754 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,811 49,547 − 2,658 734 52,205 3,077 − 1,793
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,497 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,277 39,401 − 7,576 − 694 46,977 1,970 7,0952012 111,639 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,696 115,438 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,500 23,257 − 3,7992013 122,658 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,321 116,657 771 100 115,886 31,220 6,001
2014 126,221 88,804 4,177 − 471 1,431 944 84,627 37,417 132,243 1,389 − 1,351 130,854 38,768 − 6,0202014          June 10,089 4,615 766 − 80 224 290 3,849 5,473 8,840 849 1,001 7,991 4,472 1,249         July 13,042 8,609 1,430 − 33 1,069 86 7,179 4,433 13,417 504 − 4 12,913 4,437 − 375
         Aug 11,586 9,452 2,328 − 61 1,965 88 7,124 2,134 11,442 − 278 − 325 11,720 2,459 144         Sep 9,307 3,068 − 3,343 − 22 − 3,578 156 6,411 6,239 12,248 1,450 1,110 10,798 5,129 − 2,941
         Oct 9,540 7,187 − 1,264 − 76 − 71 − 1,403 8,452 2,353 11,270 861 200 10,409 2,153 − 1,729
         Nov 17,512 12,854 − 290 − 40 − 826 287 13,145 4,657 18,307 − 357 − 1,202 18,664 5,859 − 795         Dec 9,112
p)9,846 p) 100 p)−2 0 p)−3 3 p) 316 p)9,746 − 734 10,010 − 909 − 1,294 10,919 560 − 898
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 0.89 − 1.80 1.59 − 18.88 41.18 13.48 − 10.58 − 6.18 17.53
Debt securities 4.86 − 2.65 0.28 − 2.02 1.70 − 0.56 1.33 0.28 − 0.09
short-term debt securities 2.15 − 2.61 1.56 − 0.63 0.78 − 0.38 1.79 − 0.13 − 0.44
long-term debt securities 2.71 − 0.03 − 1.28 − 1.39 0.92 − 0.18 − 0.46 0.41 0.35
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.55 − 4.87 − 1.27 − 1.55 0.70 − 1.10 − 0.26 1.05 0.06
Non-financial corporations . . 0.81 − 0.11 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32
Financial corporations . . − 2.14 − 1.65 − 0.09 − 0.25 − 0.37 0.05 − 0.43
General government . . 0.07 0.21 0.38 − 0.31 0.08 0.66 0.80
Debt securities of the rest of the world 3.32 2.22 1.55 − 0.47 0.99 0.54 1.59 − 0.77 − 0.15
Loans 10.84 21.03 −15.70 − 0.50 4.23 − 21.53 10.71 1.18 15.68
short-term loans 18.09 13.84 7.07 − 0.80 2.81 − 2.34 12.22 3.86 15.97
long-term loans − 7.26 7.19 −22.77 0.30 1.42 − 19.19 − 1.52 − 2.68 − 0.28
Memo item
to domestic sectors 6.74 19.82 −22.78 − 8.20 2.93 − 13.70 8.24 4.69 7.06
Non-financial corporations 0.81 8.94 −16.55 − 7.63 2.32 − 10.24 3.92 1.29 5.34
Financial corporations 5.27 10.38 − 6.44 − 0.62 0.55 − 3.51 4.32 3.40 1.72
General government 0.67 0.50 0.21 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 4.09 1.21 7.09 7.71 1.30 − 7.83 2.47 − 3.51 8.63
Equity and investment fund shares 58.21 42.07 29.06 − 6.74 9.65 9.27 11.44 3.45 23.02
Equity 49.96 42.26 21.41 − 6.93 8.20 6.92 10.27 5.63 21.89
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 8.70 0.58 2.99 1.05 − 0.93 − 0.69 2.77
Non-financial corporations . . 9.65 1.12 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29
Financial corporations . . − 0.95 − 0.53 − 0.04 − 0.06 0.02 0.10 0.47
Listed shares of the rest of the world . . 13.01 7.63 2.33 2.75 2.47 6.22 − 0.64
Other equity 1 47.99 43.76 − 0.30 − 15.14 2.87 3.13 8.73 0.10 19.77
Investment fund shares 8.25 − 0.20 7.65 0.19 1.45 2.35 1.17 − 2.18 1.13
Money market fund shares 0.29 0.03 − 0.15 − 0.07 0.22 − 0.27 0.48 − 0.16 − 0.01
Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.96 − 0.22 7.80 0.26 1.23 2.62 0.68 − 2.02 1.14
Insurance technical reserves − 0.24 − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.08 − 0.09 − 0.09 − 0.10 − 0.09 − 0.03
Financial derivatives −13.58 0.72 6.49 2.39 1.56 0.62 − 2.62 − 0.20 − 0.07
Other accounts receivable 63.59 102.25 129.23 16.40 65.75 15.93 − 0.81 − 20.51 − 5.79
Total 124.56 161.32 150.61 − 9.43 123.97 17.12 9.37 − 22.06 50.26
External financing
Debt securities 7.57 18.72 12.78 3.22 − 0.49 0.94 1.18 − 6.30 2.05
short-term securities 4.89 − 1.58 − 1.12 − 1.03 − 1.24 − 4.13 − 2.75 − 6.35 − 1.65
long-term securities 2.68 20.30 13.90 4.24 0.75 5.07 3.93 0.05 3.70
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 5.29 0.49 1.24 0.21 2.47 1.78 − 0.14
Non-financial corporations . . 0.81 − 0.11 0.41 − 0.55 0.03 0.34 − 0.32
Financial corporations . . 3.04 0.57 0.06 0.75 2.34 1.12 0.25
General government . . − 0.05 − 0.02 − 0.04 0.00 − 0.01 0.00 0.00
Households . . 1.50 0.05 0.81 0.01 0.11 0.32 − 0.07
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 7.48 2.72 − 1.73 0.73 − 1.29 − 8.08 2.19
Loans 26.76 12.90 0.51 11.66 − 15.44 − 7.52 15.87 26.86 − 13.78
short-term loans 19.58 12.67 8.30 4.31 − 0.48 − 10.56 14.00 12.48 − 12.89
long-term loans 7.18 0.23 − 7.80 7.36 − 14.96 3.04 1.87 14.37 − 0.89
Memo item
from domestic sectors 9.08 − 8.86 −31.24 − 4.16 − 12.29 − 21.93 19.39 20.10 − 7.00
Non-financial corporations 0.81 8.94 −16.55 − 7.63 2.32 − 10.24 3.92 1.29 5.34
Financial corporations 8.41 − 1.94 6.54 4.80 2.37 − 10.79 15.62 7.72 − 5.35
General government − 0.14 −15.86 −21.23 − 1.32 − 16.98 − 0.90 − 0.16 11.09 − 6.99
from the rest of the world 17.68 21.77 31.74 15.83 − 3.16 14.42 − 3.52 6.76 − 6.71
Equity 26.77 12.29 11.99 2.19 1.35 6.81 2.31 2.88 5.04
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . − 4.57 − 4.98 2.09 − 7.00 3.32 − 0.33 0.71
Non-financial corporations . . 9.65 1.12 3.03 1.11 − 0.94 − 0.79 2.29
Financial corporations . . − 5.02 − 5.57 2.03 − 3.98 4.41 − 0.01 − 2.49
General government . . − 0.98 − 0.93 − 0.07 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
Households . . − 8.21 0.40 − 2.90 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.47 0.90
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 7.90 6.48 − 2.27 8.38 − 2.70 2.20 3.59
Other equity 1 18.46 8.99 8.65 0.69 1.52 5.43 1.69 1.01 0.74
Insurance technical reserves 6.38 7.69 6.00 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 14.83 8.09 3.72 14.96 1.68 − 4.03 2.28 2.46 2.47
Other accounts payable 46.66 28.22 −12.49 − 16.92 16.90 − 11.27 − 2.48 − 0.92 18.18
Total 128.97 87.90 22.50 16.61 5.50 − 13.56 20.65 26.48 15.45
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 380.3 414.3 412.2 357.0 395.2 412.2 373.3 359.5 390.2
Debt securities 52.6 51.9 48.2 47.4 48.9 48.2 49.7 50.2 50.3
short-term debt securities 6.3 3.6 5.1 4.7 5.5 5.1 6.9 6.8 6.4
long-term debt securities 46.4 48.3 43.0 42.7 43.4 43.0 42.8 43.4 43.9
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 24.6 25.2 25.8 24.6 24.4 25.5 25.6
Non-financial corporations . . 4.7 4.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7
Financial corporations . . 13.8 14.3 14.1 13.8 13.5 13.6 13.2
General government . . 6.1 6.1 6.5 6.1 6.2 6.9 7.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 23.6 22.2 23.1 23.6 25.3 24.7 24.6
Loans 386.4 400.7 388.6 399.7 405.8 388.6 402.0 403.3 420.9
short-term loans 271.2 281.5 291.7 287.9 292.4 291.7 304.0 307.9 324.9
long-term loans 115.2 119.2 96.9 111.8 113.4 96.9 98.1 95.4 96.0
Memo item
to domestic sectors 252.5 272.4 249.6 260.3 263.3 249.6 257.8 262.5 269.6
Non-financial corporations 190.8 199.8 183.2 191.1 193.4 183.2 187.1 188.4 193.7
Financial corporations 55.9 66.3 59.9 62.8 63.4 59.9 64.2 67.6 69.3
General government 5.8 6.3 6.5 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5
to the rest of the world 133.9 128.4 139.0 139.3 142.6 139.0 144.2 140.8 151.4
Equity and investment fund shares 1,436.5 1,597.7 1,756.9 1,607.8 1,669.7 1,756.9 1,761.7 1,781.4 1,821.6
Equity 1,313.3 1,468.8 1,618.8 1,475.9 1,534.1 1,618.8 1,620.8 1,639.5 1,676.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 275.4 235.2 251.9 275.4 266.3 266.0 254.6
Non-financial corporations . . 269.8 230.1 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9
Financial corporations . . 5.7 5.1 5.2 5.7 5.7 5.5 5.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world . . 63.8 57.8 60.8 63.8 66.9 73.3 72.6
Other equity 1 1,084.2 1,199.8 1,279.6 1,182.9 1,221.5 1,279.6 1,287.7 1,300.2 1,349.1
Investment fund shares 123.1 129.0 138.1 131.9 135.6 138.1 140.9 141.9 145.2
Money market fund shares − − 1.1 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.6 1.5 1.4
Non-MMF investment fund shares 123.1 129.0 137.0 130.8 134.2 137.0 139.3 140.4 143.9
Insurance technical reserves 41.9 43.3 46.1 44.6 45.4 46.1 46.5 46.9 47.3
Financial derivatives 17.1 18.0 16.8 17.6 17.6 16.8 14.1 13.9 13.9Other accounts receivable 790.4 829.1 861.0 839.8 850.1 861.0 839.5 822.8 832.5
Total 3,105.2 3,354.9 3,529.8 3,313.9 3,432.7 3,529.8 3,487.0 3,478.2 3,576.6
Liabilities
Debt securities 110.7 130.9 138.9 141.3 137.5 138.9 142.5 138.0 143.1
short-term securities 16.1 14.6 13.4 18.8 17.6 13.4 10.7 4.4 2.7
long-term securities 94.6 116.3 125.4 122.4 119.9 125.4 131.8 133.6 140.4
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 51.6 50.2 51.4 51.6 55.3 58.0 59.2
Non-financial corporations . . 4.7 4.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 5.0 4.7
Financial corporations . . 31.3 30.4 30.4 31.3 34.9 36.7 38.4
General government . . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . . 15.6 14.9 15.7 15.6 15.7 16.2 16.0
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 87.3 91.1 86.1 87.3 87.2 80.0 83.9
Loans 1,339.9 1,359.2 1,380.1 1,385.7 1,380.2 1,380.1 1,392.3 1,417.3 1,404.8
short-term loans 420.1 429.4 449.2 447.2 460.5 449.2 462.3 473.9 463.1
long-term loans 919.8 929.8 930.9 938.5 919.6 930.9 930.0 943.4 941.7
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,083.6 1,081.0 1,070.4 1,089.0 1,086.3 1,070.4 1,087.2 1,104.3 1,096.1
Non-financial corporations 190.8 199.8 183.2 191.1 193.4 183.2 187.1 188.4 193.7
Financial corporations 845.9 835.5 824.2 850.0 836.2 824.2 837.8 846.6 840.9
General government 46.9 45.7 63.0 47.9 56.7 63.0 62.3 69.4 61.4
from the rest of the world 256.3 278.2 309.7 296.7 293.8 309.7 305.1 313.0 308.8
Equity 1,851.9 2,124.3 2,426.0 2,143.5 2,259.1 2,426.0 2,435.8 2,458.1 2,418.7
Listed shares of domestic sectors . . 567.9 486.0 525.0 567.9 565.0 569.4 538.5
Non-financial corporations . . 269.8 230.1 246.7 269.8 260.5 260.5 248.9
Financial corporations . . 120.3 101.6 113.0 120.3 124.4 125.6 116.7
General government . . 31.2 24.4 28.0 31.2 30.5 32.0 30.5
Households . . 146.6 129.8 137.3 146.6 149.6 151.2 142.4
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 674.8 552.5 594.2 674.8 684.2 696.5 678.5
Other equity 1 1,048.6 1,129.3 1,183.4 1,105.0 1,139.9 1,183.4 1,186.7 1,192.2 1,201.7
Insurance technical reserves 229.8 237.5 243.5 240.5 242.0 243.5 245.0 246.5 248.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 31.9 40.2 37.3 47.5 45.1 37.3 39.5 42.0 44.4
Other accounts payable 882.1 898.2 890.6 878.0 884.9 890.6 868.0 868.4 907.6
Total 4,446.3 4,790.3 5,116.3 4,836.5 4,948.8 5,116.3 5,123.1 5,170.3 5,166.7
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 57.45 74.42 66.60 18.50 10.20 29.08 13.04 19.19 17.01
Currency − 2.53 − 0.05 10.81 4.30 3.81 0.07 5.27 3.52 3.99
Deposits 59.98 74.47 55.79 14.20 6.39 29.01 7.77 15.67 13.01
Transferable deposits 33.64 90.08 89.41 25.65 16.37 28.95 8.42 19.91 11.88
Time deposits 17.75 − 5.21 − 9.78 − 2.34 − 4.94 1.47 2.37 1.31 0.94
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 8.60 −10.39 −23.85 − 9.12 − 5.04 − 1.40 − 3.03 − 5.56 0.19
Debt securities − 3.03 −17.39 −17.81 − 6.21 − 2.39 − 2.47 − 2.12 − 2.52 − 7.47
short-term debt securities 0.07 − 0.26 − 0.36 0.01 − 0.28 − 0.20 0.11 − 0.08 − 0.39
long-term debt securities − 3.10 −17.13 −17.45 − 6.22 − 2.11 − 2.28 − 2.24 − 2.44 − 7.09
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . −14.86 − 5.26 − 2.61 − 2.53 − 2.27 − 2.64 − 5.92
Non-financial corporations . . 1.24 0.00 0.75 − 0.07 0.09 0.27 − 0.11
Financial corporations . . −12.46 − 4.26 − 2.31 − 1.79 − 1.77 − 2.25 − 4.92
General government . . − 3.64 − 1.00 − 1.05 − 0.67 − 0.60 − 0.65 − 0.89
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . − 2.94 − 0.95 0.22 0.06 0.15 0.12 − 1.56
Equity and investment fund shares 6.79 − 3.51 9.63 6.34 − 2.15 − 3.89 8.19 10.69 7.55
Equity 19.41 − 0.08 − 0.41 2.94 − 3.05 − 4.36 3.44 3.79 1.00
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . . − 5.63 1.10 − 3.49 − 4.89 0.51 2.07 0.25
Non-financial corporations . . − 5.29 0.32 − 2.88 − 4.13 − 0.15 0.44 0.85
Financial corporations . . − 0.35 0.77 − 0.61 − 0.76 0.66 1.63 − 0.60
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 2.99 0.71 0.18 0.50 1.91 0.65 0.08
Other equity 1 5.63 2.58 2.24 1.13 0.26 0.03 1.02 1.06 0.68
Investment fund shares −12.63 − 3.42 10.04 3.40 0.90 0.47 4.75 6.91 6.55
Money market fund shares − 0.37 0.65 − 0.30 − 0.16 − 0.02 0.14 − 0.20 − 0.16 − 0.10
Non-MMF investment fund shares −12.26 − 4.07 10.34 3.56 0.92 0.33 4.95 7.07 6.65
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 13.12 19.87 20.46 5.08 5.04 5.17 4.33 4.26 4.21
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 13.05 29.66 35.06 8.76 8.74 8.73 13.39 5.99 3.54
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.09 27.37 22.57 5.04 0.70 4.19 8.75 6.68 5.35
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 26.13 16.99 9.46 − 1.20 11.19 − 8.40 0.28 − 8.28 4.25
Total 143.59 147.41 145.97 36.30 31.33 32.40 45.86 36.02 34.43
  External financing
Loans 11.57 15.65 11.30 5.72 8.74 0.50 0.37 5.93 9.39
short-term loans − 2.13 − 1.16 − 3.27 − 0.36 0.04 − 1.43 0.83 0.50 − 1.26
long-term loans 13.70 16.81 14.57 6.08 8.70 1.94 − 0.46 5.43 10.65
Memo item
Mortage loans 11.24 18.59 18.19 5.28 8.34 3.64 0.75 5.75 9.31
Consumer loans 5.22 − 0.99 − 0.30 1.85 1.69 − 1.19 1.46 0.13 1.33
Entrepreneurial loans − 4.90 − 1.95 − 6.59 − 1.41 − 1.28 − 1.95 − 1.84 0.04 − 1.25
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 9.10 15.17 12.60 5.26 8.31 2.07 − 0.99 6.10 9.60
Loans from other financial institutions 2.47 0.48 − 1.30 0.46 0.43 − 1.57 1.35 − 0.17 − 0.21
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.60 1.36 − 0.34 0.06 0.02 − 0.59 0.22 − 0.02 0.27
Total 13.16 17.01 10.96 5.78 8.76 − 0.08 0.59 5.91 9.66
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2015
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2013 2014 
Item 2011 2012 2013 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,772.2 1,847.6 1,914.0 1,874.8 1,884.9 1,914.0 1,926.8 1,945.9 1,963.0
Currency 104.5 104.4 115.2 111.4 115.2 115.2 120.5 124.0 128.0
Deposits 1,667.7 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,763.4 1,769.8 1,798.8 1,806.3 1,821.9 1,835.0
Transferable deposits 727.1 818.3 907.8 862.5 878.8 907.8 916.0 935.9 947.8
Time deposits 261.2 255.9 245.9 249.4 244.4 245.9 248.2 249.5 250.5
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 679.4 669.0 645.1 651.6 646.5 645.1 642.1 636.5 636.7
Debt securities 211.0 200.1 179.0 184.1 182.0 179.0 177.7 176.4 168.9
short-term debt securities 3.1 3.1 2.7 3.1 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.4
long-term debt securities 208.0 197.0 176.3 181.0 179.2 176.3 174.9 173.6 166.5
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . . 116.9 122.3 119.8 116.9 115.1 112.9 107.1
Non-financial corporations . . 14.2 13.6 14.4 14.2 14.2 14.7 14.5
Financial corporations . . 90.7 94.7 92.5 90.7 89.4 87.4 82.6
General government . . 12.0 13.9 12.9 12.0 11.5 10.9 10.0
Debt securities of the rest of the world . . 62.0 61.8 62.2 62.0 62.7 63.4 61.8
Equity and investment fund shares 759.3 820.2 885.9 835.6 857.2 885.9 901.6 923.4 928.9
Equity 403.8 446.8 487.6 453.6 467.8 487.6 496.3 502.8 497.2
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . . 167.4 148.4 156.5 167.4 170.5 171.5 163.0
Non-financial corporations . . 140.4 124.5 131.7 140.4 143.3 144.9 136.2
Financial corporations . . 26.9 23.9 24.8 26.9 27.1 26.6 26.9
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . . 55.8 49.4 52.7 55.8 57.9 60.6 63.2
Other equity 1 237.4 255.7 264.4 255.7 258.7 264.4 267.9 270.7 271.0
Investment fund shares 355.5 373.4 398.3 382.0 389.4 398.3 405.3 420.6 431.7
Money market fund shares 23.5 23.9 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.4 4.2 4.1 4.0Non-MMF investment fund shares 332.0 349.5 393.8 377.7 385.1 393.8 401.0 416.5 427.7
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 266.2 283.1 301.1 292.1 296.6 301.1 305.5 309.7 313.9
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 774.3 809.1 847.3 828.3 837.8 847.3 861.5 868.2 872.0
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 641.4 677.0 707.1 690.3 696.2 707.1 715.9 722.6 727.9
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 38.4 37.1 36.7 37.0 36.8 36.7 36.7 36.7 36.5
Total 4,462.8 4,674.2 4,871.2 4,742.2 4,791.5 4,871.2 4,925.7 4,982.9 5,011.0
  Liabilities
Loans 1,523.9 1,538.4 1,548.9 1,540.5 1,548.5 1,548.9 1,549.3 1,555.2 1,564.6
short-term loans 72.8 71.5 66.4 68.8 68.7 66.4 67.2 67.7 66.5
long-term loans 1,451.0 1,467.0 1,482.5 1,471.7 1,479.9 1,482.5 1,482.0 1,487.5 1,498.1
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,053.4 1,072.7 1,092.2 1,080.0 1,088.4 1,092.2 1,093.0 1,098.8 1,108.7
Consumer loans 200.4 194.3 188.7 191.9 190.2 188.7 190.1 189.9 190.6
Entrepreneurial loans 270.1 271.4 268.0 268.6 270.0 268.0 266.2 266.5 265.2
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,432.5 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,448.8 1,456.4 1,458.4 1,457.4 1,463.5 1,473.1
Loans from other financial institutions 91.3 91.8 90.5 91.7 92.1 90.5 91.9 91.7 91.5
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 13.1 14.9 14.9 16.1 16.2 14.9 16.1 15.9 16.6
Total 1,536.9 1,553.4 1,563.7 1,556.6 1,564.8 1,563.7 1,565.4 1,571.0 1,581.2
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2008 − 0.5 − 14.7 − 1.5 + 9.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.3
2009 − 74.5 − 38.0 − 19.3 − 2.7 − 14.4 − 3.0 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.6
2010 2 − 104.8 − 82.2 − 20.4 − 6.2 + 3.9 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2
2011 p − 23.3 − 27.1 − 13.0 + 1.4 + 15.4 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.6
2012 p + 2.6 − 14.7 − 5.7 + 4.7 + 18.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7
2013 p + 4.2 − 4.5 − 2.8 + 5.3 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2
2014 pe + 11.9 + 7.3 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
2012          H2  p − 6.8 − 8.6 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 6.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.5
2013          H1  p + 7.8 − 2.3 − 0.1 + 6.2 + 3.9 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3
         H2  p − 3.6 − 2.2 − 2.7 − 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014          H1  pe + 17.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 6.6 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level3 End of year or quarter
2008 1,660.2 1,010.8 539.1 125.6 1.5 64.9 39.5 21.1 4.9 0.1
2009 1,778.5 1,079.7 581.3 132.0 1.3 72.4 43.9 23.7 5.4 0.1
2010 p 2,067.4 1,318.4 628.0 137.4 1.3 80.3 51.2 24.4 5.3 0.1
2011 p 2,095.6 1,327.4 642.8 141.8 1.3 77.6 49.2 23.8 5.3 0.0
2012 p 2,173.6 1,372.3 671.5 145.6 1.2 79.0 49.9 24.4 5.3 0.0
2013 pe 2,159.5 1,376.1 652.5 148.2 1.3 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
2013          Q1 pe 2,162.1 1,372.5 663.3 147.0 1.2 78.6 49.9 24.1 5.3 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,162.6 1,380.3 653.1 146.7 1.1 78.1 49.8 23.6 5.3 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,143.9 1,365.8 646.1 147.4 1.1 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
         Q4 pe 2,159.5 1,376.1 652.5 148.2 1.3 76.9 49.0 23.2 5.3 0.0
2014          Q1 pe 2,147.4 1,373.0 642.4 147.5 1.2 75.6 48.3 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2 pe 2,154.7 1,381.4 640.2 148.3 1.1 75.3 48.3 22.4 5.2 0.0
         Q3 pe 2,155.2 1,377.4 644.2 148.7 1.1 74.8 47.8 22.3 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus able with the annual figures. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds received from the
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection 2010 frequency auction. 3Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of
with the publication of the 2014 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the four preceding quarters. 
the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2014 half-year figures are not directly compar-
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2008 1,111.8 585.9 412.4 113.4 1,112.3 592.5 189.1 68.5 51.4 210.8 − 0.5 1,003.1
2009 1,090.8 554.5 415.6 120.6 1,165.3 625.2 197.8 64.8 56.2 221.2 − 74.5 974.1
2010 1,110.4 556.2 426.2 128.1 2 1,215.3 634.7 203.5 63.3 58.9 2 254.8 2 − 104.8 986.5
2011 p 1,179.5 598.9 442.2 138.3 1,202.7 634.6 208.2 67.1 61.2 231.7 − 23.3 1,045.8
2012 p 1,217.8 624.1 454.3 139.5 1,215.2 645.6 212.7 63.2 62.1 231.7 + 2.6 1,082.9
2013 p 1,249.4 642.5 465.4 141.6 1,245.3 666.8 217.6 56.3 62.8 241.8 + 4.2 1,112.2
2014 pe 1,292.0 662.6 481.5 147.9 1,280.0 691.7 223.7 49.8 65.3 249.5 + 11.9 1,148.4
as a percentage of GDP
2008 43.5 22.9 16.1 4.4 43.5 23.2 7.4 2.7 2.0 8.2 − 0.0 39.2
2009 44.4 22.6 16.9 4.9 47.4 25.4 8.1 2.6 2.3 9.0 − 3.0 39.7
2010 43.1 21.6 16.5 5.0 2 47.2 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 2 9.9 2 − 4.1 38.3
2011 p 43.7 22.2 16.4 5.1 44.6 23.5 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.6 − 0.9 38.7
2012 p 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.2 23.5 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.4 + 0.1 39.4
2013 p 44.5 22.9 16.6 5.0 44.3 23.7 7.7 2.0 2.2 8.6 + 0.1 39.6
2014 pe 44.5 22.8 16.6 5.1 44.1 23.8 7.7 1.7 2.3 8.6 + 0.4 39.6
Percentage growth rates
2008 + 2.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 3.8 + 3.7 + 1.8 + 2.7 + 2.0 + 7.9 + 9.8 . + 2.8
2009 − 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.8 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.4 + 9.3 + 5.0 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.2 + 4.3 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.8 + 15.1 . + 1.3
2011 p + 6.2 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 8.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 9.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.1 − 5.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.6 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.3 − 10.8 + 1.0 + 4.3 . + 2.7
2014 pe + 3.4 + 3.1 + 3.5 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 2.8 − 11.6 + 4.1 + 3.2 . + 3.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and ceived from the 2010 frequency auction, which are deducted from other expenditure
social contributions plus customs duties. 2Including the €4.4 billion proceeds re- in the national accounts. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2008 665.7 561.2 13.9 674.9 180.2 272.8 67.2 35.0 18.5 − 9.2 485.5 479.0 + 6.5 1,055.1 1,057.7 − 2.7
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 p 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.0
2012 p 744.1 600.0 14.6 765.4 217.8 285.1 69.9 41.0 25.5 − 21.3 536.1 518.8 + 17.3 1,170.0 1,174.0 − 4.0
2013 p 761.6 619.7 14.7 771.0 224.3 286.6 66.2 42.4 23.8 − 9.4 537.4 531.7 + 5.7 1,198.5 1,202.2 − 3.7
2012          Q1 p 174.0 142.9 2.5 192.5 51.7 75.6 28.0 6.9 3.4 − 18.5 129.1 128.5 + 0.7 274.8 292.6 − 17.8
         Q2 p 190.4 150.4 2.7 179.8 52.8 68.0 17.2 8.2 3.2 + 10.6 132.2 128.0 + 4.2 296.2 281.5 + 14.7
         Q3 p 178.1 147.5 4.3 182.4 53.7 66.6 17.7 10.4 3.9 − 4.3 130.2 128.9 + 1.3 282.5 285.6 − 3.0
         Q4 p 199.1 159.4 4.9 209.3 58.7 73.4 6.8 14.2 14.8 − 10.2 143.4 133.3 + 10.1 313.3 313.4 − 0.1
2013          Q1 p 177.8 148.6 2.6 187.2 53.5 74.8 22.5 5.9 2.9 − 9.3 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.2 294.3 − 13.1
         Q2 p 193.5 155.3 4.8 184.2 54.4 68.6 14.2 8.4 8.0 + 9.3 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 301.7 291.9 + 9.9
         Q3 p 183.4 151.8 2.4 191.4 54.9 70.8 20.1 11.4 3.2 − 8.1 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.0 299.1 − 9.1
         Q4 p 204.4 164.2 4.6 206.4 60.5 70.9 9.9 15.4 8.3 − 2.0 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.6 315.1 + 6.5
2014          Q1 p 186.8 153.6 2.0 192.3 56.0 77.7 20.1 7.6 2.3 − 5.5 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 294.6 303.4 − 8.8
         Q2 p 191.9 157.4 2.2 186.3 56.2 71.8 9.8 9.5 8.2 + 5.6 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 303.3 297.1 + 6.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2008 292.8 304.6 − 11.8 276.2 275.7 + 0.5 176.4 168.0 + 8.4
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 p 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 324.2 + 0.1 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2012          Q1 p 65.4 83.1 − 17.7 74.6 76.2 − 1.7 39.6 44.6 − 4.9
         Q2 p 78.0 72.2 + 5.8 75.8 74.4 + 1.4 48.8 47.0 + 1.8
         Q3 p 77.1 85.1 − 8.0 77.5 78.7 − 1.2 50.7 48.9 + 1.8
         Q4 p 91.9 94.8 − 2.9 82.1 86.4 − 4.3 58.9 56.5 + 2.4
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.5 − 10.7 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 1.0 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.8 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.5 − 0.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2008 561,182 484,182 260,690 200,411 23,081 77,190 − 190 21,510
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 ... 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 ... ... 27,772
2013          Q1 148,936 126,532 63,351 52,078 11,103 15,051 + 7,353 6,494
         Q2 155,507 133,820 72,708 54,570 6,542 21,934 − 246 6,914
         Q3 151,383 130,589 71,238 52,601 6,750 20,948 − 155 7,554
         Q4 163,882 144,230 80,343 57,181 6,706 26,341 − 6,690 6,813
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 ... 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 ... ... 6,754
2013          Dec . 69,982 38,079 28,090 3,813 . . 2,271
2014          Dec . 75,920 42,431 29,654 3,835 . . 2,251
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2008 515,498 220,483 141,895 32,685 15,868 30,035 175,989 130,789 45,200 6,784 86,302 21,937 4,002 31,316
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2013          Q1 135,026 59,835 36,468 10,750 6,014 6,603 49,167 37,466 11,701 125 20,971 3,889 1,039 8,493
         Q2 142,450 64,448 38,827 11,084 5,427 9,110 47,136 35,052 12,083 1,799 24,355 3,762 950 8,630
         Q3 138,958 56,791 38,008 9,815 3,309 5,659 50,033 37,661 12,372 1,875 25,011 4,111 1,137 8,369
         Q4 153,779 64,834 44,896 10,631 4,757 4,551 50,507 38,136 12,372 3,254 30,116 3,961 1,106 9,548
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059
         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783
         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2013          Dec 75,248 40,672 20,756 11,517 6,207 2,193 17,250 13,324 3,925 1,567 14,137 1,290 332 5,266
2014          Dec 81,479 43,673 21,849 12,511 6,744 2,568 17,180 13,234 3,946 1,591 17,139 1,523 373 5,559
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2014: 53.5:44.5:2.0. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2014: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2008 39,248 13,574 13,146 10,478 . 6,261 2,126 1,470 8,842 5,728 4,771 2,596 52,468 41,037 10,807
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 ... ... ...
2013          Q1 4,672 2,141 3,473 5,429 2,304 1,797 580 575 . 2,144 1,007 738 14,035 10,912 2,803
         Q2 9,472 3,504 3,843 2,050 2,284 2,009 471 721 . 1,942 1,137 683 14,858 11,377 3,205         Q3 10,101 3,858 3,314 2,255 2,053 1,602 507 1,320 . 2,203 1,261 647 14,299 10,339 3,659         Q4 15,119 4,316 3,748 1,818 1,849 1,600 545 1,121 . 2,106 1,227 628 13,357 10,400 2,710
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 ... ... ...
2013          Dec 8,281 1,649 2,244 513 567 428 216 239 . 650 444 196 . . .2014          Dec 8,420 1,992 2,402 524 520 498 217 2,564 . 837 463 223 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,5 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance 4 surplus Total Deposits 6 Securities loans 7 estate assets
2008 242,770 167,611 73,381 238,995 204,071 14,051 + 3,775 16,531 16,313 36 56 126 4,645
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 
p 269,050 189,069 78,947 265,661 226,485 15,971 + 3,389 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2012          Q1 62,038 42,411 19,318 62,883 53,747 3,779 − 845 24,261 21,839 2,219 88 116 4,366
         Q2 64,721 45,318 19,086 62,885 53,532 3,772 + 1,836 26,026 23,950 1,869 92 115 4,356
         Q3 63,669 44,188 19,193 64,275 54,788 3,866 − 606 25,968 23,265 2,509 94 100 4,328
         Q4 68,656 49,337 19,059 64,262 54,683 3,858 + 4,394 30,935 28,483 2,256 95 101 4,336
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Including long-term care insurance for pensioners
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- until 2004 Q1. 5Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- quarter. 6 Including cash. 7 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2008 38,289 26,452 673 7,583 39,407 13,864 544 8,586 5,000 654 4,495 − 1,118 −
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2012          Q1 9,709 6,175 69 2,693 8,452 3,773 449 1,924 − 0 211 1,185 + 1,257 −
         Q2 8,331 6,620 78 872 7,816 3,457 229 1,762 0 329 1,191 + 515 −
         Q3 7,501 6,508 80 70 7,539 3,307 82 1,462 368 218 1,249 − 37 −
         Q4 11,888 7,267 86 3,603 11,035 3,286 68 1,551 3,454 223 1,493 + 853 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Excluding pension fund. 1Excluding central compensation top-up payments and promotion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012.
government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Unemployment benefit in case of un- From 2005 to 2007: compensatory amount. 6Including collection charges to other
employment. 3Including seasonal short-time working benefits and restructuring statutory social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the frame-
short-time working benefits, restructuring measures and refunds of social security con- work of the basic allowance for job seekers. tributions. 4Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2008 162,516 155,883 2,500 161,334 52,623 29,145 25,887 10,926 9,095 6,583 8,680 + 1,182
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2012          Q1 46,433 42,249 3,500 45,971 15,579 7,424 7,502 2,971 2,664 2,336 2,195 + 462
         Q2 47,942 43,739 3,500 46,178 15,115 7,419 7,515 3,015 2,874 2,281 2,244 + 1,764
         Q3 47,653 43,648 3,499 45,842 15,049 7,221 7,342 2,843 2,872 2,220 2,283 + 1,811
         Q4 51,162 46,727 3,501 46,576 14,548 7,305 7,465 2,989 3,065 2,333 2,936 + 4,586
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2012          Q1 5,493 5,450 5,700 774 2,469 1,248 223 283 − 207
         Q2 5,713 5,686 5,656 758 2,478 1,254 217 276 + 57         Q3 5,726 5,694 5,774 783 2,507 1,269 219 262 − 49         Q4 6,113 6,087 5,811 791 2,511 1,310 225 265 + 302
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 Central, state and local government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
T
otal new borrowing 1 of which of which Banking system Domestic non-banks
Change Change
in money in money Period Socialmarket market (End of year Bundes- Credit insti- security Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank tutions  pe funds Other 1 creditors pe 
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,564,590 4,440 435,600 62 314,588 809,900
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,657,842 4,440 438,700 59 317,743 896,900
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 1,732,531 4,440 399,900 21 382,670 945,500
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 1,752,476 4,440 356,600 102 408,934 982,4002012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 1,790,284 4,440 425,700 70 284,374 1,075,7002013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 
p 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 262,550 1,109,900
2012          Q1 + 72,603 + 12,524 + 8,251 − 2,380 2012          Q1 1,765,630 4,440 398,100 91 347,999 1,015,000
         Q2 + 68,851 + 13,623 + 2,836 + 19,969          Q2 1,779,703 4,440 409,900 92 317,771 1,047,500
         Q3 + 60,504 − 8,627 − 8,281 − 14,911          Q3 1,771,856 4,440 429,400 92 277,624 1,060,300
         Q4 + 61,376 + 14,208 + 3,376 + 10,697          Q4 1,790,284 4,440 425,700 70 284,374 1,075,700
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 p 1,801,947 4,440 430,200 20 259,087 1,108,200
         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 p 1,806,017 4,440 424,900 23 283,254 1,093,400
         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 p 1,794,367 4,440 423,700 28 270,699 1,095,500
         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 p 1,816,536 4,440 439,600 46 262,550 1,109,900
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 1,809,142 4,440 437,500 21 235,781 1,131,400
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 1,821,390 4,440 439,300 16 249,334 1,128,300
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 1,817,786 4,440 443,200 16 267,430 1,102,700
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund 
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2015
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2008 1,564,590 44,620 337,511 172,037 9,649 584,144 3,174 325,648 62 83,229 4,443 73
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,531 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,396 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,476 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,179 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012          Q2 1,779,703 55,392 410,186 224,607 7,518 663,695 2,137 295,204 92 116,431 4,440 2
         Q3 1,771,856 53,325 409,957 237,746 7,110 654,513 1,893 286,106 92 116,673 4,440 2
         Q4 1,790,284 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 287,836 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 p 1,801,947 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,193 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,806,017 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,105 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,794,367 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 279,657 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 p 1,809,142 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,238 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,821,390 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,290 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,817,786 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,225 16 110,147 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9,10
2008 966,197 40,795 105,684 172,037 9,649 583,930 3,174 35,291 − 11,122 4,443 72
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012          Q2 1,107,451 52,578 122,937 224,607 7,518 663,314 2,137 20,827 − 9,092 4,440 2
         Q3 1,098,824 51,638 120,240 237,746 7,110 654,132 1,893 12,646 − 8,979 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
State government
2008 483,875 3,825 231,827 .... 179,978 3 68,241 . 1
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,619 1,176 265,631 .... 167,353 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,491 1,975 283,601 .... 154,465 62 97,387 . 1
2012          Q2 536,354 2,814 287,249 .... 143,830 52 102,409 . 1
         Q3 537,827 1,687 289,717 .... 143,606 52 102,764 . 1
         Q4 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 p 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 p 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 p 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 p 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 p 540,545 261 309,346 .... 132,432 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 p 542,959 1,098 314,024 .... 128,920 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 p 546,951 856 322,362 .... 125,452 5 98,276 . 1
Local government11
2008 114,518 . − . . 214 . 110,379 60 3,866 . .
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,497 . − . . 375 . 121,695 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,681 . − . . 381 . 128,331 40 4,929 . .
2012          Q2 135,898 . − . . 381 . 130,547 40 4,930 . .
         Q3 135,205 . − . . 381 . 129,854 40 4,930 . .
         Q4 136,430 . − . . 423 . 132,960 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 p 137,976 . − . . 423 . 134,505 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 p 136,506 . − . . 523 . 132,935 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 p 137,227 . − . . 523 . 133,656 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 p 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,712 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 p 139,643 . − . . 1,046 . 135,256 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 p 139,977 . − . . 1,046 . 135,590 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 p 140,414 . − . . 1,046 . 136,027 11 3,330 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From December
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities 2008, including debt of the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 9From March 2009,
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding including debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 10From January 2011, in-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 11Including debt of
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have beenities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2013   2014
  2012   2013   2014   2012   2013   2014   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.3 107.5 108.7 1.4 0.2 1.1 − 3.5 0.9 1.1 2.5 3.2 − 0.1 0.9Construction 104.1 103.8 106.6 0.1 − 0.3 2.7 − 6.9 − 0.4 1.8 2.7 11.6 1.7 1.7Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 101.6 101.6 103.7 − 2.3 0.0 2.1 − 2.5 0.3 1.3 0.8 3.0 1.6 2.0Information and communication 116.8 118.2 120.6 5.3 1.2 2.0 1.1 1.2 1.1 1.2 2.1 1.9 1.9Financial and insuranceactivities 102.8 101.3 100.8 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 2.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.5Real estate activities 101.3 101.9 102.9 − 2.0 0.5 1.0 0.7 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.1 1.4Business services 
1 102.8 103.8 105.9 0.6 0.9 2.0 − 0.9 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.8 1.6 2.4
Public services, education and
health 102.2 102.1 103.2 1.0 − 0.1 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 1.6 0.9 0.8Other services 100.7 99.1 99.5 0.1 − 1.6 0.4 − 2.8 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 0.8 − 0.1 0.6
Gross value added 104.0 104.1 105.6 0.5 0.1 1.4 − 1.7 0.3 0.7 1.2 2.6 0.9 1.3Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.7 0.4 0.1 1.5 − 1.8 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.0 103.8 104.9 0.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.4 1.0 2.0 0.7 0.9 0.8 1.2
Government consumption 101.9 102.7 103.7 1.2 0.7 1.0 1.1 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.3
Machinery and equipment 102.9 100.5 104.2 − 3.0 − 2.4 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.2 0.1 0.1 7.4 3.0 2.6Premises 109.1 109.0 112.7 0.6 − 0.1 3.4 − 6.7 0.7 2.6 2.2 12.8 1.0 0.5Other investment 
4 106.9 108.2 109.5 0.1 1.3 1.2 2.0 1.3 0.7 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 1.4 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.2 0.2 0.0 − 0.7
Domestic demand 102.1 102.7 104.0 − 0.9 0.7 1.2 − 1.4 0.9 2.3 1.0 2.4 1.1 0.5Net exports 
6 . . . 1.3 − 0.5 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.7
Exports 111.1 112.8 117.0 2.8 1.6 3.7 − 1.5 1.9 1.6 4.3 4.1 2.6 4.8Imports 107.1 110.5 114.2 − 0.0 3.1 3.3 − 0.7 3.1 5.2 4.9 3.9 3.1 3.6
Gross domestic product 
2 104.0 104.1 105.7 0.4 0.1 1.5 − 1.8 0.5 0.8 1.0 2.6 1.0 1.2
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,539.5 1,571.5 1,603.9 2.2 2.1 2.1 0.8 2.4 3.3 1.8 2.0 1.9 2.3
Government consumption 521.3 541.2 561.5 3.1 3.8 3.7 4.2 3.3 4.6 3.2 3.7 4.0 4.0Machinery and equipment 181.7 177.9 184.4 − 2.2 − 2.1 3.7 − 9.6 0.1 0.2 0.3 7.4 2.9 2.5Premises 273.9 279.2 292.9 3.4 1.9 4.9 − 4.9 2.7 4.6 4.2 14.7 2.5 2.1Other investment 
4 95.6 98.8 102.1 2.1 3.3 3.3 4.1 3.2 2.7 3.3 3.0 3.3 3.3
Changes in inventories 5 − 23.9 − 22.3 − 30.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,588.2 2,646.2 2,714.0 0.8 2.2 2.6 0.3 2.6 3.7 2.3 4.0 2.6 1.8Net exports 161.7 163.3 189.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,262.9 1,280.1 1,325.6 4.4 1.4 3.6 − 1.2 1.9 1.0 3.8 3.7 2.1 4.8Imports 1,101.1 1,116.9 1,136.4 2.1 1.4 1.7 − 1.3 1.3 3.1 2.6 1.9 1.2 2.1
Gross domestic product 
2 2,749.9 2,809.5 2,903.2 1.9 2.2 3.3 0.3 2.8 2.7 2.9 4.6 2.9 3.0
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 103.4 104.7 105.7 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1Gross domestic product 102.7 104.8 106.7 1.5 2.1 1.8 2.1 2.3 1.9 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.7Terms of trade 97.1 98.5 99.9 − 0.5 1.5 1.4 1.0 1.8 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.3
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,389.7 1,428.3 1,481.7 3.8 2.8 3.7 2.9 2.6 2.8 2.8 3.8 3.8 3.7Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 665.7 671.6 694.2 − 3.3 0.9 3.4 − 5.5 4.7 1.3 4.5 7.2 − 0.3 3.3
National income 2,055.3 2,099.9 2,175.8 1.4 2.2 3.6 − 0.1 3.2 2.3 3.3 5.0 2.5 3.5
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,822.2 2,881.9 2,974.8 1.9 2.1 3.2 0.2 3.0 2.3 2.8 4.3 2.4 3.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2014. Initial annual ing households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer software and enter-
results for 2014: figures computed in January 2015. 1Professional, scientific, techni- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net increase
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy 1 Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 2 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2011 106.7 107.0 95.7 108.1 107.0 111.9 104.2 101.3 109.2 110.2 113.2 112.6
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.7 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
2014 x 107.9 108.2 92.4 109.8 106.1 116.5 100.6 102.6 111.8 108.6 114.6 119.8
 
2013          Q4 111.0 119.3 99.7 111.2 103.6 121.0 102.8 105.8 109.2 108.3 123.1 116.8
2014          Q1 105.2 88.0 98.9 108.4 106.6 113.4 102.3 100.4 111.5 106.6 107.7 123.1
         Q2 107.3 110.5 85.7 109.6 107.4 115.8 98.1 100.4 112.8 106.7 112.2 122.5
         Q3 108.0 116.5 86.3 109.5 106.9 115.0 97.0 103.2 111.7 110.6 114.9 114.8
         Q4 x 111.0 117.7 98.7 111.7 103.4 121.8 105.0 106.4 111.0 110.6 123.7 118.8
 
2013          Dec 104.5 116.8 100.6 103.2 89.7 117.9 89.7 100.1 94.6 99.1 133.6 96.1
2014          Jan 98.0 73.4 103.7 100.8 101.6 101.4 93.5 98.7 105.3 98.3 96.9 108.2
         Feb 102.4 85.4 94.3 105.9 103.8 111.5 101.0 96.4 108.4 104.5 103.5 124.0
         Mar 115.1 105.2 98.6 118.6 114.5 127.3 112.4 106.1 120.9 117.1 122.8 137.2
         Apr 106.9 108.6 88.5 109.1 107.8 113.6 98.1 101.9 112.7 105.4 108.1 123.1
         May 105.2 107.6 85.5 107.4 105.6 113.2 94.7 98.4 110.5 103.7 108.9 120.9
         June 109.7 115.4 83.0 112.4 108.7 120.7 101.5 100.9 115.3 110.9 119.5 123.4
         July 3 111.0 119.5 84.7 113.1 110.2 120.6 96.7 102.7 115.1 111.3 114.2 130.3
         Aug 3 100.0 111.8 84.7 100.3 101.9 99.6 83.8 101.3 104.9 105.6 106.5 84.4
         Sep 112.9 118.1 89.6 115.1 108.7 124.7 110.4 105.5 115.2 114.9 124.1 129.6
         Oct x 113.6 120.7 97.9 114.6 110.7 120.4 107.9 109.7 117.4 113.9 116.5 125.4
         Nov x 115.7 121.1 97.2 117.3 109.4 127.8 112.1 109.6 119.1 116.1 123.1 134.2
         Dec x,p 103.8 111.3 101.0 103.2 90.2 117.1 94.9 100.0 96.6 101.8 131.6 96.8
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 + 7.2 + 7.9 − 4.4 + 8.8 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 4.8 + 1.8 + 9.7 + 11.0 + 14.0 + 13.5
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 x + 1.4 + 2.5 − 4.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.4
 
2013          Q4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 + 4.4 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 8.1
2014          Q1 + 4.0 + 14.3 − 5.8 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 4.7 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 5.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 9.6
         Q2 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 4.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 1.6 − 1.4 + 5.7
         Q3 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 1.9 − 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.1 + 4.2 + 2.5 + 0.7
         Q4 x + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.7
 
2013          Dec + 3.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 4.5 + 4.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 9.7
2014          Jan + 4.8 + 13.6 − 2.2 + 4.9 + 3.7 + 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 6.0 + 1.5 + 6.0 + 12.7
         Feb + 4.4 + 16.5 − 5.4 + 4.4 + 5.2 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 3.5 + 6.0 + 5.2 − 0.7 + 9.7
         Mar + 2.9 + 13.1 − 9.6 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 5.6 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 7.1
         Apr + 1.8 + 3.5 − 6.2 + 2.5 + 4.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.2 − 3.0 + 4.2
         May + 1.6 + 0.7 − 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 4.5 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 9.3
         June + 0.2 + 0.9 − 5.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 + 3.7
         July 3 + 3.1 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 8.0 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 5.8 + 1.0 + 19.4
         Aug 3 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 4.4 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 3.7 − 19.5
         Sep + 0.3 − 1.0 − 3.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 1.6 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 1.2
         Oct x + 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.2
         Nov x − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Dec x,p − 0.7 − 4.7 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 2.1 + 2.7 − 1.5 + 0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, base year 2010. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Including electric Quarterly Production Survey or the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction in-
power generation from renewable resources (wind- and solar power dustry, respectively. stations). 2Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production sector in the

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2010 99.5 + 24.7 99.5 + 27.9 99.5 + 25.3 99.6 + 5.3 99.5 + 14.6 99.6 + 2.5
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.5 − 5.5 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 2.0
2014 p 112.5 + 2.8 104.1 + 0.9 118.7 + 3.8 110.7 + 4.5 102.7 + 0.9 113.5 + 5.7
2013          Dec 107.7 + 5.5 90.2 + 0.7 122.0 + 8.6 94.8 + 2.5 88.5 + 6.2 97.0 + 1.4
2014          Jan 111.4 + 6.3 108.0 + 2.8 113.7 + 8.4 112.6 + 10.6 100.8 + 1.9 116.7 + 13.6
         Feb 113.0 + 5.9 106.0 + 4.1 117.4 + 6.6 116.9 + 8.7 97.6 + 2.2 123.5 + 10.7         Mar 120.3 + 0.4 113.7 − 1.4 126.0 + 1.4 113.3 + 3.5 113.1 + 1.7 113.4 + 4.1
         Apr 112.4 + 5.9 105.7 + 2.6 117.9 + 8.4 107.2 + 4.9 108.2 + 7.3 106.9 + 4.1
         May 110.5 + 5.0 103.1 + 0.2 116.3 + 8.2 106.4 + 5.2 99.6 + 1.1 108.7 + 6.6         June 113.3 − 2.2 106.2 + 1.7 119.0 − 5.5 108.4 + 6.0 105.4 − 2.7 109.5 + 9.3
         July 115.4 + 6.0 106.2 + 1.8 122.2 + 9.4 113.7 + 1.9 97.3 − 1.8 119.4 + 2.9
         Aug 100.7 + 0.9 95.4 − 0.3 103.0 + 0.9 111.0 + 7.0 94.4 + 3.1 116.8 + 8.2         Sep 111.8 − 0.4 102.0 +
 0.0 118.5 − 0.9 112.7 + 0.7 107.5 − 3.6 114.4 + 2.0
         Oct 
114.6 + 3.1 106.8 − 0.7 120.2 + 5.7 114.5 + 2.2 108.1 − 1.7 116.8 + 3.5
         Nov 114.7 + 0.1 104.4 − 1.5 122.2 + 1.2 113.8 + 0.9 106.0 − 1.5 116.5 + 1.7
         Dec p 112.3 + 4.3 92.2 + 2.2 128.3 + 5.2 98.4 + 3.8 94.3 + 6.6 99.8 + 2.9
From the domestic market
2010 99.5 + 18.7 99.5 + 28.9 99.5 + 13.1 99.6 + 1.4 99.4 + 4.5 99.6 + 0.4
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 104.0 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.5 + 2.0 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 p 105.6 + 1.1 101.2 − 0.7 110.5 + 2.8 103.2 + 2.8 103.3 + 0.4 103.2 + 3.7
2013          Dec 94.0 + 1.6 87.9 + 1.7 101.7 + 1.3 84.5 + 3.3 81.4 + 1.2 85.6 + 4.0
2014          Jan 106.2 + 3.3 106.2 + 1.2 106.5 + 5.0 104.9 + 6.3 102.6 − 1.8 105.7 + 9.3
         Feb 107.0 + 3.3 104.2 + 2.8 109.4 + 3.8 109.7 + 3.6 99.9 − 1.9 113.1 + 5.3         Mar 116.8 + 1.1 109.3 − 3.4 125.3 + 5.0 111.0 + 4.2 113.8 − 0.4 110.0 + 6.1
         Apr 107.7 + 5.0 104.3 + 2.7 112.3 + 7.3 100.0 + 4.7 107.5 + 5.1 97.4 + 4.6
         May 104.7 + 4.6 102.8 + 1.6 107.8 + 8.1 96.9 + 1.8 96.8 + 1.3 96.9 + 1.9         June 105.7 − 0.8 102.9 + 0.4 109.4 − 2.5 100.3 + 3.5 107.1 + 4.0 97.9 + 3.4
         July 108.0 + 1.3 103.8 − 0.3 112.3 + 2.6 107.9 + 3.0 100.3 + 1.3 110.6 + 3.6
         Aug 98.7 − 1.4 95.4 − 1.1 101.2 − 2.3 103.8 + 2.4 95.7 + 3.1 106.7 + 2.2         Sep 102.1 − 3.7 96.9 − 4.0 106.9 − 3.9 105.0 − 0.1 110.2 − 3.0 103.2 + 1.1
         Oct 108.8 + 3.2 102.1 − 1.4 115.9 + 8.1 106.7 + 1.1 111.0 − 5.4 105.2 + 3.7
         Nov 105.8 − 3.5 100.2 − 4.9 111.9 − 2.4 103.0 − 1.4 107.6 − 1.0 101.4 − 1.6         Dec 
p 96.2 + 2.3 86.7 − 1.4 106.7 + 4.9 89.7 + 6.2 86.6 + 6.4 90.8 + 6.1
From abroad
2010 99.6 + 29.9 99.6 + 26.9 99.6 + 34.4 99.6 + 8.9 99.5 + 25.2 99.6 + 4.2
2011 110.0 + 10.4 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.5 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.7 − 0.5 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.8 100.9 + 3.7 114.1 + 2.5
2014 p 118.1 + 4.1 107.6 + 2.8 123.8 + 4.5 117.1 + 5.8 102.2 + 1.3 122.3 + 7.2
2013          Dec 118.9 + 8.2 93.0 − 0.4 134.5 + 12.5 103.6 + 2.0 94.6 + 10.3 106.7 − 0.3
2014          Jan 115.7 + 8.7 110.1 + 4.5 118.2 + 10.4 119.2 + 14.2 99.2 + 5.4 126.0 + 16.9
         Feb 117.8 + 7.8 108.1 + 5.7 122.3 + 8.2 123.0 + 13.1 95.6 + 6.1 132.4 + 14.9         Mar 123.2 − 0.1 118.9 + 0.8 126.5 − 0.7 115.3 + 2.9 112.5 + 3.7 116.2 + 2.6
         Apr 116.3 + 6.7 107.3 + 2.5 121.4 + 9.0 113.4 + 5.0 108.9 + 9.4 114.9 + 3.6
         May 115.2 + 5.3 103.4 − 1.3 121.6 + 8.3 114.5 + 7.9 102.1 + 1.1 118.8 + 10.1         June 119.5 − 3.3 110.0 + 3.1 124.9 − 7.1 115.4 + 8.0 104.0 − 8.0 119.4 + 13.9
         July 121.5 + 9.8 109.1 + 4.3 128.3 + 13.4 118.6 + 0.9 94.6 − 4.5 126.8 + 2.4
         Aug 102.3 + 2.8 95.5 + 0.7 104.1 + 2.9 117.1 + 10.8 93.3 + 3.0 125.3 + 13.0         Sep 119.6 + 1.8 108.1 + 4.5 125.7 + 0.7 119.2 + 1.2 105.2 − 4.0 123.9 + 2.7
         Oct 119.3 + 2.8 112.4 +
 0.0 122.8 + 4.3 121.1 + 3.0 105.5 + 1.8 126.6 + 3.3
         Nov 
122.0 + 2.9 109.4 + 2.4 128.5 + 3.0 123.0 + 2.6 104.6 − 1.9 129.4 + 4.0
         Dec p 125.3 + 5.4 98.6 + 6.0 141.6 + 5.3 105.8 + 2.1 101.0 + 6.8 107.4 + 0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2009 98.3 − 5.3 94.2 − 12.2 90.9 − 0.4 95.3 − 21.2 97.0 − 1.1 102.5 + 2.2 94.3 − 14.9 105.4 + 3.6
2010 99.7 + 1.4 99.7 + 5.8 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.9 + 3.0 99.7 − 2.7 99.7 + 5.7 99.8 − 5.3
2011 107.2 + 7.5 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.8 − 8.1 102.2 + 2.5 112.9 + 13.2 96.1 − 3.7
2012 114.5 + 6.8 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.5 − 0.3 107.6 + 5.3 118.5 + 5.0 103.3 + 7.5
2013 119.1 + 4.0 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.7 + 2.4 111.7 + 3.8 121.8 + 2.8 107.6 + 4.2
 
2013          Nov 106.6 + 16.6 119.6 + 18.4 122.9 + 0.8 132.4 + 34.1 75.0 + 12.4 93.7 + 14.5 123.1 + 30.8 83.3 + 9.2
         Dec 106.2 + 13.7 120.0 + 11.0 136.8 + 11.7 121.3 + 6.9 82.9 + 29.9 92.5 + 17.5 113.6 + 8.0 86.5 + 24.3
2014          Jan 93.0 + 13.3 106.5 + 17.8 112.9 + 10.8 113.3 + 22.4 73.7 + 20.8 79.6 + 7.9 110.7 + 27.8 67.1 − 3.6
         Feb 102.2 + 4.0 112.9 + 12.0 134.0 + 23.6 114.3 + 9.6 67.0 − 11.4 91.6 − 4.3 106.4 + 2.0 85.3 − 3.1
         Mar 138.9 + 5.9 146.5 + 9.9 165.2 + 9.1 148.0 + 12.6 105.2 + 1.7 131.4 + 1.9 141.2 + 8.7 126.0 + 1.4
         Apr 134.0 + 8.5 133.3 + 2.5 170.1 + 17.3 121.6 − 3.0 95.9 − 16.1 134.6 + 15.1 125.4 + 6.5 128.3 + 6.4
         May 127.7 + 1.8 130.9 − 3.3 157.1 + 10.5 122.9 − 12.5 103.0 − 3.5 124.5 + 7.5 120.3 − 5.4 123.5 + 5.5         June 132.2 − 9.4 140.0 − 11.2 163.1 − 10.4 133.1 − 15.9 114.8 + 6.3 124.4 − 7.4 131.7 − 13.0 120.2 − 4.6
         July 136.5 − 4.1 139.8 − 1.5 143.9 − 8.9 147.3 + 3.5 109.5 + 0.6 133.1 − 6.9 139.6 + 4.9 130.3 − 10.5
         Aug 121.5 − 1.9 122.5 − 1.3 127.0 − 12.3 130.7 + 7.9 89.4 − 3.2 120.6 − 2.3 124.9 + 4.7 115.9 − 3.3         Sep 121.8 − 3.3 130.0 − 4.3 149.0 − 2.6 128.9 − 2.9 96.2 − 13.2 113.5 − 2.3 123.3 − 5.5 109.3 − 1.1
         Oct 113.6 − 3.3 129.3 + 0.5 152.0 + 7.5 129.4 − 3.9 84.6 − 1.2 97.9 − 8.0 119.1 − 4.9 92.6 − 7.3
         Nov 99.4 − 6.8 113.0 − 5.5 130.2 + 5.9 116.7 − 11.9 68.2 − 9.1 85.9 − 8.3 109.0 − 11.5 77.3 − 7.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.6 + 2.5 101.0 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.9 100.9 − 0.1 105.1 + 2.5 102.2 + 0.6 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.3 + 1.7 101.3 + 0.4 109.0 + 3.7 103.1 + 0.9 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 108.5 + 2.1 103.1 + 1.8 111.5 + 2.3 104.4 + 1.3 95.2 − 0.2 102.5 + 0.2 110.6 + 7.3 ... ...
 
2013          Dec 122.5 + 1.0 117.0 + 0.2 124.2 + 1.6 119.5 − 2.1 141.1 − 4.5 103.4 − 3.0 116.3 + 7.5 97.8 + 4.2
2014          Jan  3 99.2 + 2.1 94.8 + 1.0 101.3 + 1.7 89.6 + 3.5 98.7 − 2.2 87.9 − 1.2 105.0 + 5.3 91.9 + 8.5
         Feb 96.1 + 3.2 91.4 + 2.4 100.6 + 2.9 82.0 + 6.8 82.7 − 3.0 90.3 + 2.5 102.5 + 6.9 96.1 + 6.4
         Mar 111.1 + 2.8 104.8 + 1.8 115.7 + 3.5 109.0 + 10.9 86.4 − 9.7 111.5 + 3.3 109.0 + 3.8 119.4 + 4.9
         Apr 108.4 + 1.5 102.3 + 0.9 113.5 + 4.7 104.2 − 4.7 82.9 − 2.6 108.4 + 0.3 109.4 + 7.8 113.7 + 2.2
         May 107.7 + 0.2 101.8 − 0.1 111.6 + 1.3 106.2 + 2.3 84.1 + 1.3 103.9 − 3.6 106.6 + 5.8 110.5 + 0.5         June 107.1 + 2.7 101.4 + 2.4 113.8 + 3.5 101.3 + 0.7 83.2 − 1.5 99.6 − 1.5 109.1 + 10.3 111.9 + 1.8
         July 107.8 + 1.5 102.6 + 1.2 112.2 + 0.4 102.5 +
 0.0 89.8 + 5.2 100.2 − 2.8 114.1 + 7.4 109.5 + 3.2
         Aug 105.9 + 2.4 100.8 + 1.9 108.7 + 0.7 105.6 + 8.8 84.4 − 3.5 99.8 + 1.8 106.4 + 7.5 100.6 + 3.1
         Sep 104.8 + 0.2 99.3 − 0.2 106.1 + 2.5 106.0 − 7.5 91.4 − 2.5 99.7 − 2.1 108.0 + 6.4 107.0 + 1.7
         Oct 112.2 + 2.7 106.4 + 2.5 113.6 + 2.5 114.0 − 2.8 99.3 + 3.0 109.0 + 0.2 114.5 + 7.9 116.4 + 0.7
         Nov 113.8 + 1.6 108.5 + 1.9 112.9 + 0.7 108.5 − 1.6 110.6 + 4.3 111.5 + 1.2 116.2 + 9.4 112.9 + 0.4         Dec 127.8 + 4.3 122.6 + 4.8 128.5 + 3.5 124.4 + 4.1 148.6 + 5.3 108.2 + 4.6 125.8 + 8.2 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2014 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2010 41,020 + 0.3 28,008 + 1.0 8,421 18,693 675 5,025 503 429 3,239 1,076 7.7 3592011 41,571 + 1.3 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 4662012 42,033 + 1.1 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013 42,281 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 4572014
8 42,652 8 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,898 933 6.7 490
2011          Q4 41,991 + 1.3 29,228 + 2.6 8,729 19,444 827 5,000 102 72 2,744 788 6.5 486
2012          Q1 41,564 + 1.3 28,967 + 2.7 8,630 19,367 758 4,943 201 82 3,075 999 7.3 472
         Q2 41,948 + 1.1 29,223 + 2.5 8,706 19,510 771 4,983 77 65 2,876 847 6.8 499         Q3 42,226 + 1.1 29,416 + 2.1 8,776 19,604 798 5,006 56 43 2,856 885 6.7 493         Q4 42,394 + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,834 + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 42,198 + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459         Q3 42,482 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471         Q4 42,611 + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 42,141 + 0.7 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,586 + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,828 20,251 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900
9 6.6 487
         Q3 42,858 + 0.9 10 30,281 10 + 1.7 10 8,896 10 20,338 10 799 10 5,071 ... 10 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 8 43,023 8 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,738 846 6.3 510
2011          Sep 41,943 + 1.3 29,217 + 2.5 8,739 19,397 841 4,981 76 65 2,796 803 6.6 502         Oct 42,017 + 1.3 29,274 + 2.6 8,746 19,456 837 4,981 81 70 2,738 779 6.5 500         Nov 42,069 + 1.3 29,278 + 2.6 8,744 19,476 832 5,017 85 76 2,714 770 6.4 492         Dec 41,888 + 1.3 29,046 + 2.7 8,656 19,402 782 5,021 140 72 2,781 814 6.6 467
2012          Jan 41,538 + 1.4 28,916 + 2.9 8,620 19,330 755 4,944 206 82 3,085 1,011 7.3 452
         Feb 41,513 + 1.3 28,922 + 2.7 8,610 19,352 749 4,909 230 87 3,110 1,029 7.4 473         Mar 41,640 + 1.2 29,082 + 2.7 8,663 19,437 756 4,935 167 78 3,028 956 7.2 491         Apr 41,802 + 1.1 29,199 + 2.6 8,698 19,505 763 4,964 83 71 2,964 893 7.0 499         May 41,973 + 1.1 29,289 + 2.4 8,724 19,548 778 5,002 77 65 2,855 831 6.7 499         June 42,069 + 1.0 29,280 + 2.2 8,733 19,519 790 5,032 71 58 2,809 817 6.6 499         July 42,103 + 1.1 29,255 + 2.3 8,737 19,478 804 5,038 54 42 2,876 885 6.8 500         Aug 42,208 + 1.1 29,477 + 2.0 8,793 19,645 801 4,986 47 34 2,905 910 6.8 493         Sep 42,367 + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,463 + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,483 + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 42,237 + 0.8 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,808 + 0.7 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb 41,809 + 0.7 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448         Mar 41,885 + 0.6 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463         Apr 42,044 + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460         May 42,230 + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457         June 42,321 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459         July 42,375 + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,460 + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,611 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,680 + 0.5 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,690 + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,463 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 42,071 + 0.6 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,110 + 0.7 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,241 + 0.8 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,444 + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,596 + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,835 20,289 750 5,060 72 56 2,882 893
9 6.6 481
         June 42,717 + 0.9 30,175 + 1.9 8,853 20,292 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,763 + 0.9 30,121 + 1.8 8,859 20,217 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,817 + 0.8
10 30,305 10 + 1.5 10 8,905 10 20,352 10 802 10 5,056 ... 10 32 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep 42,993 + 0.9 10 30,659 10 + 1.6 10 8,995 10 20,599 10 812 10 5,027 ... 10 38 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct 43,100 + 1.0 10 30,700 10 + 1.7 10 8,988 10 20,657 10 809 10 5,037 ... 10 46 2,733 836 6.3 517
         Nov 8 43,101 8 + 1.0 10 30,689 10 + 1.8 10 8,975 10 20,678 10 800 10 5,044 ... 10 44 2,717 834 6.3 515
         Dec 8 42,867 8 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 9From May
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- 2014, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Unadjusted figures esti-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2012 and 2013, the estimated values
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.4 % for employees sub-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given ject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.9 % for persons solely in jobs
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 30.8 % for cyclically
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located induced short-time work. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2010 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 r 120.7 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 p 111.8 104.0 103.6 120.8 96.8
 
2013          Mar 105.6 109.9 103.2 117.8 103.7 103.4 107.2 124.2 104.9 107.6 136.3 107.7
         Apr 105.1 110.0 103.3 118.2 101.8 103.5 107.1 124.8 104.7 106.4 127.8 104.0
         May 105.5 111.1 103.2 117.7 103.2 103.6 107.7 106.8 124.5 104.5 106.0 129.0 103.3
         June 105.6 111.5 102.9 117.6 103.7 103.7 106.7 122.2 104.1 105.3 127.1 100.7
         July 106.1 111.2 102.4 118.8 105.1 103.9 106.6 119.4 104.2 105.4 133.7 99.9
         Aug 106.1 110.3 102.4 118.6 105.3 104.0 108.2 106.5 119.2 104.2 105.5 135.3 98.1
         Sep 106.1 109.9 103.4 119.1 104.3 104.1 106.8 r 120.8 104.2 105.5 135.7 97.3
         Oct 105.9 110.1 103.9 117.5 103.6 104.1 106.6 r 121.3 103.9 104.8 130.1 95.3
         Nov 106.1 110.4 103.9 116.4 104.3 104.4 108.4 106.5 r 122.3 103.9 104.9 130.3 96.3
         Dec 106.5 112.1 103.3 116.8 105.5 104.5 106.6 r 122.4 103.8 104.9 131.5 96.6
2014          Jan 105.9 112.9 102.8 116.0 104.1 104.7 106.5 p 119.5 104.0 104.8 129.4 96.0
         Feb 106.4 112.7 103.2 116.3 105.1 104.8 109.2 106.5 p 119.4 104.0 104.7 129.3 97.2
         Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 p 120.4 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 p 121.1 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 p 118.8 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 p 117.7 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 p 113.9 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 p 111.5 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3
         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 p 108.6 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 p 104.6 104.2 103.5 111.9 95.5
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 p 104.3 104.2 102.7 103.1 97.5
         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 p 103.6 103.9 101.0 84.3 96.0
2015          Jan 105.5 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.2 106.1 ... ... ... ... 71.4 97.7
Annual percentage change  
  
2010 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 13.5 + 3.1 + 7.1 + 37.4 + 34.2
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 r + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 p − 7.4 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 9.2 − 4.2
 
2013          Mar + 1.4 + 3.7 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 12.1 − 2.5
         Apr + 1.2 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 6.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 − 14.0 − 5.6
         May + 1.5 + 5.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 8.0 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 8.2 − 6.2
         June + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 2.1 − 7.5
         July + 1.9 + 5.7 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 14.5
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 − 14.1
         Sep + 1.4 + 4.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 − 0.5 r − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 5.2 − 13.0
         Oct + 1.2 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 r − 1.5 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 12.3
         Nov + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.8 r − 2.6 − 1.1 − 2.9 − 5.9 − 10.0
         Dec + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.5 r − 1.9 − 1.0 − 2.3 − 3.5 − 9.3
2014          Jan + 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.1 p − 3.8 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 6.6 − 9.6
         Feb + 1.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.9 p − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.7 − 8.8 − 9.1
         Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 3.1 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 p − 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 p − 4.6 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 p − 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 p − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 p − 6.5 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 p − 10.1 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 p − 13.8 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 p − 14.7 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.9 + 1.2
         Dec + 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 p − 15.4 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 35.9 − 0.6
2015          Jan − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.1 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... − 44.8 + 1.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2015
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2006
938.1 1.5 630.7 0.5 358.9 − 0.5 989.6 0.2 1,514.0 2.6 151.6 2.3 10.0
2007 969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,540.7 1.8 157.1 3.6 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.4 0.6 1,029.2 2.4 1,579.0 2.5 165.1 5.1 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.5 7.0 1,056.1 2.6 1,564.2 − 0.9 155.7 − 5.7 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 388.0 1.2 1,090.1 3.2 1,605.0 2.6 159.3 2.3 9.9
2011 1,087.7 4.7 728.5 3.7 383.2 − 1.2 1,111.6 2.0 1,666.0 3.8 159.2 − 0.1 9.6
2012 1,131.7 4.0 756.4 3.8 389.4 1.6 1,145.7 3.1 1,699.0 2.0 159.5 0.2 9.4
2013 1,165.5 3.0 777.2 2.8 398.3 2.3 1,175.6 2.6 1,728.5 1.7 157.0 − 1.6 9.1
2013          Q2 284.4 2.8 185.6 2.5 99.0 2.5 284.6 2.5 429.8 1.9 37.3 − 2.4 8.7
         Q3 288.1 3.1 196.4 3.1 99.9 2.3 296.3 2.8 436.5 3.1 34.3 1.2 7.8
         Q4 321.9 3.0 214.0 2.6 98.0 1.8 311.9 2.3 434.4 1.7 32.2 0.5 7.4
2014          Q1 281.7 3.9 187.7 3.6 103.7 2.1 291.3 3.0 436.9 2.1 54.8 3.0 12.5
         Q2 295.6 3.9 192.6 3.8 100.1 1.2 292.8 2.9 438.7 2.1 38.6 3.6 8.8
         Q3 299.2 3.8 203.5 3.6 102.4 2.5 306.0 3.3 447.0 2.4 35.5 3.6 7.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2014. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2007 93.9 1.2 93.7 1.4 93.4 1.5 92.9 1.4 95.3 1.4
2008 96.5 2.7 96.4 2.8 96.2 3.0 95.9 3.2 97.6 2.42009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.3 2.5 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.3 3.32012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.1 2.72013 107.0 2.4 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 3.0 110.4 2.9 110.5 3.0 . .
2013          Q3 109.0 2.2 109.1 2.3 109.4 2.3 107.9 2.4 106.8 2.2
         Q4 119.7 2.4 119.7 2.4 120.1 2.5 108.2 2.4 118.5 2.2
2014          Q1 102.3 3.2 102.3 3.2 102.0 2.7 109.3 2.7 104.8 3.0
         Q2 103.5 3.3 103.5 3.3 103.7 3.3 110.4 3.4 109.0 2.7         Q3 112.1 2.8 112.1 2.8 112.4 2.8 111.0 2.9 109.7 2.7         Q4 123.1 2.8 123.1 2.8 123.4 2.8 111.3 2.9 . .
2014          June 103.2 3.6 103.1 3.5 103.4 3.6 110.7 3.6 . .
         July 129.6 2.9 129.6 2.8 130.0 2.9 110.9 3.0 . .
         Aug 103.3 2.8 103.3 2.7 103.6 2.7 111.0 2.8 . .
         Sep 103.4 2.8 103.4 2.8 103.7 2.8 111.1 2.8 . .
         Oct 103.5 2.9 103.5 2.9 103.8 2.9 111.2 2.9 . .
         Nov 159.5 2.7 159.5 2.7 160.0 2.7 111.3 2.9 . .
         Dec 106.2 2.9 106.2 2.8 106.4 2.7 111.3 2.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2014. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2010 1,748.4 1,077.5 334.5 459.6 213.2 670.9 169.5 170.2 132.6 514.7 1,233.7 657.9 354.8 575.8 147.1 151.4
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.2 176.8 161.1
2012 1,904.5 1,178.1 380.2 490.5 240.8 726.4 189.8 179.1 126.0 561.5 1,343.0 719.5 380.8 623.5 179.5 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.1 635.9 191.5 166.8
2013          Q3 1,933.1 1,197.6 392.6 495.6 250.5 735.4 196.3 183.9 130.3 566.5 1,366.6 730.5 375.6 636.1 200.7 161.5
         Q4 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.1 635.9 191.5 166.8
2014          Q1 1,972.9 1,203.7 388.4 502.3 252.6 769.3 196.9 193.4 142.8 578.1 1,394.9 740.8 384.0 654.1 194.4 164.3
         Q2 p 1,982.6 1,224.9 394.0 505.9 261.9 757.7 200.9 189.9 123.3 568.6 1,413.9 763.3 395.0 650.6 199.7 162.6
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 61.6 19.1 26.3 12.2 38.4 9.7 9.7 7.6 29.4 70.6 37.6 20.3 32.9 8.4 8.7
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.7 9.4 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2013          Q3 100.0 62.0 20.3 25.6 13.0 38.1 10.2 9.5 6.7 29.3 70.7 37.8 19.4 32.9 10.4 8.4
         Q4 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014          Q1 100.0 61.0 19.7 25.5 12.8 39.0 10.0 9.8 7.2 29.3 70.7 37.6 19.5 33.2 9.9 8.3
         Q2 p 100.0 61.8 19.9 25.5 13.2 38.2 10.1 9.6 6.2 28.7 71.3 38.5 19.9 32.8 10.1 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2010 1,383.0 814.2 213.9 355.8 189.5 568.8 152.2 135.1 105.4 400.6 982.4 515.3 258.3 467.1 125.4 108.1
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.6 921.2 258.9 387.9 222.1 619.5 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.8 1,096.8 581.7 286.6 515.1 161.0 116.5
2013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.7 118.6
2013          Q3 1,565.4 936.1 263.3 395.1 234.4 629.3 180.7 143.1 104.2 450.4 1,114.9 593.6 287.8 521.3 174.7 118.1         Q4 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 285.9 521.4 170.7 118.6
2014          Q1 1,595.5 941.5 260.1 400.9 236.3 654.0 180.9 152.3 110.4 457.2 1,138.4 597.1 289.9 541.3 173.9 121.6
         Q2
p 1,604.2 956.5 260.9 403.7 245.0 647.7 184.7 147.7 97.0 451.5 1,152.7 617.5 301.8 535.2 177.9 118.2
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 58.9 15.5 25.7 13.7 41.1 11.0 9.8 7.6 29.0 71.0 37.3 18.7 33.8 9.1 7.8
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2013          Q3 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 15.0 40.2 11.6 9.1 6.7 28.8 71.2 37.9 18.4 33.3 11.2 7.6
         Q4 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.3 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014          Q1 100.0 59.0 16.3 25.1 14.8 41.0 11.3 9.6 6.9 28.7 71.4 37.4 18.2 33.9 10.9 7.6
         Q2 p 100.0 59.6 16.3 25.2 15.3 40.4 11.5 9.2 6.1 28.1 71.9 38.5 18.8 33.4 11.1 7.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2010 365.4 263.3 120.6 103.8 23.7 102.1 17.4 35.1 27.2 114.0 251.4 142.6 96.5 108.8 21.7 43.3
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.4
2012 363.8 256.9 121.3 102.6 18.7 106.9 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.7 246.1 137.7 94.2 108.4 18.4 44.2
2013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.2
2013          Q3 367.7 261.5 129.3 100.4 16.1 106.2 15.5 40.8 26.2 116.0 251.7 136.9 87.8 114.8 26.0 43.3
         Q4 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.9 48.2
2014          Q1 377.4 262.1 128.4 101.4 16.4 115.3 16.0 41.1 32.4 120.9 256.5 143.7 94.0 112.8 20.5 42.7
         Q2 p 378.4 268.4 133.1 102.2 16.9 110.0 16.2 42.2 26.2 117.2 261.2 145.8 93.2 115.4 21.8 44.4
as a percentage of total assets
2010 100.0 72.1 33.0 28.4 6.5 27.9 4.8 9.6 7.4 31.2 68.8 39.0 26.4 29.8 5.9 11.9
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.2
2012 100.0 70.6 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.4 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.7 37.9 25.9 29.8 5.1 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2013          Q3 100.0 71.1 35.2 27.3 4.4 28.9 4.2 11.1 7.1 31.6 68.4 37.2 23.9 31.2 7.1 11.8
         Q4 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014          Q1 100.0 69.5 34.0 26.9 4.3 30.6 4.2 10.9 8.6 32.0 68.0 38.1 24.9 29.9 5.4 11.3
         Q2 p 100.0 70.9 35.2 27.0 4.5 29.1 4.3 11.1 6.9 31.0 69.0 38.5 24.6 30.5 5.8 11.7
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2005 1,077.4 . 150.6 . 14.0 . 6.4 12.0 17.7 72.7 . 6.8 . 3.1 6.9 11.7
2006 1,209.4 10.6 155.0 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.5 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.0 4.4 173.8 15.0 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.5 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.7 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 180.1 − 0.3 12.6 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.2 6.6 192.6 3.4 12.4 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 97.0 − 7.1 6.3 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 189.2 − 2.5 12.2 − 0.3 5.0 10.2 18.4 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2011          Q4 387.1 6.9 48.3 − 4.8 12.5 − 1.5 4.9 11.8 17.1 17.4 − 32.8 4.5 − 2.7 1.6 6.9 11.3
2012          Q1 379.9 9.0 47.6 − 0.3 12.5 − 1.2 3.9 9.2 16.4 29.0 − 3.8 7.6 − 1.0 0.2 5.0 11.0
         Q2 382.4 7.2 47.1 9.3 12.3 0.2 4.8 9.9 17.0 27.7 10.6 7.2 0.2 1.2 6.5 11.4
         Q3 384.3 7.1 48.7 4.3 12.7 − 0.3 4.8 10.3 17.2 16.6 − 49.8 4.3 − 3.9 1.7 6.2 11.9
         Q4 406.6 3.3 49.1 0.7 12.1 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 24.1 5.8 1.0 0.1 6.4 12.4
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.9 − 1.0 12.5 0.1 5.2 10.4 16.5 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.3 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.2 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.4 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 0.1 50.2 9.1 13.2 1.1 3.8 8.8 16.2 30.6 15.4 8.0 1.1 0.0 5.1 10.3
         Q2 p 386.8 − 1.7 47.9 0.1 12.4 0.2 4.4 9.6 16.9 26.4 − 1.9 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.6 11.1
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2005 807.7 . 109.5 . 13.6 . 6.5 12.0 17.7 52.3 . 6.5 . 2.9 7.8 11.5
2006 898.7 9.8 114.9 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.7 12.2 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.42007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.8 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.0 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.1 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.0 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.0 7.6 144.1 5.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.9 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.2 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.6 140.9 − 2.2 11.8 − 0.2 4.3 10.2 15.5 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.8
2011          Q4 294.9 8.7 30.7 − 14.3 10.4 − 2.9 3.9 10.6 15.3 12.9 − 37.4 4.4 − 3.3 0.4 6.2 10.12012          Q1 297.1 10.6 38.9 2.7 13.1 − 1.0 4.8 9.7 15.5 25.8 − 0.9 8.7 − 1.0 0.8 5.8 11.0
         Q2 294.0 8.2 35.8 9.8 12.2 0.2 5.4 10.2 15.8 22.0 12.5 7.5 0.3 1.6 6.6 10.2         Q3 292.4 8.3 35.0 4.7 12.0 − 0.4 5.3 10.3 15.0 19.2 − 11.0 6.6 − 1.2 1.7 5.7 10.7         Q4 311.4 3.7 34.3 5.3 11.0 0.2 3.4 10.5 16.6 16.0 14.5 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 11.0
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 34.1 − 0.4 11.7 0.2 4.9 10.3 15.1 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.4 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.6 4.6 − 0.4 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.3 39.1 6.6 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.8 14.5 25.0 10.5 8.4 0.8 0.1 5.3 9.0
         Q2
p 297.2 − 2.1 36.1 0.7 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 0.3 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2005 269.7 . 41.0 . 15.2 . 6.3 12.0 17.7 20.4 . 7.6 . 3.1 5.3 12.12006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 44.2 9.3 13.3 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.22008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.7 8.7 13.4 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 48.2 7.6 14.4 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.2 3.0 48.5 − 3.3 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.2
2011          Q4 92.2 0.9 17.6 28.1 19.1 3.5 7.0 14.0 23.3 4.4 − 11.8 4.8 − 0.7 3.9 7.9 15.32012          Q1 82.8 3.1 8.7 − 13.4 10.6 − 1.9 2.9 7.7 20.3 3.2 − 27.2 3.8 − 1.3 − 0.7 4.0 11.9
         Q2 88.4 3.8 11.3 7.8 12.8 0.5 4.1 9.7 20.9 5.7 2.6 6.5 − 0.1 0.7 5.2 14.6         Q3 91.9 3.1 13.7 3.3 14.9 0.0 4.4 11.1 20.6 − 2.6 −147.5 − 2.9 − 13.2 1.6 7.5 13.5         Q4 95.2 1.9 14.8 − 10.1 15.5 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.7 55.9 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.4 11.1 20.2 13.3 2.3 4.1 9.2 21.6 5.6 50.2 6.7 2.2 0.0 4.6 13.4
         Q2
p 89.6 − 0.2 11.9 − 1.8 13.2 − 0.2 4.7 10.4 18.6 6.0 − 10.0 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 5.9 12.8
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2013 2014
Item 2013 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov p
Current account + 214,030 + 52,219 + 84,348 + 35,182 + 42,611 + 72,238 + 31,658 + 29,745 + 24,649 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,916,346 477,756 486,768 469,444 484,837 489,114 174,964 177,871 159,912
Imports 1,701,571 428,457 427,628 424,760 423,806 426,878 149,735 152,356 138,439
Balance + 214,775 + 49,299 + 59,140 + 44,684 + 61,031 + 62,236 + 25,229 + 25,515 + 21,473
2 Services
Receipts 641,184 171,554 167,338 155,394 170,473 181,983 60,721 59,819 55,908
Expenditure 570,109 148,778 147,316 136,828 148,524 162,156 52,783 53,805 50,121
Balance + 71,076 + 22,776 + 20,022 + 18,566 + 21,950 + 19,824 + 7,937 + 6,014 + 5,787
3 Primary income
Receipts 598,900 142,569 157,967 146,452 156,591 137,790 49,932 41,878 42,775
Expenditure 527,309 129,110 123,037 123,063 163,019 122,075 44,157 35,439 34,890
Balance + 71,590 + 13,458 + 34,931 + 23,390 − 6,429 + 15,715 + 5,775 + 6,439 + 7,885
4 Secondary income
Receipts 87,561 21,223 22,227 19,959 23,822 21,530 7,787 7,305 7,284
Expenditure 230,975 54,538 51,973 71,417 57,763 47,070 15,071 15,528 17,780
Balance − 143,412 − 33,315 − 29,745 − 51,458 − 33,942 − 25,539 − 7,283 − 8,223 − 10,495
Capital account + 21,348 + 4,753 + 8,753 + 5,941 + 4,099 + 4,112 + 893 + 1,764 + 2,243 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 450,545 + 95,528 + 169,156 + 60,574 + 79,737 + 68,623 + 51,036 + 33,257 + 76,624 C
1 Direct investment + 27,369 + 8,547 + 27,257 + 21,042 − 1,106 + 27,649 + 20,704 − 967 + 28,086
By resident units abroad + 508,928 + 70,446 + 212,929 + 12,340 − 14,869 + 56,097 + 28,084 + 10,650 + 25,476
By non-resident units in the euro area + 481,561 + 61,898 + 185,673 − 8,702 − 13,762 + 28,448 + 7,381 + 11,618 − 2,610
2 Portfolio investment + 15,200 + 30,151 − 32,491 − 52,606 − 43,060 + 76,470 + 59,236 + 47,387 + 12,242
By resident units abroad + 271,433 + 75,318 + 54,921 + 72,706 + 157,144 + 114,599 + 66,743 + 16,261 + 46,724
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 172,922 + 48,513 + 42,673 + 20,325 + 67,310 + 27,331 + 12,319 − 10,818 + 10,384
Long-term debt securities + 91,890 + 24,482 + 13,320 + 39,650 + 73,136 + 61,401 + 39,917 + 21,586 + 37,603
Short-term debt securities + 6,621 + 2,322 − 1,071 + 12,730 + 16,697 + 25,866 + 14,506 + 5,493 − 1,263
By non-resident units in the euro area + 256,232 + 45,167 + 87,412 + 125,312 + 200,206 + 38,128 + 7,507 − 31,126 + 34,481
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 157,283 + 20,864 + 41,924 + 60,621 + 109,995 + 65,732 + 24,069 + 28,370 + 3,462
Long-term debt securities + 85,933 − 13,931 + 84,960 + 60,746 + 65,782 − 42,667 − 10,202 − 33,534 + 39,391
Short-term debt securities + 13,017 + 38,234 − 39,470 + 3,944 + 24,428 + 15,062 − 6,360 − 25,962 − 8,371
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 33,089 + 507 + 12,040 + 5,501 + 16,124 + 16,150 + 9,467 + 624 + 3,899
4 Other investment + 370,106 + 53,375 + 161,945 + 84,134 + 107,357 − 50,308 − 36,443 − 14,791 + 34,213
Eurosystem + 58,821 + 16,355 + 8,998 + 23,818 + 17,242 + 14,507 + 6,174 + 4,007 − 2,010
General government − 9,174 − 8,219 + 14,980 − 3,201 − 4,366 + 643 − 1,572 + 1,729 + 2,269
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 254,234 + 35,183 + 108,079 + 72,273 + 78,150 − 38,437 − 58,731 − 632 + 32,745
Enterprises and households + 66,224 + 10,056 + 29,887 − 8,754 + 16,332 − 27,022 + 17,685 − 19,895 + 1,209
5 Reserve assets + 4,782 + 2,948 + 405 + 2,503 + 422 − 1,338 − 1,928 + 1,004 − 1,816
Net errors and omissions + 215,166 + 38,555 + 76,056 + 19,451 + 33,028 − 7,726 + 18,485 + 1,748 + 49,732 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
Goods trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total (fob/fob) 
1 items 2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2000 − 36,958 + 64,061 + 1,645 − 58,346 − 12,747 − 29,927 + 5,091 − 42,531 − 5,844 − 10,664
2001 − 7,907 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,151 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,1122002 + 41,656 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,600 − 29,408 − 4,010 + 25,935 − 2,065 − 11,7102003 + 31,725 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,695 − 18,513 − 31,088 + 5,920 + 63,349 − 445 + 25,7032004 + 102,057 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 17,657 − 30,018 − 119 + 127,106 − 1,470 + 25,167
2005 + 107,399 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 22,173 − 31,124 − 2,334 + 118,364 − 2,182 + 13,299
2006 + 138,066 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 43,627 − 32,249 − 1,328 + 178,011 − 2,934 + 41,2732007 + 173,132 + 201,989 − 922 − 36,958 + 41,835 − 33,733 − 1,597 + 213,938 + 953 + 42,4022008 + 147,821 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 32,026 + 29,675 − 34,349 − 893 + 168,457 + 2,008 + 21,5302009 + 143,173 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 21,430 + 58,365 − 34,930 − 1,858 + 136,851 − 3,200 − 4,464
2010 + 146,652 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 28,892 + 54,049 − 39,651 + 1,219 + 112,031 + 1,613 − 35,839
2011 + 163,970 + 163,241 − 9,043 − 33,661 + 69,204 − 34,815 + 1,690 + 161,039 + 2,836 − 4,6212012 + 196,242 + 197,116 − 10,086 − 36,849 + 74,668 − 38,692 + 1,298 + 213,430 + 1,297 + 15,8902013 + 189,242 + 207,795 − 4,513 − 47,957 + 72,747 − 43,343 + 2,013 + 245,803 + 838 + 54,5482014 
p + 215,345 + 229,762 − 5,480 − 41,715 + 68,367 − 41,068 + 2,470 + 282,117 − 2,564 + 64,302
2012          Q1 + 46,888 + 49,318 − 1,708 − 7,914 + 19,435 − 13,951 − 259 + 33,717 + 963 − 12,912         Q2 + 44,482 + 49,896 − 2,976 − 8,303 + 8,329 − 5,439 + 632 + 46,454 + 769 + 1,339         Q3 + 48,376 + 52,429 − 2,137 − 15,357 + 19,731 − 8,426 + 846 + 52,846 + 59 + 3,624         Q4 + 56,495 + 45,473 − 3,265 − 5,275 + 27,173 − 10,876 + 79 + 80,413 − 494 + 23,838
2013          Q1 + 44,645 + 51,801 − 1,625 − 11,256 + 19,283 − 15,184 + 756 + 41,503 + 86 − 3,897
         Q2 + 46,362 + 55,556 + 2,842 − 11,658 + 9,905 − 7,441 + 847 + 67,186 + 72 + 19,977         Q3 + 38,874 + 49,123 − 4,085 − 17,879 + 17,188 − 9,557 + 369 + 62,212 − 785 + 22,969         Q4 + 59,361 + 51,314 − 1,644 − 7,164 + 26,371 − 11,160 + 41 + 74,901 + 1,464 + 15,499
2014          Q1 + 49,201 + 52,900 + 1,335 − 7,138 + 18,219 − 14,780 + 1,667 + 66,747 − 565 + 15,879
         Q2 + 45,737 + 54,832 − 727 − 8,732 + 6,556 − 6,919 + 624 + 64,175 − 610 + 17,814         Q3 + 53,767 + 61,627 − 2,287 − 18,217 + 18,347 − 7,990 + 839 + 79,529 + 332 + 24,923         Q4 
p + 66,640 + 60,402 − 3,801 − 7,628 + 25,245 − 11,379 − 660 + 71,667 − 1,722 + 5,687
2012          July + 17,010 + 17,659 − 752 − 4,906 + 6,453 − 2,197 − 35 + 1,700 − 48 − 15,274         Aug + 13,749 + 17,085 − 793 − 6,509 + 6,508 − 3,335 + 610 + 19,153 + 389 + 4,795         Sep + 17,618 + 17,685 − 592 − 3,942 + 6,769 − 2,894 + 271 + 31,992 − 281 + 14,103
         Oct + 16,095 + 16,318 − 1,084 − 4,358 + 7,296 − 3,160 + 195 + 18,059 + 176 + 1,769
         Nov + 19,510 + 17,584 − 724 − 2,211 + 7,112 − 2,974 + 409 + 30,705 − 308 + 10,786         Dec + 20,890 + 11,571 − 1,458 + 1,295 + 12,766 − 4,742 − 525 + 31,649 − 361 + 11,284
2013          Jan + 10,906 + 14,545 − 520 − 4,058 + 5,837 − 5,419 + 50 − 9,365 + 493 − 20,321
         Feb + 12,326 + 16,191 − 1,633 − 3,732 + 6,623 − 6,756 + 92 + 16,620 − 321 + 4,202         Mar + 21,413 + 21,065 + 528 − 3,466 + 6,823 − 3,010 + 614 + 34,249 − 86 + 12,223
         Apr + 16,700 + 20,116 + 662 − 2,752 + 1,675 − 2,339 + 309 + 22,471 + 56 + 5,463
         May + 12,656 + 16,583 + 1,997 − 4,511 + 2,819 − 2,235 + 247 + 13,502 − 22 + 600         June + 17,007 + 18,858 + 182 − 4,395 + 5,411 − 2,867 + 291 + 31,213 + 38 + 13,915
         July + 12,100 + 16,107 − 1,081 − 6,783 + 6,027 − 3,250 + 141 + 10,409 − 654 − 1,832
         Aug + 7,785 + 12,624 − 1,786 − 7,130 + 5,851 − 3,560 + 121 + 30,077 + 425 + 22,172         Sep + 18,989 + 20,393 − 1,218 − 3,966 + 5,310 − 2,747 + 107 + 21,726 − 556 + 2,630
         Oct + 16,992 + 19,347 − 170 − 6,140 + 6,427 − 2,643 + 479 + 19,684 − 212 + 2,213
         Nov + 21,122 + 18,496 − 257 − 1,961 + 6,831 − 2,244 + 176 + 22,382 + 407 + 1,085         Dec + 21,248 + 13,471 − 1,217 + 937 + 13,112 − 6,273 − 614 + 32,834 + 1,269 + 12,200
2014          Jan + 13,218 + 15,753 − 753 − 3,176 + 5,060 − 4,419 + 867 + 4,153 − 375 − 9,932
         Feb + 14,228 + 17,455 + 128 − 2,289 + 6,199 − 7,137 + 455 + 24,451 − 898 + 9,768         Mar + 21,756 + 19,692 + 1,960 − 1,673 + 6,961 − 3,224 + 345 + 38,143 + 708 + 16,043
         Apr + 16,950 + 18,571 − 121 − 2,034 + 3,789 − 3,375 + 145 + 30,524 + 151 + 13,429
         May + 11,966 + 17,923 − 1,519 − 2,647 − 2,010 − 1,301 + 41 + 17,190 − 631 + 5,183         June + 16,821 + 18,338 + 913 − 4,051 + 4,777 − 2,243 + 439 + 16,461 − 130 − 798
         July + 19,781 + 23,154 − 1,648 − 5,912 + 5,591 − 3,051 + 11 + 17,008 + 431 − 2,785
         Aug + 10,363 + 14,604 − 609 − 7,502 + 5,744 − 2,483 + 441 + 19,787 + 166 + 8,983         Sep + 23,623 + 23,870 − 30 − 4,803 + 7,012 − 2,456 + 386 + 42,734 − 265 + 18,725
         Oct + 22,434 + 23,571 − 1,445 − 5,572 + 6,830 − 2,394 − 108 + 17,312 + 203 − 5,014
         Nov + 18,921 + 18,338 − 490 − 2,556 + 6,756 − 3,616 + 143 + 24,442 + 30 + 5,379         Dec  
p + 25,285 + 18,494 − 1,866 + 500 + 11,659 − 5,368 − 695 + 29,913 − 1,955 + 5,322
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net acquisition/disposal of
transactions for the account of residents and the deduction of goods returned. non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from
Deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing; the difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3Including freight and current account and the capital account. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2015
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2014
Country / group of countries  2011  2012  2013 Jan / Nov Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,061,225 1,095,766 1,093,115 1,043,445 83,888 102,293 103,925 95,969 90,107
Imports 902,523 905,925 898,164 845,483 70,011 80,276 81,861 78,086 71,057Balance + 158,702 + 189,841 + 194,950 + 197,962 + 13,877 + 22,017 + 22,064 + 17,883 + 19,050
I Exports 752,295 751,071 748,156 712,560 56,346 68,602 69,974 65,792 ... European countries
Imports 622,870 629,305 633,706 602,037 47,654 56,383 57,862 56,106 ...
Balance + 129,425 + 121,766 + 114,451 + 110,523 + 8,691 + 12,219 + 12,112 + 9,686 ...
Exports 629,953 622,674 623,472 606,377 47,664 58,644 59,714 56,181 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 506,211 504,494 513,463 492,638 38,758 46,657 47,967 45,901 ...
Balance + 123,742 + 118,180 + 110,009 + 113,739 + 8,905 + 11,988 + 11,747 + 10,280 ...
Euro-area (18) Exports 421,845 407,666 403,592 383,066 29,262 36,640 37,652 35,193 ...
countries Imports 338,988 339,072 342,401 324,782 25,260 30,666 31,294 30,151 ...
Balance + 82,857 + 68,593 + 61,191 + 58,283 + 4,002 + 5,974 + 6,358 + 5,042 ...
of which
Austria Exports 57,671 56,591 56,276 52,124 4,226 5,103 5,216 4,717 ...
Imports 37,028 36,419 36,793 33,655 2,599 3,253 3,299 3,042 ...
Balance + 20,643 + 20,172 + 19,484 + 18,469 + 1,627 + 1,850 + 1,917 + 1,675 ...
Belgium and Exports 53,161 49,424 47,980 43,948 3,625 4,205 4,274 3,912 ...
Luxembourg Imports 41,302 40,528 42,033 40,122 3,460 3,902 3,921 3,745 ...
Balance + 11,859 + 8,896 + 5,947 + 3,826 + 166 + 303 + 354 + 167 ...
France Exports 101,444 102,911 99,980 94,167 6,618 8,951 9,264 8,616 ...
Imports 65,948 64,035 64,018 62,507 4,377 5,925 5,904 5,842 ...
Balance + 35,496 + 38,875 + 35,962 + 31,660 + 2,241 + 3,026 + 3,360 + 2,774 ...
Italy Exports 62,044 55,529 53,247 50,664 3,310 5,063 4,939 4,618 ...
Imports 47,844 47,957 46,930 44,904 3,289 4,078 4,391 3,959 ...
Balance + 14,200 + 7,572 + 6,317 + 5,760 + 21 + 984 + 548 + 659 ...
Netherlands Exports 69,423 70,381 70,970 67,427 5,746 6,296 6,391 6,377 ...
Imports 81,804 85,738 88,680 81,217 6,824 7,569 7,571 7,606 ...
Balance − 12,382 − 15,357 − 17,709 − 13,790 − 1,078 − 1,273 − 1,180 − 1,229 ...
Spain Exports 34,811 31,047 31,349 32,105 2,272 3,033 3,294 3,021 ...
Imports 22,491 23,206 23,639 23,006 1,494 2,189 2,215 2,167 ...
Balance + 12,320 + 7,841 + 7,709 + 9,099 + 778 + 844 + 1,079 + 854 ...
Other EU member Exports 208,108 215,008 219,880 223,312 18,402 22,004 22,062 20,988 ...
states Imports 167,223 165,421 171,062 167,856 13,499 15,990 16,673 15,749 ...
Balance + 40,885 + 49,587 + 48,818 + 55,456 + 4,903 + 6,014 + 5,390 + 5,239 ...
of which
United Exports 65,570 73,283 75,488 77,438 6,213 7,621 7,359 7,295 ...
Kingdom Imports 44,741 42,820 42,513 38,989 3,338 3,553 3,649 3,579 ...
Balance + 20,829 + 30,462 + 32,975 + 38,449 + 2,875 + 4,068 + 3,710 + 3,716 ...
Exports 122,342 128,398 124,684 106,182 8,682 9,957 10,260 9,611 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,660 124,811 120,242 109,399 8,896 9,726 9,895 10,206 ... countries
Balance + 5,683 + 3,586 + 4,442 − 3,216 − 214 + 231 + 364 − 595 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 47,875 48,933 46,924 43,146 3,589 3,969 4,321 3,905 ...
Imports 36,996 37,775 38,321 37,646 2,879 3,346 3,587 3,577 ...
Balance + 10,879 + 11,158 + 8,603 + 5,500 + 710 + 623 + 734 + 328 ...
II Exports 308,193 340,980 341,213 330,126 27,296 33,562 33,674 29,977 ... Non-European
Imports 279,653 276,620 264,459 244,848 22,385 24,049 23,908 21,980 ... countries
Balance + 28,541 + 64,360 + 76,754 + 85,278 + 4,912 + 9,513 + 9,766 + 7,998 ...
Exports 20,717 21,920 21,803 20,755 1,667 2,090 2,089 1,852 ... 1 Africa
Imports 21,944 24,145 23,108 18,566 1,570 2,010 1,748 1,593 ...
Balance − 1,227 − 2,224 − 1,305 + 2,189 + 97 + 81 + 342 + 259 ...
Exports 110,424 128,703 130,427 124,758 10,275 12,905 12,574 11,495 ... 2 America
Imports 80,568 80,549 75,023 67,996 6,054 6,120 6,588 5,818 ...
Balance + 29,856 + 48,154 + 55,404 + 56,762 + 4,221 + 6,785 + 5,987 + 5,677 ...
of which
Exports 73,776 86,971 89,348 88,432 7,211 9,701 9,074 8,339 ... United States
Imports 48,531 51,070 48,582 44,842 4,129 3,963 4,279 3,774 ...
Balance + 25,244 + 35,901 + 40,766 + 43,590 + 3,082 + 5,738 + 4,795 + 4,565 ...
Exports 167,574 179,630 179,038 175,704 14,590 17,713 18,101 15,826 ... 3 Asia
Imports 173,115 167,873 162,960 155,540 14,480 15,661 15,364 14,260 ...
Balance − 5,541 + 11,757 + 16,077 + 20,164 + 110 + 2,052 + 2,738 + 1,566 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 28,711 32,503 32,754 32,476 2,465 3,439 3,614 2,839 ...
Imports 8,874 8,134 8,921 7,177 602 641 670 782 ...
Balance + 19,837 + 24,369 + 23,833 + 25,299 + 1,863 + 2,798 + 2,945 + 2,057 ...
Japan Exports 15,115 17,138 17,076 15,656 1,256 1,606 1,581 1,350 ...
Imports 23,595 21,910 19,492 17,624 1,465 1,698 1,729 1,451 ...
Balance − 8,480 − 4,772 − 2,416 − 1,968 − 209 − 92 − 148 − 102 ...
Exports 64,863 66,746 66,912 68,477 5,736 6,732 6,870 6,135 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,528 78,529 74,544 72,515 6,791 7,773 7,383 6,989 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 14,665 − 11,783 − 7,633 − 4,038 − 1,056 − 1,041 − 514 − 854 ...
Exports 41,569 45,651 45,894 44,531 3,847 4,444 4,605 4,056 ... Emerging markets
Imports 39,546 37,428 36,672 35,513 3,279 3,434 3,506 3,214 ... in South-East Asia 3 
Balance + 2,023 + 8,223 + 9,222 + 9,018 + 568 + 1,009 + 1,099 + 842 ...
Exports 9,479 10,727 9,946 8,909 765 855 909 804 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,026 4,054 3,368 2,746 281 259 209 309 ... polar regions
Balance + 5,453 + 6,672 + 6,578 + 6,163 + 484 + 596 + 700 + 495 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Latvia. 1Including fuel and other supplies Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment Manufacturing intellectual Compensation
Period Total services 1 Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 income of employees
2010 − 28,892 + 1,070 − 8,381 − 32,775 + 7,347 + 871 + 670 − 3,912 + 2,863 + 1,557 + 50,896
2011 − 33,661 + 567 − 8,615 − 33,755 + 6,833 + 2,407 + 817 − 6,871 + 2,939 + 1,787 + 66,3362012 − 36,849 + 178 − 10,201 − 33,566 + 6,806 + 2,753 + 1,356 − 10,017 + 3,117 + 2,594 + 71,1212013 − 47,957 + 84 − 12,241 − 37,764 + 5,794 + 3,379 − 929 − 6,711 + 3,084 + 354 + 71,1992014 − 41,715 + 23 − 13,520 − 38,111 + 6,120 + 4,151 + 2,525 − 3,406 + 2,926 + 114 + 67,412
2013          Q2 − 11,658 − 6 − 2,807 − 8,187 + 932 + 638 − 473 − 1,971 + 807 − 141 + 10,921
         Q3 − 17,879 − 38 − 2,608 − 16,868 + 2,094 + 794 + 256 − 1,351 + 760 − 474 + 18,583         Q4 − 7,164 + 160 − 3,618 − 7,022 + 1,848 + 1,297 + 1,059 − 1,252 + 722 + 351 + 22,083
2014          Q1 − 7,138 + 170 − 3,670 − 4,893 + 791 + 1,049 + 152 − 580 + 754 + 605 + 18,614
         Q2 − 8,732 + 64 − 3,223 − 8,519 + 1,447 + 947 + 560 − 374 + 779 − 179 + 7,583         Q3 − 18,217 − 41 − 3,273 − 17,408 + 2,236 + 860 + 222 − 978 + 718 − 520 + 19,863         Q4 − 7,628 − 170 − 3,353 − 7,291 + 1,646 + 1,294 + 1,591 − 1,474 + 674 + 208 + 21,352
2014          Feb − 2,289 + 40 − 1,185 − 1,181 + 94 + 426 − 139 − 382 + 241 + 202 + 6,301
         Mar − 1,673 + 112 − 1,180 − 2,229 + 486 + 347 + 413 + 312 + 254 + 204 + 7,115
         Apr − 2,034 + 4 − 1,178 − 1,760 + 522 + 397 − 49 − 192 + 288 − 56 + 4,101
         May − 2,647 + 21 − 1,029 − 2,407 + 612 + 451 − 82 − 519 + 239 − 46 − 1,708         June − 4,051 + 38 − 1,016 − 4,352 + 314 + 100 + 691 + 337 + 252 − 76 + 5,190
         July − 5,912 − 53 − 1,134 − 4,895 + 839 + 334 − 341 − 658 + 236 − 183 + 6,020
         Aug − 7,502 + 2 − 975 − 7,207 + 712 + 314 + 95 − 495 + 255 − 164 + 6,260         Sep − 4,803 + 11 − 1,164 − 5,306 + 685 + 213 + 469 + 175 + 227 − 174 + 7,584
         Oct − 5,572 − 42 − 1,266 − 4,614 + 409 + 348 + 183 − 646 + 255 + 72 + 7,169
         Nov − 2,556 − 21 − 1,083 − 1,918 + 536 + 376 + 184 − 560 + 234 + 34 + 7,134         Dec + 500 − 107 − 1,005 − 759 + 701 + 570 + 1,224 − 267 + 185 + 101 + 7,049
1Includes fees for processing goods that are not owned by the processor. 2Since side. 3Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not
2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2010 − 39,651 − 24,935 − 4,702 + 4,156 − 14,717 − 3,035 − 3,035 + 1,219 + 2,304 − 1,085
2011 − 34,815 − 21,264 − 4,436 + 6,715 − 13,551 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,690 + 1,137 + 5532012 − 38,692 − 24,792 − 4,570 + 5,270 − 13,900 − 3,080 − 3,080 + 1,298 + 1,366 − 682013 − 43,343 − 28,978 − 4,332 + 6,825 − 14,365 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 2,013 + 2,339 − 3272014 − 41,068 − 28,314 − 5,044 + 8,038 − 12,754 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,470 + 2,301 + 169
2013          Q2 − 7,441 − 3,937 − 871 + 3,588 − 3,504 − 807 − 807 + 847 + 661 + 185
         Q3 − 9,557 − 6,211 − 825 + 1,164 − 3,347 − 820 − 807 + 369 + 666 − 298         Q4 − 11,160 − 6,965 − 1,006 + 1,035 − 4,196 − 815 − 807 + 41 + 466 − 426
2014          Q1 − 14,780 − 11,917 − 1,577 + 1,308 − 2,863 − 870 − 863 + 1,667 + 367 + 1,300
         Q2 − 6,919 − 2,853 − 732 + 5,014 − 4,066 − 869 − 863 + 624 + 889 − 265         Q3 − 7,990 − 4,671 − 1,063 + 943 − 3,319 − 870 − 863 + 839 + 765 + 74         Q4 − 11,379 − 8,873 − 1,672 + 772 − 2,506 − 866 − 863 − 660 + 280 − 940
2014          Feb − 7,137 − 6,254 − 335 + 305 − 883 − 290 − 288 + 455 + 185 + 270
         Mar − 3,224 − 2,221 − 130 + 413 − 1,004 − 290 − 288 + 345 + 156 + 189
         Apr − 3,375 − 1,757 − 242 + 936 − 1,619 − 289 − 288 + 145 + 125 + 19
         May − 1,301 − 75 − 318 + 2,665 − 1,226 − 290 − 288 + 41 + 451 − 410         June − 2,243 − 1,021 − 171 + 1,414 − 1,222 − 289 − 288 + 439 + 313 + 126
         July − 3,051 − 2,045 − 489 + 237 − 1,006 − 289 − 288 + 11 + 251 − 240
         Aug − 2,483 − 1,617 − 323 + 259 − 865 − 291 − 288 + 441 + 263 + 178         Sep − 2,456 − 1,009 − 251 + 447 − 1,447 − 290 − 288 + 386 + 250 + 136
         Oct − 2,394 − 1,721 − 377 + 142 − 674 − 289 − 288 − 108 + 128 − 236
         Nov − 3,616 − 2,861 − 489 + 14 − 756 − 289 − 288 + 143 + 397 − 254         Dec − 5,368 − 4,291 − 806 + 616 − 1,076 − 288 − 288 − 695 − 245 − 450
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2014
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 388,492 + 38,789 + 287,943 + 92,513 + 109,572 + 75,313 + 10,546 + 12,945 + 75,923 − 78,322
1 Direct investment + 89,900 + 61,568 + 87,708 + 27,095 + 23,151 + 19,312 + 18,150 − 2,073 + 7,516 + 12,707
Equity + 68,215 + 43,065 + 69,640 + 19,992 + 18,711 + 12,139 + 18,798 + 2,613 + 9,047 + 7,137
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 31,692 + 30,054 + 30,299 + 11,349 + 8,452 + 8,091 + 2,407 + 3,687 + 4,400 − 5,680
Debt instruments + 21,685 + 18,504 + 18,067 + 7,103 + 4,439 + 7,172 − 648 − 4,686 − 1,531 + 5,570
2 Portfolio investment + 109,814 + 140,956 + 144,858 + 40,511 + 41,344 + 27,192 + 35,811 + 8,416 + 22,517 + 4,879
Shares 2 + 11,736 + 19,206 + 11,537 + 3,443 + 4,944 − 118 + 3,268 − 1,728 − 27 + 5,023
Investment fund shares 3 + 21,696 + 31,321 + 37,417 + 9,686 + 8,649 + 12,806 + 6,276 + 2,353 + 4,657 − 734
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 76,487 + 86,676 + 95,152 + 22,487 + 27,554 + 16,158 + 28,954 + 7,653 + 16,913 + 4,387
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 105 + 3,754 + 751 + 4,895 + 196 − 1,654 − 2,687 + 137 + 974 − 3,797
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 25,619 + 18,146 + 27,562 + 5,030 + 9,024 + 6,785 + 6,723 + 2,246 + 4,418 + 60
4. Other investment 7 + 161,862 − 182,718 + 30,380 + 20,441 + 36,664 + 21,693 − 48,417 + 4,153 + 41,442 − 94,012
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 66,082 − 56,647 + 76,255 + 31,733 + 45,182 + 1,767 − 2,427 + 18,364 + 33,307 − 54,099
Long-term − 47,913 − 50,495 + 21,158 + 3,254 − 4,487 + 9,831 + 12,560 + 1,884 − 279 + 10,954
Short-term − 18,169 − 6,152 + 55,097 + 28,479 + 49,669 − 8,064 − 14,987 + 16,480 + 33,586 − 65,053
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 14,332 + 11,209 − 9,064 + 27,273 − 1,970 − 2,704 − 31,663 − 5,461 + 4,468 − 30,670
Long-term + 401 + 943 + 639 − 685 − 1,108 + 742 + 1,690 + 119 + 0 + 1,570
Short-term − 14,734 + 10,266 − 9,703 + 27,958 − 863 − 3,446 − 33,353 − 5,580 + 4,468 − 32,241
General government + 49,597 + 8,238 + 13,069 + 2,086 + 1,709 + 4,527 + 4,747 + 2,462 + 4,508 − 2,223
Long-term + 49,608 + 15,919 − 3,329 − 4,424 + 3,279 − 849 − 1,335 − 488 − 144 − 703
Short-term − 10 − 7,681 + 16,398 + 6,510 − 1,570 + 5,376 + 6,082 + 2,950 + 4,652 − 1,520
Bundesbank + 192,679 − 145,519 − 49,880 − 40,651 − 8,258 + 18,103 − 19,074 − 11,212 − 841 − 7,021
5. Reserve assets + 1,297 + 838 − 2,564 − 565 − 610 + 332 − 1,722 + 203 + 30 − 1,955
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 175,062 − 207,014 + 5,826 + 25,766 + 45,397 − 4,216 − 61,121 − 4,367 + 51,481 − 108,235
1 Direct investment + 39,053 + 38,637 − 7,007 + 1,750 + 7,358 − 6,339 − 9,776 − 1,069 + 2,336 − 11,043
Equity + 11,109 + 5,918 + 12,718 + 3,222 + 513 + 4,131 + 4,851 + 1,919 − 304 + 3,235
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 6,039 + 3,580 + 8,435 + 3,601 + 712 + 2,926 + 1,196 + 1,217 − 744 + 723
Debt instruments + 27,944 + 32,719 − 19,725 − 1,472 + 6,844 − 10,469 − 14,627 − 2,989 + 2,639 − 14,278
2 Portfolio investment + 45,076 − 24,113 + 22,768 + 9,344 + 18,647 + 3,987 − 9,211 − 217 + 11,073 − 20,066
Shares 2) + 1,094 + 5,328 + 11,952 − 5,315 + 7,668 + 5,487 + 4,112 + 2,340 + 2,090 − 318
Investment fund shares 3 − 3,799 + 6,001 − 6,020 − 80 + 655 − 3,172 − 3,423 − 1,729 − 795 − 898
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 52,220 − 12,402 + 18,632 + 7,914 + 10,969 − 6,955 + 6,703 + 1,288 + 18,684 − 13,269
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 4,438 − 23,040 − 1,797 + 6,825 − 645 + 8,627 − 16,604 − 2,115 − 8,907 − 5,581
3. Other investment 7 + 90,934 − 221,538 − 9,935 + 14,672 + 19,392 − 1,865 − 42,134 − 3,081 + 38,072 − 77,126
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 51,508 − 158,453 + 31,387 + 32,528 + 3,347 + 29,131 − 33,619 − 1,353 + 29,295 − 61,562
Long-term − 10,250 − 16,955 − 15,563 − 3,213 − 5,172 − 6,503 − 675 − 844 + 826 − 656
Short-term + 61,758 − 141,498 + 46,951 + 35,741 + 8,519 + 35,635 − 32,944 − 508 + 28,470 − 60,905
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 10,264 − 11,743 + 2,115 + 8,861 + 2,019 − 1,976 − 6,789 − 4,554 + 4,782 − 7,017
Long-term + 1,711 − 16,916 − 6,139 − 3,288 − 269 − 1,656 − 926 − 576 + 802 − 1,152
Short-term + 8,553 + 5,173 + 8,254 + 12,149 + 2,288 − 320 − 5,863 − 3,978 + 3,981 − 5,865
General government − 30,775 − 2,066 − 6,367 − 3,952 + 5,207 − 3,694 − 3,928 − 4,626 + 1,622 − 924
Long-term + 36,230 + 9,474 − 1,623 − 1,793 + 1,429 − 367 − 892 + 64 − 908 − 48
Short-term − 67,005 − 11,540 − 4,743 − 2,159 + 3,777 − 3,326 − 3,036 − 4,690 + 2,530 − 876
Bundesbank + 59,936 − 49,275 − 37,070 − 22,766 + 8,820 − 25,327 + 2,202 + 7,452 + 2,373 − 7,623
III Net financial account
(Net lending:+ / net borrowing: -) + 213,430 + 245,803 + 282,117 + 66,747 + 64,175 + 79,529 + 71,667 + 17,312 + 24,442 + 29,913
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national
claims on Net
Monetary Other residents external
Fund and claims on Claims in other position
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area (col 1 Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member less vis-à-vis non-
or month Total Total rights reserves (net) 2 states col 9) receivables residents 1,3 residents 3,4 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 6,548 29,292 312 20,796 667 7,935 85,175
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 4,549 33,708 350 42,830 906 6,285 123,983
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 3,011 28,640 350 18,344 931 4,819 99,570
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 2,418 27,694 350 84,064 2,534 16,005 163,488
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 3,285 27,705 350 128,668 2,573 30,169 200,607
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 15,969 25,634 350 189,936 7,460 9,126 314,160
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 18,740 27,957 50 337,869 24,676 14,620 510,075
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 22,296 29,433 50 475,942 54,067 46,557 668,106
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 20,624 30,646 50 473,224 46,785 20,311 658,492
2012          May 964,557 193,057 138,000 23,400 31,658 50 711,198 60,252 53,949 910,608
         June 992,341 190,248 136,094 23,320 30,834 50 741,198 60,845 84,880 907,461
         July 1,000,019 199,419 144,217 23,769 31,434 50 739,837 60,713 101,674 898,345
         Aug 1,023,617 197,776 143,507 23,520 30,749 50 764,080 61,711 101,494 922,123
         Sep 974,478 203,337 150,373 23,295 29,669 50 708,090 63,002 95,757 878,721
         Oct 991,439 196,910 144,172 23,154 29,585 50 731,983 62,496 123,787 867,652
         Nov 988,534 197,486 145,110 22,771 29,606 50 727,755 63,242 112,190 876,344
         Dec 921,002 188,630 137,513 22,344 28,774 50 668,617 63,706 106,496 814,506
2013          Jan 878,587 184,947 134,745 21,953 28,249 50 629,884 63,707 103,899 774,688
         Feb 871,508 183,222 132,131 22,011 29,079 50 625,519 62,717 96,300 775,208
         Mar 852,611 188,447 136,454 22,403 29,590 50 601,669 62,446 80,341 772,271
         Apr 857,433 173,980 122,844 22,096 29,040 50 620,813 62,590 94,482 762,951
         May 832,746 169,105 118,228 21,984 28,893 50 602,136 61,456 82,781 749,965
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 21,926 28,618 50 588,423 59,590 69,145 729,743
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 21,650 27,623 50 589,372 59,133 71,106 736,059
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 21,434 28,330 50 586,531 57,591 69,088 739,560
         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 21,296 27,337 50 583,271 56,874 65,950 730,697
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 20,922 27,086 50 574,400 56,514 85,712 699,737
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 20,907 27,473 50 557,391 56,280 70,398 691,332
         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 20,798 28,080 50 523,103 54,834 57,214 664,527
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 21,110 28,388 50 512,734 54,154 53,965 662,902
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 20,589 27,165 50 511,610 54,225 43,789 674,528
         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 20,586 27,850 50 482,453 54,440 34,434 653,123
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 20,950 27,534 50 490,066 52,792 53,041 639,916
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 21,125 27,550 50 479,240 52,649 52,748 628,140
         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 20,795 27,622 50 474,195 50,875 43,267 634,869
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 21,162 28,406 50 455,926 49,660 17,254 643,267
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 21,133 29,199 50 476,681 48,182 15,697 665,626
         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 21,864 29,873 50 492,298 48,088 18,051 678,751
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 21,753 30,450 50 481,086 46,521 25,515 656,275
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 21,564 30,615 50 480,244 47,251 27,894 655,075
         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 20,624 30,646 50 473,224 46,785 20,311 658,492
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 21,383 33,751 50 527,644 46,628 73,154 677,908
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to From November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously shown
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis-à-vis national central banksrevaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed outside the Eurosystem. 3See footnote 2. 4Excluding allocations of special drawing
on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month rights (SDR) by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for an amount of SDR 12,059levels are valued at market prices. 1Including loans to the World Bank. 2Including million. 5 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
the balances in the Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2011 698,599 242,387 456,212 285,123 171,089 155,392 15,697 871,795 172,099 699,696 538,839 160,857 95,131 65,726
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,892
2013 779,109 280,526 498,583 319,761 178,822 163,734 15,088 920,620 142,676 777,944 616,341 161,603 94,646 66,957
2014 811,820 276,435 535,385 350,163 185,222 170,423 14,799 919,688 148,582 771,106 607,051 164,055 97,641 66,413
2014          July 818,861 300,686 518,175 336,642 181,532 166,524 15,009 952,349 160,367 791,981 631,117 160,864 92,783 68,081
         Aug 828,510 305,745 522,765 344,240 178,525 163,514 15,012 950,640 154,672 795,968 637,730 158,238 89,413 68,825         Sep 842,488 308,897 533,590 347,362 186,229 171,498 14,730 944,880 153,485 791,396 625,641 165,755 97,919 67,836
         Oct 833,063 301,799 531,264 344,021 187,243 172,163 15,080 936,683 147,885 788,798 624,896 163,902 96,542 67,360
         Nov 835,661 306,643 529,018 339,568 189,450 174,558 14,892 943,386 148,893 794,492 628,957 165,536 98,315 67,221         Dec 811,820 276,435 535,385 350,163 185,222 170,423 14,799 919,688 148,582 771,106 607,051 164,055 97,641 66,413
Industrial countries 1
 
2011 615,925 240,265 375,660 258,453 117,207 104,915 12,292 785,925 169,535 616,390 502,139 114,251 80,491 33,760
2012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,181
2013 689,637 277,223 412,414 291,000 121,414 108,082 13,332 833,922 141,307 692,615 579,018 113,597 78,921 34,676
2014 712,638 271,563 441,076 316,105 124,971 111,871 13,100 832,702 147,408 685,294 569,489 115,805 80,626 35,178
2014          July 722,437 295,471 426,966 305,542 121,425 108,271 13,154 867,378 159,290 708,088 595,080 113,008 77,492 35,516         Aug 732,412 300,379 432,034 313,460 118,573 105,380 13,193 863,917 153,525 710,392 601,286 109,106 73,398 35,708         Sep 745,290 303,943 441,347 316,251 125,096 112,069 13,027 858,108 152,247 705,861 588,496 117,365 81,551 35,814
         Oct 733,979 296,958 437,021 311,458 125,563 112,246 13,317 850,605 146,719 703,887 587,725 116,162 80,665 35,497
         Nov 736,260 301,731 434,529 306,582 127,947 114,805 13,142 856,754 147,724 709,030 591,697 117,333 81,980 35,353         Dec 712,638 271,563 441,076 316,105 124,971 111,871 13,100 832,702 147,408 685,294 569,489 115,805 80,626 35,178
EU member states 1
 
2011 508,071 225,583 282,488 196,132 86,356 76,472 9,884 660,137 157,465 502,672 421,679 80,993 54,370 26,623
2012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,507
2013 582,038 262,788 319,249 232,788 86,461 75,934 10,527 699,765 127,084 572,681 493,383 79,298 52,975 26,323
2014 599,426 256,452 342,974 254,491 88,483 77,872 10,611 698,208 133,168 565,041 484,284 80,757 53,878 26,879
2014          July 613,721 280,714 333,007 245,578 87,429 76,841 10,588 732,339 147,505 584,834 504,758 80,076 52,995 27,081         Aug 623,784 285,495 338,289 253,099 85,190 74,576 10,614 726,703 141,309 585,394 508,943 76,451 49,129 27,322         Sep 630,811 288,791 342,019 252,516 89,504 79,038 10,466 717,585 139,121 578,464 495,724 82,741 55,423 27,317
         Oct 621,010 280,968 340,042 250,053 89,989 79,233 10,756 713,440 136,711 576,730 494,821 81,909 54,787 27,123
         Nov 622,332 286,158 336,174 243,882 92,292 81,755 10,537 722,564 137,831 584,733 501,297 83,436 56,257 27,179         Dec 599,426 256,452 342,974 254,491 88,483 77,872 10,611 698,208 133,168 565,041 484,284 80,757 53,878 26,879
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2011 372,493 171,907 200,586 142,530 58,056 52,125 5,931 529,244 103,827 425,417 370,898 54,519 37,188 17,331
2012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,196
2013 422,440 196,101 226,339 170,696 55,643 49,469 6,175 593,680 100,922 492,758 439,537 53,221 36,389 16,832
2014 443,742 201,468 242,274 185,922 56,353 50,132 6,220 589,111 105,694 483,417 430,945 52,472 35,555 16,918
2014          July 446,399 214,274 232,126 176,773 55,353 49,232 6,121 628,882 120,454 508,428 454,776 53,651 36,167 17,484         Aug 453,341 218,279 235,062 181,413 53,649 47,478 6,171 620,618 112,386 508,232 457,309 50,923 33,387 17,536         Sep 458,430 219,970 238,459 182,603 55,856 49,562 6,294 609,169 108,838 500,331 445,969 54,363 36,921 17,441
         Oct 451,050 213,120 237,930 181,249 56,681 50,383 6,298 603,879 106,135 497,745 443,418 54,326 37,041 17,285
         Nov 456,701 220,732 235,969 177,609 58,359 52,231 6,128 613,245 109,135 504,110 448,973 55,137 37,810 17,327         Dec 443,742 201,468 242,274 185,922 56,353 50,132 6,220 589,111 105,694 483,417 430,945 52,472 35,555 16,918
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2011 82,674 2,122 80,552 26,670 53,882 50,477 3,405 85,870 2,564 83,306 36,700 46,606 14,640 31,966
2012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,683
2013 89,466 3,303 86,163 28,759 57,403 55,647 1,756 86,694 1,368 85,325 37,323 48,002 15,723 32,280
2014 99,178 4,872 94,306 34,055 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,984 1,174 85,810 37,562 48,248 17,014 31,234
2014          July 96,421 5,215 91,206 31,099 60,107 58,253 1,854 84,970 1,078 83,892 36,037 47,855 15,290 32,565         Aug 96,095 5,366 90,729 30,778 59,951 58,133 1,818 86,722 1,147 85,575 36,444 49,131 16,014 33,117         Sep 97,198 4,955 92,243 31,111 61,132 59,429 1,703 86,771 1,237 85,533 37,144 48,389 16,367 32,022
         Oct 99,079 4,840 94,238 32,562 61,676 59,914 1,763 86,075 1,166 84,909 37,171 47,737 15,875 31,862
         Nov 99,396 4,912 94,484 32,985 61,499 59,749 1,750 86,629 1,169 85,460 37,260 48,200 16,333 31,868         Dec 99,178 4,872 94,306 34,055 60,251 58,552 1,699 86,984 1,174 85,810 37,562 48,248 17,014 31,234
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are figures are due to substantial revisions. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia. 3All countries
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- that are not regarded as industrial countries. Up to December 2010 including
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Netherlands Antilles; from January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba andextended survey and a new calculation method. Deviations from previously reported Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2014          Jan 1.5377 1.4884 8.2368 7.4614 141.47 8.3927 8.8339 1.2317 0.82674 1.3610
         Feb 1.5222 1.5094 8.3062 7.4622 139.35 8.3562 8.8721 1.2212 0.82510 1.3659         Mar 1.5217 1.5352 8.5332 7.4638 141.48 8.2906 8.8666 1.2177 0.83170 1.3823
         Apr 1.4831 1.5181 8.5984 7.4656 141.62 8.2506 9.0329 1.2189 0.82520 1.3813
         May 1.4755 1.4951 8.5658 7.4641 139.74 8.1513 9.0298 1.2204 0.81535 1.3732         June 1.4517 1.4728 8.4698 7.4588 138.72 8.2149 9.0914 1.2181 0.80409 1.3592
         July 1.4420 1.4524 8.3940 7.4564 137.72 8.3880 9.2327 1.2150 0.79310 1.3539
         Aug 1.4306 1.4548 8.1965 7.4551 137.11 8.2522 9.1878 1.2118 0.79730 1.3316         Sep 1.4246 1.4196 7.9207 7.4449 138.39 8.1798 9.1929 1.2076 0.79113 1.2901
         Oct 1.4436 1.4214 7.7635 7.4448 136.85 8.3136 9.1797 1.2078 0.78861 1.2673
         Nov 1.4432 1.4136 7.6411 7.4415 145.03 8.4912 9.2384 1.2027 0.79054 1.2472         Dec 1.4928 1.4216 7.6330 7.4402 147.06 8.9802 9.4043 1.2026 0.78830 1.2331
2015          Jan 1.4390 1.4039 7.2269 7.4406 137.47 8.9320 9.4167
3 1.0940 0.76680 1.1621
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange indicative rates. 2Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 3Discontinuation
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference of the minimum exchange rate on 15 January 2015. 
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
February 2015
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices  4 product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.4 95.7 97.5 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.6 85.9 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.6 97.2 84.9 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.7 87.2 86.6 84.2 90.5 87.1 91.3 96.1 85.7 90.0 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.3 89.5 87.5 95.0 90.7 92.0 95.2 88.2 90.6 93.6 92.0 91.8
2003 100.7 101.5 100.5 98.7 106.9 101.6 95.4 94.3 97.4 94.8 97.1 96.6 96.8
2004 104.5 105.2 103.3 102.1 111.5 105.3 95.7 93.1 99.7 95.0 98.5 98.0 98.4
2005 102.9 103.7 101.2 100.2 109.5 102.8 94.5 91.7 98.8 92.9 98.5 96.9 96.7
2006 102.8 103.7 100.6 99.3 109.4 102.1 93.3 90.1 98.3 91.1 98.7 96.5 95.9
2007 106.3 106.4 102.6 101.1 112.9 104.1 94.2 89.3 102.2 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.1
2008 109.4 108.5 103.9 104.0 117.1 106.1 94.4 87.9 105.4 90.5 102.3 97.8 97.2
2009 110.7 109.1 104.9 106.9 119.9 107.0 94.5 88.6 104.5 90.9 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.6 96.7 99.4 111.6 98.3 92.0 88.2 97.9 87.5 98.9 93.9 92.4
2011 103.4 100.7 94.9 97.3 112.3 97.8 91.6 88.0 97.4 86.8 98.3 93.2 91.8
2012 97.9 95.6 89.6 92.0 107.2 93.0 89.8 87.9 92.4 84.4 96.1 90.4 88.9
2013 101.7 98.9 92.6 94.6 112.2 96.3 92.2 88.4 98.1 86.3 98.4 92.2 90.9
2014 102.3 p 98.6 ... ... 114.8 p 96.7 ... ... ... ... p 98.5 p 92.4 p 91.6
2011          Oct 103.0 100.2 112.8 98.0 97.9 92.9 91.8
         Nov 102.6 99.9 93.7 94.2 112.3 97.5 90.9 87.9 95.4 86.0 97.6 92.7 91.6
         Dec 100.9 98.2 110.4 95.9 96.9 91.8 90.6
2012          Jan 99.0 96.3 108.2 93.8 96.2 90.8 89.5
         Feb 99.7 97.3 91.1 94.2 108.5 94.3 90.1 87.8 93.5 84.9 96.9 91.4 89.8
         Mar 99.9 97.4 108.8 94.5 97.1 91.4 89.9
         Apr 99.5 97.2 108.6 94.3 96.8 91.2 89.7
         May 98.1 95.7 89.9 93.1 107.4 93.2 89.9 87.9 92.5 84.5 96.1 90.5 89.1
         June 97.3 94.9 106.7 92.6 95.7 90.1 88.8
         July 95.4 93.2 104.4 90.8 95.0 89.2 87.7
         Aug 95.3 93.1 87.7 90.4 104.5 90.7 89.1 87.9 90.5 83.5 95.1 89.2 87.7
         Sep 97.3 95.0 106.7 92.6 95.8 90.0 88.7
         Oct 97.8 95.5 107.4 93.0 95.9 90.1 88.7
         Nov 97.3 94.9 89.8 90.3 106.8 92.4 90.2 88.0 93.1 84.5 95.9 90.0 88.5
         Dec 98.7 96.3 108.4 93.7 96.5 90.5 89.1
2013          Jan 100.4 98.0 110.0 95.0 97.5 91.6 90.0
         Feb 101.7 99.0 92.3 95.4 111.3 95.8 91.5 88.1 96.6 85.8 98.2 92.1 90.6
         Mar 100.3 97.9 109.6 94.5 97.6 91.5 89.8
         Apr 100.5 97.9 109.9 94.5 98.0 91.8 90.0
         May 100.6 98.1 92.6 95.1 110.1 94.7 92.0 88.4 97.7 86.1 98.3 91.8 90.1
         June 101.6 99.0 112.1 96.3 98.4 92.3 91.0
         July 101.6 98.9 112.1 96.3 98.6 92.3 91.1
         Aug 102.3 99.5 93.0 96.0 113.5 97.4 92.2 88.4 98.4 86.2 98.7 92.6 91.6
         Sep 102.1 99.2 113.4 97.1 98.6 92.4 91.5
         Oct 102.9 99.8 114.3 97.5 98.8 92.6 91.6
         Nov 102.7 99.5 92.5 92.0 114.3 97.4 92.9 88.7 99.7 87.0 98.9 92.7 91.7
         Dec 103.9 100.7 115.9 98.7 99.3 93.3 92.4
2014          Jan 103.5 100.3 116.0 98.7 99.1 93.1 92.4
         Feb 103.6 100.4 95.1 p 97.8 116.4 98.9 93.4 89.0 100.4 87.6 99.1 93.2 92.6
         Mar 104.7 101.3 117.6 99.7 99.3 93.6 93.0
         Apr 104.6 101.0 117.1 99.0 99.2 93.6 92.7
         May 103.9 100.1 94.7 p 97.8 116.2 97.9 93.3 89.2 99.7 87.7 98.9 93.1 92.1
         June 103.1 99.3 115.2 97.0 98.6 92.8 91.7
         July 102.7 98.8 114.7 96.5 98.6 92.7 91.6
         Aug 102.0 98.2 p 92.2 p 95.4 114.1 96.0 p 92.4 89.0 p 97.6 p 86.4 98.4 92.4 91.3
         Sep 100.5 96.7 112.5 p 94.6 98.1 91.8 p 90.6
         Oct 99.6 p 95.8 112.0 p 93.9 p 97.5 p 91.1 p 90.2
         Nov 99.6 p 95.7 ... ... 112.3 p 94.0 ... ... ... ... p 97.7 p 91.0 p 90.2
         Dec 99.7 p 95.3 113.4 p 94.4 p 97.4 p 90.8 p 90.4
2015          Jan 95.9 p 91.6 109.3 p 90.9 p 95.7 p 89.0 p 88.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4By derogation from the standard,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November the real effective exchange rates of the euro based on consumer price indices2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and February 2012, pp  34-35). For more (columns 2 and 6) are computed for the EMU without Lithuania. The deflator HICPdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 (EMU 19) is not yet available. The Lithuanian litas is included in the basket of partner(www.ecb.int). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB country currencies. 5Euro-area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 includingexchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from 2015lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro-area countries and
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and wage countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro-area countries and countries
indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 
countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the Communication Division. For a small 
fee to cover costs, a file which is updated monthly and contains approximately 40,000 time series published by the Bundesbank can be obtained on CD-ROM from the Division Statis -
tical data processing, mathematical methods or downloaded from the Bundesbank-ExtraNet site. Orders should be sent, in writing, to one of the addresses listed on the reverse of the title page. Selected time series can also be downloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2014 see the index attached 
to the January 2015 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2014
– The shadow banking system in the euro 
area: overview and monetary policy implica -
tions
– German balance of payments in 2013
– Manufacturing enterprises in Germany and 
their vulnerability to crises – findings of a risk 
analysis using annual financial statement 
dataApril 2014
– On the reliability of international organisa -
tions’ estimates of the output gap
– Implications of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
operations during the financial crisis
– Some approaches to explaining the behav -
iour of inflation since the last financial and 
economic crisis
May 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2014 and 2015 
and an outlook for 2016
– Europe’s new recovery and resolution regime 
for credit institutions
– Changes in the methodology and classifica -
tions of the balance of payments and the 
international investment position
– Cash withdrawals at the point of sale: motives for use and implications for cash holding
July 2014
– Exchange rates and financial stressDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
83•

– Germany’s statutory health insurance scheme: 
past developments and future challenges
– Consolidated financial statement statistics as 
a contribution to the extended corporate 
analysis: approach and initial results
– Analyses of the importance of the insurance 
industry for financial stability
August 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2014
– Ownership structure in the German equity 
market: general trends and changes in the 
financial crisis
– The reform of financial relations in the Ger -
man federal system
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2013
October 2014
– Methodological changes in the financial 
 accounts – background, approach and se -
lected results
– The German economy in the international 
division of labour: a look at value added 
flows
– Launch of the banking union: the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism in Europe
November 2014
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2014
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2013
January 2015
– The role of trade in goods in the develop -
ment of global imbalances
– The Common Credit Assessment System for 
assessing the eligibility of enterprises
February 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2003 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20142, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2008 to 
2013, June 20142
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
2006 bis 2012 , December 20132, 3
 6 V erhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2010 bis 
2011, May 20142, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20141, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
40/ 2014  
Forecast-error-based estimation of forecast 
 uncertainty when the horizon is increased
41/ 2014  
Unconventional monetary policy in an open 
economy
42/ 2014  
Who trades on momentum?
43/ 2014  
Updating the option implied probability of 
 default methodology
44/ 2014  
A network view on interbank market freezes
45/ 2014  
Cross-border liquidity, relationships and monet -
ary policy: evidence from the Euro area inter-
bank crisis
46/ 2014  
Banking market structure and macroeconomic 
stability: are low-income countries special?
01/ 2015  
Employment, hours and optimal monetary 
 policy
02/ 2015  
The term structure of interest rates and the 
macroeconomy: learning about economic 
 dynamics from a FAVAR
03/ 2015  
Centrality-based capital allocations
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct and Statute of the Euro -
pean System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20083 2a Solvabilitäts- und Liquiditätsverordnung, 
February 20083
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2015  
86•

