Monthly Report
August 2016
Vol 68  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 12 August 2016.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The international spillover effects of an expansion of public investment in Germany  ..........  13
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  49
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  59
Excursus: longer- term pension  developments  .....................................................................  68Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
5

Overview
German economy exhibiting 
robust growth
The global economy probably expanded only 
modestly again in the second quarter of this 
year, as in the last three months of 2015 and 
first quarter of 2016. The pace of economic 
growth remained moderate, particularly in the 
advanced economies, with the dynamics shift -
ing somewhat between individual countries. 
Real gross domestic product (GDP) in the 
United States grew barely faster in the second 
quarter than in the preceding three months, 
not least as a result of changes in inventories. 
In the euro area, the remarkable vigour with 
which the economy had begun the year waned. 
On average, growth in the first two quarters 
was roughly in line with the moderate under -
lying rate which has for some time now set the 
pace and which still suffices to bring unemploy -
ment down gradually. Despite the increased 
uncertainty surrounding the Brexit referendum, 
the economic upturn in the United Kingdom 
proved robust in the second quarter. In the 
emerging market economies, activity appears 
to be stabilising further. In China, this was 
probably primarily due to the authorities’ 
efforts  to stimulate growth. Additionally, there 
was increasing evidence in the first half of the 
year to suggest that the recessions in Brazil and 
Russia are easing.
On 23 June 2016, the British public voted for 
the United Kingdom to leave the EU, an event 
which many market participants had previously 
identified as a significant downside risk for the 
global economy. According to first surveys 
among consumers and businesses, however, 
sentiment in the immediate aftermath of the 
referendum was noticeably depressed only in 
the United Kingdom. Yet weaker growth of the 
British economy alone does not pose a material 
risk to the global economy. In fact, the strength -
ening labour market in the United States – after 
intermittent worries that the country could slip into recession  – and the stabilisation of the 
emerging market economies suggest that the 
downside risks for the global economy have 
recently  eased somewhat, if anything.
Developments in the international financial 
markets in the second quarter were dominated 
by uncertainty surrounding the British referen -
dum on whether to remain in or leave the EU. 
Another important factor was monetary policy 
in the industrialised nations, which maintained 
an expansionary stance – not least because of 
the UK Leave vote and concerns about the 
downside risks for the global economy that it 
could entail. A lot of market participants were 
surprised by the vote and shifted funds into 
safe investments (safe- haven inflows). None -
theless, the turmoil that observers had feared 
such an outcome would cause on the inter -
national financial markets failed to materialise. 
Long- term government bond yields in the 
major currency areas continued to decline and 
temporarily reached historic lows. This was the 
case in Germany, Japan and the United King -
dom, for instance. Mirroring this, the stock 
markets initially also recorded sharp share price 
losses in response to the outcome of the 
referendum . However, as uncertainty eased, a 
counterswing fairly rapidly set in on the bond 
and, especially, the stock markets. Overall, the 
Euro Stoxx was trading slightly above its level at 
the end of March as this report went to press, 
and the US markets even marked new record 
highs. European bank shares significantly 
underperformed the market. They suffered 
from deteriorating earnings expectations and 
the fact that attention was increasingly focus -
ing on the large levels of non- performing loans, 
especially in Italy. Funding conditions for enter -
prises in the euro area improved considerably. 
The euro’s effect ive exchange rates against 
the  currencies of 19 major trading partners 
remained  virtually unchanged as compared to 
the end of March. While the single currency fell Global economy
Brexit not 
a material risk for global economy Financial market setting
UK referendum 
dominant factor on the financial marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
6

perceptibly against the yen, it appreciated 
strongly, especially against the pound sterling.
Having agreed on a comprehensive package of 
monetary easing measures in March, the Gov -
erning Council of the ECB adopted no new 
non- standard measures in the reporting quar -
ter and left its policy rates unchanged. At its 
monetary policy meeting in July, it discussed 
potential consequences of the UK referendum 
for the euro area and concluded that the base -
line scenario of an ongoing economic recovery 
and a gradual increase in inflation rates in the 
euro area remained intact. Given the uncer -
tainty resulting from the outcome of the refer -
endum, the ECB’s Governing Council did, how -
ever, announce that it would closely monitor 
the outlook for price stability and reassess the 
most likely path of inflation as well as the risks 
over the coming months based on newly avail -
able information.
The Eurosystem continued to make purchases 
under its expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP) in the reporting quarter as planned and in 
June started to implement the corporate sector 
purchase programme (CSPP), which was de -
cided on in March. Moreover, at the end of 
June, the last transaction in the first series of 
targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO I) was carried out as well as the first of a 
total of four new such transactions (TLTRO II). 
In line with market expectations, banks only 
partly utilised their total allowances under the 
first TLTRO II, using the credit in particular to 
replace  earlier longer- term refinancing oper -
ations, which were now no longer as attract -
ive. The second TLTRO II will be carried out in 
September of this year.
Developments in the monetary indicators per 
se continue to provide no indication of a grow -
ing need for monetary policy action. The broad 
M3 monetary aggregate rose considerably in 
the second quarter against the backdrop of his -
torically low interest rates and the continued 
moderate economic recovery in the euro area. 
One growth driver was a marked increase in loans to the private sector; lending to domestic 
non- financial corporations and households 
espe cially thus remained on an upward trajec -
tory. Nonetheless, the mainstay of monetary 
expansion was once again securities- based 
lending to general government by the MFI sec -
tor, fuelled largely by the Eurosystem’s govern -
ment bond purchases. However, the direct 
boost to the money stock from the securities 
purchases was partly offset by outflows of 
funds from the euro area as foreign investors 
offloaded euro- area bonds on balance and 
euro- area investors continued to purchase for -
eign debt securities.
In Germany, banks once again issued more 
loans to the domestic private sector during the 
quarter under review. In addition to lending to 
the private sector, banks also raised their hold -
ings of privately issued securities, which they 
had reduced considerably in the preceding 
quarters. Lively demand from households for 
loans for house purchase was once again the 
key factor driving the ongoing expansion in 
loans to the private sector. By contrast, mo -
mentum in lending to domestic non- financial 
corporations sagged somewhat in the quarter 
under review following three fairly strong quar -
ters. According to the banks participating in 
the Bank Lending Survey (BLS), this is probably 
mainly because companies have ample scope 
for internal financing.
German economic growth slowed as antici -
pated in the second quarter of 2016, following 
an exceptionally strong first quarter. According 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real GDP in the second quarter rose by 0.4% on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. Aggregate capacity utilisation is there -
fore still above average. The reduced economic 
momentum was mainly attributable to a clear 
drop in investment in both machinery and 
equipment and in construction, though private 
consumption growth was also weaker than at 
the beginning of the year.Monetary policy
Baseline scen-
ario of rising 
inflation also 
intact post- Brexit
Borrowing 
allowances in the first TLTRO II 
only partially utilised
Monetary devel-
opments in the euro areaCredit dynamics in Germany
German 
economy Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
7

Special factors notably depressed investment. 
The weaker demand for new machinery and 
equipment probably represents not least a nat -
ural rebound from the strong surge in invest -
ment at the beginning of the year. Another fac -
tor is likely to have been that industrial output 
has not yet picked up durably. By contrast, the 
fall- off in construction investment was largely 
weather-  related, after exceptionally mild tem -
peratures in the winter had allowed additional 
building output in the first quarter. Moreover, 
part of the additional building work carried out 
during the winter months was probably merely 
brought forward, meaning that this impulse 
was lacking in the second quarter. The slower 
pace of private consumption may also owe 
something to the turnaround from falling to 
rising oil prices, as this cancelled out previously 
realised gains in purchasing power. On the 
other hand, the very robust export momentum 
had a stabilising effect on overall economic 
activity  .
The labour market situation continued to be 
very favourable. Both employment and the 
number of vacant positions continued to rise. 
As in the preceding quarters, this was due 
mainly to the very buoyant trend in jobs subject 
to social security contributions. The underlying 
unemployment dynamics were also positive. 
However, the growing number of asylum appli -
cation decisions led to an increase in the num -
ber of refugees registering as unemployed. The 
fact that total registered unemployment none -
theless continued to decrease is attributable to 
the increased use of labour market policy in -
struments. The upbeat employment momen -
tum should persist in the coming months, since 
the most important leading indicators of em -
ployment have remained very stable in the last 
few months. Unemployment could also con -
tinue to drop slightly, since the active labour 
market policy measures will probably be further 
expanded in connection with the influx of refu -
gees.
The second quarter of 2016 saw negotiated 
rates of pay climb only modestly by +2.2% year on year, just as they had done in the first quar -
ter. This was due not only to the moderate pay 
rises in the current pay round, which in some 
cases come into effect only after a several-  
month freeze at the old pay rates, but also to 
negative baseline effects owing to one- off and 
special payments in the second quarter of 
2015, as well as to low graduated increases 
stemming from pay agreements negotiated in 
earlier pay rounds. So far this year, new wage 
agreements were concluded for just under 8 
million workers and salaried employees. On an 
annualised basis, the agreed volumes translate 
into a moderate wage increase of just under 
2½%.
Prices did not continue their downward trend 
in the second quarter of 2016; instead, higher 
crude oil prices resulted in steep increases 
across nearly all stages of the economy com -
pared to the first quarter. Excluding energy, 
however, the underlying inflation dynamics 
remained   muted, whereby the decline at the 
upstream stages tailed off noticeably. While the 
rate of price increases at the consumer level in -
tensified somewhat, even after stripping out 
energy, this was mainly attributable to excep -
tional factors. Thus the surge in the price of 
commercial goods excluding energy can largely 
be explained by fluctuations in the prices of 
clothing and footwear, which have become 
significantly more volatile in recent years. More -
over, an adjustment to the minimum tax rate 
resulted in higher tobacco prices. As the rate of 
inflation had likewise increased very sharply in 
the second quarter of 2015, the year- on- year 
increase as measured by the national consumer 
price index (CPI) dipped slightly to +0.1% and 
to 0.0% as defined by the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP).
The German economy should continue to grow 
in the third quarter in line with the robust 
underlying cyclical upthrust. Despite the low 
level of new orders received in the second 
quarter, the mood in German industry has im -
proved distinctly. Notwithstanding the intense 
public discussion about the economic implica -Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
8

tions of the UK’s announced departure from 
the EU, German firms have so far only slightly 
moderated their positive expectations. This 
supports the assessment that the economic 
consequences of the Brexit vote for Germany 
are likely to be very limited in scope, at least in 
the short term. German firms’ positive expect -
ations regarding foreign sales suggest that 
exports , too, will grow solidly in the third quar -
ter. Overall, production by industrial firms 
should once again make a stronger contribu -
tion to aggregate growth in the third quarter. 
Given that capacity utilisation is already above 
its average level, this should also mean more 
investment in machinery and equipment. Con -
struction investment should also provide a 
greater impetus in the third quarter after the 
effects of the weather- related second- quarter 
negative rebound in building activity have 
petered out. In addition, private consumption 
should once more be a significant driver of do -
mestic economic growth after faltering in the 
second quarter. Both employees’ income pro -
spects and the labour  market situation remain 
positive, and the preceding rise in crude oil 
prices has reversed .
The setting for German public finances remains 
favourable; as things currently stand, a surplus 
and a declining debt ratio are once again on 
the horizon for the coming year. Given the 
robust  economic and labour market situation, 
government budgets are profiting from further 
falling interest expenditure. However, the fiscal 
surplus is expected to be smaller than last year 
as it will be partly offset by additional structural 
outlays. First, expenditure on refugees and 
other immigrants will rise, particularly because 
in 2015 many immigrants only arrived in 
autumn , which meant that the bulk of the 
related  expenditure only affected a few 
months. Second, the budgetary stance is 
expan sionary in other fields, too. For example, 
spending is being increased in various areas, 
such as housing allowance, infrastructure and 
child day- care. In addition, the mid- year pen -
sion increases were particularly large.The outlook for German public finances remains  
favourable over the medium term. However, 
recent experience of unexpectedly high fiscal 
burdens in connection with the influx of immi -
grants underlines the importance of creating 
safety cushions below the deficit ceilings that 
provide room for manoeuvre within the fiscal 
framework to cope with unexpected develop -
ments. In view of the requirements set by the 
national debt brake, this suggests that policy -
makers should generally strive to generate 
moderate structural surpluses in the future as 
well.
On top of this, it is important to seek to achieve 
a focused improvement in the structural frame -
work, eg by exploiting efficiency reserves 
and  giving greater prominence to growth-  
enhancing expenditure categories. Any sus -
tained budgetary leeway available over and 
above the safety margins could be used in 
future  to lower taxes and social contributions, 
rather than choosing as in the recent past to 
use positive fiscal shocks primarily to boost 
spending. For example, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency could consider lowering the con -
tribution rate, thus dampening the additional 
increase in its reserves which is currently 
expected . Another option would be to reduce 
the solidarity surcharge. This add- on to various 
taxes imposed by the Federal Government gen -
erates extra revenue of ½% of GDP , whereas 
the special- purposes grants to the east German 
federal states, which were given as the reason 
for introducing the surcharge, are now low in 
comparison and will have been phased out by 
the end of the decade.
It would also be expedient in the medium term 
to build up greater safety margins in the Fed -
eral budget below the budget ceiling defined 
by the debt brake – not only to ensure greater 
operational flexibility to deal with unexpected 
developments but also, for example, to make 
provision for the demographic challenges that 
are gradually emerging. It would also be better 
to use the reserves set up to cover expenses 
relating to refugee immigration costs in order Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
9

to pay down public debt by the end of 2017 at 
the latest. By then it should be possible to rela -
tively accurately gauge future expenditures on 
refugees, and these should then be financed 
out of regular income streams. The current ac -
counting treatment of the reserve in the con -
text of the debt brake may lead to a conflict 
with EU rules, which state that changes in re -
serves – like finan cial transactions – should be 
disregarded when calculating the fiscal bal -
ance. The underlying rationale of the debt 
brake is to safeguard the EU fiscal rules, which 
is another reason why surpluses accumulated 
from previous years should not be used to plug 
funding gaps in the budget plans. In general, 
policymakers should resist the temptation to 
use windfall budgetary gains such as reserves 
to cover new, permanent additional spending 
in the short term since this causes a future 
cumulative  consolidation requirement.
The current favourable situation of the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme masks the fact 
that it will face substantial strains in future from 
demographic challenges. Official costing fore -
casts should extend beyond the year 2030 in 
order to identify long- term trends that will 
deter mine funding requirements. Public trust in 
the statutory pension insurance scheme could 
be strengthened and uncertainty about finan -
cial security in old age allayed if policymakers 
were to spell out the long- term rules for adjust -ing the pension scheme’s key parameters of 
retirement  age, pension level and contribution 
rate from today’s perspective. The official 
calcula tions currently fail to take adequate 
account   of the prolongation of the average 
working life induced by the progressive raising 
of the statutory retirement age to 67, with the 
result that the likely future pension- to- earnings 
ratio is increasingly understated along the time 
axis by current projections. In fact, policymakers 
would be well advised to revisit the issues of a 
longer working life and a higher statutory 
retire ment age. The incremental raising of the 
statutory retirement age to 67 by the year 2029 
will largely stabilise the balance between the 
respective average duration of the retirement 
phase and of the contribution phase up to that 
time, albeit at an historically high level. It would 
make sense to extend this stabilisation concept 
beyond 2029. From today’s vantage point, this 
implies a graduated increase in the retirement 
age to approximately 69 by the year 2060. 
Even on this basis the contribution rate would 
probably rise to around 24%, while the 
pension- to- earnings level provided by the 
statutory pension insurance scheme would fall 
to around 44%. However, supplementary sav -
ings under voluntary private pension plans 
could enable retirees to achieve a total pension 
income above the current level, even in the 
event of lower market rates of return on invest -
ment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
As in the fourth quarter of 2015 and the first 
quarter of 2016, the global economy probably 
expanded only modestly again in spring. The 
pace of economic growth remained moderate, 
particularly in the advanced economies, with 
the dynamics shifting somewhat between indi -
vidual countries. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the United States grew barely faster in 
the second quarter than in the preceding 
period, not least as a result of ongoing changes 
in inventories. At the same time, the remark -
able vigour with which the euro- area economy 
had begun the year waned. On an average of 
the first two quarters, growth in the euro area 
was roughly in line with the moderate under -
lying rate which has for some time now set the 
pace and which is enough to bring unemploy -
ment down gradually. As this report went to 
press, official GDP figures for Japan were not 
yet available. However, there are a number of 
indications that the relatively strong growth 
recorded  at the start of the year was not main -
tained in the second quarter. Despite the 
increased  uncertainty surrounding the Brexit 
referendum, the upturn in aggregate economic 
activity in the United Kingdom proved to be 
robust in the second quarter. In the emerging 
market economies, activity appears to be sta -
bilising further. In China, this was probably pri -
marily due to the authorities’ efforts to stimu -
late growth. Additionally, the feeling that the 
recessions in Brazil and Russia were easing 
became  more ingrained over the first half of 
the year.
On 23  June 2016, the people of the United 
Kingdom voted to leave the EU, an event which 
had previously often been seen as a significant 
downside risk for the global economy. How -
ever, fears that a decision in favour of a Brexit 
could result in severe disruptions in the inter -
national financial markets did not materialise. 
Following initial and, in some cases, substantial price volatility, the markets quickly stabilised 
again (see the section “Financial markets” on 
pages 39 to 48) with no impairment to their 
functioning.
According to the first surveys available, the sen -
timent among consumers and enterprises be -
came more gloomy in the immediate aftermath 
of the referendum. Essentially, though, this 
develop ment was restricted to the United King -
dom. The confidence indicators for the euro 
area, which has quite close foreign trade links 
with the British economy, barely changed in 
July. Even the survey results for the United 
Kingdom presented a mixed picture. Whilst the 
Purchasing Managers’ Indices fell sharply, sig -
nalling a contraction in economic activity in 
July, European Commission surveys showed 
that it was primarily consumers who lost confi -
dence. Price increases in the wake of the sub -
stantial depreciation of the pound sterling 
could indeed depress consumption activity in 
Great Britain in the months to come. Con -
versely, exporters are likely to profit from the 
exchange rate shift. According to data from the 
Bank of England, the majority of its business 
contacts reported no direct impairment of 
activity  or expenditure following the referen -
dum. However, in some cases, longer- term 
invest ment projects and recruitment plans are 
being reconsidered.1 The extent to which 
uncer tainty and lack of confidence will ultim -
ately be mirrored in production and employ -
ment in the United Kingdom is also likely to 
hinge on how long uncertainty persists about 
the speed and form of the Brexit process, and 
thus its medium to long- term economic conse -
quences. A key step has already been taken in 
the political arena with the swift formation of 
a  new UK government. At the beginning of 
August , the Bank of England further loosened Global 
economy’s  pace of growth remains subdued 
No disruptions 
in financial 
markets  
following  
Brexit voteDownbeat mood in the 
United Kingdom
1 See Bank of England, Agents’ summary of business con -
ditions, July 2016 Update, as well as the August 2016 
Update , available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/
publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
11

its already unusually expansionary monetary 
policy stance to counter dampening effects on 
aggregate demand.
Weaker growth of the British economy alone 
does not pose a significant risk to the global 
economy.2 In fact, the strengthening labour 
market in the United States – after intermittent 
worries that the country could slip into reces -
sion  – and the stabilisation of the emerging 
market economies suggest that the downside 
risks for the global economy have recently 
eased somewhat. Considering the monetary 
and fiscal policy measures already in place or 
devised, there is currently little to support 
stimulating global growth with new state 
spending programmes. Demands of this kind 
have not least been directed at Germany in the 
past. Economies’ relative sizes and degree of 
interconnectedness are important in terms of 
the international spillover effects of fiscal policy 
stimuli via the foreign trade channel. Model 
calculations for a temporary increase in public demand in Germany show that such spillover 
effects would be minor even in many euro- area 
partner countries (see the box on pages  13 
to 17). What is required is not a new economic 
flash in the pan with its restrictions in terms of 
space and time, but rather greater efforts on 
the part of industrial nations and emerging 
market economies to reform their economic 
structures and thus permanently improve the 
outlook for growth.
Prompted by the Brexit vote, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), in its July update of the 
World Economic Outlook, considerably lowered 
its growth projections for the British economy 
(by 0.2  percentage point to +1.7% for 2016 
and 0.9 percentage point to +1.3% for 2017). 
The annual average rates mask the fact, how -
ever, that the revisions in the quarterly profile 
are focused on 2016. The IMF was thus expect -
ing the referendum to have immediate marked 
slowing effects. This would have fallout for the 
euro area, too. Economic growth in 2017 here 
was projected to be only 1.4% (-0.2 percent -
age point).3 By contrast, the forecast revisions 
for other economies had little to do with the 
referendum in the United Kingdom. The down -
ward revision of the still very favourable growth 
projection for the United States this year, in 
particular, was to be expected.4 The IMF con -
sidered Brazil and Russia’s economic prospects 
of late to be considerably better than in April. 
Additionally, it slightly improved its growth pro -
jections for the Chinese economy in the year 
2016. Overall, the global growth projections 
for 2016 and 2017 were marked down only Downside risks 
for global growth reduced somewhatOnly slight downward revision  of IMF 
global growth projections following  Brexit decisionSelected confidence indicators according to European Commission surveys
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Standardisation through mean and standard deviation from 
October 1985 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 164321012
––––++Monthly, seasonally adjusted and standardised1
–3–2–10+1+2Industrial confidence
Consumer confidenceUnited Kingdom
Euro area
2 Calculated on the basis of market exchange rates, the 
United Kingdom’s share of global economic output last 
year was small at just under 4%. In 2015, it imported 
goods and services to the value of US$840 billion; these 
imports, as seen from the rest of the world’s point of view, 
are exports that corresponded to little more than 1% of 
own GDP .
3 Here, too, the revisions of the projected annual average 
rates – the forecast for 2016 was even revised up slightly – 
provide a distorting view of the effects taken into account. 
For instance, the fourth- quarter rate of euro- area real GDP , 
which measures the annual change in GDP on a fourth-  
quarter- to- fourth- quarter basis, was lowered by 0.2 per -
centage point for 2016, but unchanged for 2017.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European setting, 
Monthly Report, May 2016, p 12.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
12

The international spillover effects of an expansion of public 
investment in Germany
Given that global economic growth has 
been subdued by longer- term standards and that the euro area is perceived to be recovering at a slow pace, calls for fi  scal policy stimulus measures have persisted. 
These calls are primarily addressed at Ger-
many, as public fi  nances here are believed to still offer a relatively large degree of 
room for manoeuvre and the high current 
account surplus is held to indicate persist-ently weak domestic demand. This raises 
the question as to how signifi  cant the spill-over effects of fi  scal expansion in Germany 
would be for economic growth in its part-
ner countries in the euro area and the rest of the world.
According to data from the International 
Monetary Fund (World Economic Outlook, 
April 2016), Germany accounted for 4.6% 
of global economic output last year, calcu-
lated on the basis of market exchange rates.
1 This means that any expansionary 
measure of a plausible size that can be 
taken by the public sector in Germany must have a small impact on the global economy. However, within the euro area, the German 
share of value added (almost 30%) is far greater, meaning that the impact of fi  scal 
stimulus in Germany on the euro area could 
be perceptible. The overall impact should go beyond the direct, purely arithmetical, 
effect on euro- area gross domestic product (GDP), as higher demand in Germany would stimulate the economy in the neighbouring 
countries – particularly through the trade 
channel. This is often believed to hold out 
the promise of a substantial contribution to 
reviving the economies of the euro- area 
periphery countries, in particular.
The magnitude of these effects can be esti-
mated via simulations using the NiGEM 
global econometric model developed by the National Institute of Economic and Social  Research (NIESR).2 In line with other 
studies, a defi  cit- fi  nanced expansion of public investment in Germany by 1% of GDP over two years was assumed. This is  equivalent to a nearly 50% increase in public  investment expenditure.
3 Assuming 
no change in the nominal interest rates,4 
accord ing to NiGEM real GDP in Germany would then increase by 0.5% on average 
over the fi  rst two years compared with the 
baseline. This output effect is considerably 
smaller than the original fi  scal stimulus, pri-
marily because a substantial part of the additional government expenditure would ultimately be spent on foreign goods and 
services. Thus, German imports would rise 
by no less than 2%.
The additional German imports stimulate the economic output in the partner coun-tries in NiGEM. The degree of this impact 
depends on the extent to which the coun-
try has trade links with Germany and the importance of foreign trade for the econ-
1 This equates to less than one- fi  fth of the contribu-
tion of the United States. If the calculation is made 
using purchasing power parities, Germany’s share of 
the global economy amounts to only 3.4%, just over 
one- fi  fth of that of the United States.
2 In NiGEM, most of the OECD countries and the 
major emerging market economies are modelled sep-
arately and linked to each other via foreign trade as well as the interest- exchange rate nexus. The model 
has New Keynesian features and, in particular, antici-
patory elements on the fi  nancial and labour markets. 
For further information on the model structure, see 
https://nimodel.niesr.ac.uk3 The important questions of whether there are actu-
ally any meaningful projects on this scale and how such an additional investment volume can be imple-
mented in administrative and practical terms, ie given 
potential constraints to the supply of the additionally 
required goods and services (for example, in the con-struction sector), are not addressed here.4 In NiGEM the short- term interest rates follow a mon-etary policy rule that is primarily based on the infl  ation rate. It is thus possible to interpret the suppression of 
the monetary policy response to an expansionary 
shock as monetary easing. In this respect, in a model 
with endogenous monetary policy, it is diffi   cult to isol-ate the impact of the central bank response from the effects of the observed shock.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
13

omy in question. Important determinants in 
this context are proximity and country size. There are found to be sizeable positive stim-uli primarily in some small to medium- sized 
economies neighbouring Germany and in 
central Europe. In the large euro- area coun-
tries of France, Italy and Spain, the impact 
on real GDP would be small (+0.1% each). 
In Greece and Portugal the impact would only be slightly greater (+0.2%), as is also the case for the euro area as a whole ex-
cluding Germany. Signifi  cant non- euro- area 
countries are affected to an even lesser 
extent .
The impact on the current account balances 
would also be similar in scale. The German 
current account surplus in relation to GDP 
would fall by 0.7 percentage point on aver-
age over the fi  rst two years, whereas the 
balance for the rest of the euro area would rise by less than 0.1 percentage point.
5 This 
once again illustrates that German eco-nomic policy cannot redress other coun-tries’ external imbalances or relieve them of 
their adjustment burdens.6 This is because, 
despite a relatively high import content, in-
creased demand in Germany is directed to 
5 In addition to volume effects, the (countervailing) 
price effects should also be taken into account in this 
context. Owing to the expansion in domestic demand, the prices of German products rise compared with the baseline, resulting in a short to medium- term improve-ment in the terms of trade in Germany. Conversely, the 
relative foreign trade prices of the partner countries initially deteriorate slightly. Compared with the in-
crease in the level of demand in Germany, these price shifts are of minor signifi  cance when determining the output effects.
6 See T Bettendorf and M León- Ledesma (2016), Are 
lower German wages creating current account imbal-
ances in the euro area?, Deutsche Bundesbank, Re-search Brief, Issue 2; N Gadatsch, N Stähler and B Weigert, German labor market and fi  scal reforms 
1999 to 2008: can they be blamed for intra- euro area 
imbalances?, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper 
No 29/ 2015; Federal Ministry of Finance, Gesamtwirt-
schaftliche Auswirkungen fi  skalpolitischer Impulse, 
Monatsbericht, November 2013, pp 15-22; Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The macroeconomic impact of an in-crease in wages in NiGEM simulations, Monthly Re-
port, February 2013, pp 18-20; and Deutsche Bundes-bank, On the problems of macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area, Monthly Report, July 2010, pp 17-38.Importance of trade links for the spillover effects of increased public investmentin Germany
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook, IMF Direction of Trade Statistics and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Modelling of a two-year defi-
cit-financed increase in public investment in Germany by 1% of GDP given exogenous monetary policy. 2 Average of the first two years 
after the shock occurred.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 5 10 15 20 2500.10.20.30.4Deviation of real GDPin the respective countryfrom the baseline
 2
Germany’s bilateral imports as a percentage of the trading partner’s GDP in 2015BEResults of NiGEM simulations,1 %
FRGR
ITNL
AT
PTSI
ESSK
BG
CNCZHU
PLRO
RU
CH
GB
US
and euro-area countriesand non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
14

only a minor extent at goods and services 
provided by specifi  c partner countries.
The fi  scal stimulus in Germany spills over to 
the euro- area partner countries not only 
through the trade channel but also via the 
single monetary policy. Assuming no change 
in the nominal interest rates, the infl  ation 
rate in the second year of the simulation 
rises perceptibly in Germany and slightly in 
the euro area as a whole. Were the monet-
ary policy stance appropriate prior to the fi  scal stimulus, the new situation would 
actually  call for the key interest rates to be hiked (or for a less intensive use of uncon-ventional monetary policy measures). How-
ever, this would dampen not only infl  ation 
but also growth in economic activity in the euro area. The average increase in real GDP 
in the euro area compared with the base-
line in the fi  rst two years would then dwin-dle from just under 0.3% with fi  xed interest 
rates to just under 0.2% with a monetary 
policy response. Moreover, this dampening 
effect would predominantly be felt in the partner countries. While the increased de-
mand triggering the stimulus occurs mainly in the German economy, the nominal inter-
est rate would increase evenly throughout 
the euro area. In addition, according to NiGEM, the economies of the periphery 
countries respond to a greater extent to a 
change in the interest rates than the Ger-man economy, for example, does. This is why, given endogenous key interest rates, the fi  scal stimulus has hardly any impact 
anymore when it reaches these countries.7, 8
An increase in public investment expands 
the capital stock and can enhance potential 
output. Assuming that a suffi   cient number 
of meaningful projects can be identifi  ed 
and implemented, the level of real GDP in 
Germany would rise by 0.2% in the long term compared with the baseline. This is by  no means a “free lunch”. Once the additional  expenditure has run out after two years, the negative effects on public fi  nances  (and the current account balance) 
largely dissipate. However, according to the 
model, the government debt level would remain entrenched at an elevated level – assum ing fi  xed interest rates it would be 
1.7 percentage points higher in relation to 
GDP . Such a sizeable increase in public debt 
could be avoided by fi  nancing the invest-
ment programme through taxes. But, in the model framework selected here, the short- 
7 For information on the signifi  cance of the monetary 
policy response for the spillover effects of fi  scal policy, 
see also N Gadatsch, K Hauzenberger and N Stähler (2016), Fiscal policy during the crisis: A look on Ger-
many and the euro area with GEAR, Economic Model-ling, Vol 52, pp 997-1016.8 The increase in the key interest rate also causes the euro to appreciate and other currencies to depreciate. This loss in value tends to have an infl  ationary impact 
on the affected non- euro- area countries, meaning that, here too, monetary policy countermeasures are 
required to a certain extent, albeit on a smaller scale 
than in the euro area. In the United States, an increase in the short- term interest rates by a few basis points is 
already enough to compensate for the small stimulus 
of the increased demand from Germany. In the me-
dium term, real GDP there even remains slightly below the baseline owing to the interest rate cut.Short- term output effects of an expansion  of public investment in Germany
*
Average percentage deviations of real GDP from the 
baseline over the fi  rst two years
ItemInterest rates
Unchanged Rule- based
Euro area 0.26 0.18
of which
Germany 0.52 0.45
France 0.11 0.04
Italy 0.09 0.03
Spain 0.10 0.02
Netherlands 0.32 0.20
Belgium 0.25 0.14
Austria 0.21 0.13
Portugal 0.15 0.07
Greece 0.20 0.05
Slovakia 0.36 0.23
Poland 0.23 0.16
Czech Republic 0.30 0.22
Hungary 0.43 0.31
United Kingdom 0.10 0.05
United States 0.04 0.00
Japan 0.07 0.01
China 0.07 0.05
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM. * Simula-
tion of a defi  cit- fi  nanced expansion of public investment 
by 1% of GDP for two years. Nominal interest rates fi  xed 
globally or responding in line with standard monetary pol-icy rules.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
15

term demand effects, including the inter-
national spillover effects, would then be 
perceptibly dampened.
If public consumption, rather than invest-ment, were temporarily expanded, aggre-gate production capacities would not in-crease, but the economy at home and abroad would, according to NiGEM, be 
stimulated on a similar scale. In this context, 
it should be noted that in NiGEM the im-ports are modelled as a function of an 
economy’s aggregate demand. The various 
expenditure components impact identically 
on imports. However, in actual fact, there are quite considerable differences in the import  content of the demand compon-
ents. In the case of government consump-
tion, it is typically particularly small. In this 
respect, the NiGEM simulation of an expan-sion of public consumption underestimates 
the stimulating impact on the domestic economy, while the international spillover 
effects are overstated.This also tends to be the case for the pre-
sented scenarios of higher government in-
vestment, albeit not on the same scale.9 If 
the NiGEM equation for German imports is 
brought in line with the import content of 
the individual expenditure components, the 
expansion of public investment pushes up real GDP in Germany to a perceptibly 
greater extent than was previously the case, 
namely by 0.8% on average over the fi  rst two years. The impact on the economy in the euro- area partner countries is some-
what smaller, however. It even drops to vir-
tually zero if the rule- based interest rate 
response  is allowed to take place.
With regard to the international spillover effects , other studies reach conclusions 
similar to the simulations presented above. Accord ing to in ‘t Veld (2013), an expansion of public investment in Germany and other 
euro- area surplus countries by 1% of GDP 
over two years boosts economic activity in 
Germany by 0.9% initially and 0.2% in the 
long term. The short- term output effects in 
other euro- area countries are estimated at 
between 0.2% and 0.3%.10 Elekdag and 
Muir (2014) record a signifi  cantly higher impact  on capacity utilisation in Germany, 
as in their calculation a larger public capital stock increases the marginal productivity of 
9 The data on import content are based on input- 
output tables in which no distinction is made between 
private and public investment. However, if the data for investment in machinery and equipment and construc-tion are properly weighted, this suggests that the im-
port content in the case of public investment, which 
has a higher share of construction investment than 
commercial investment, is signifi  cantly greater than is 
the case for government consumption, but lower than the average aggregate demand.
10 See J in ‘t Veld (2013), Fiscal consolidations and 
spillovers in the euro area periphery and core, Euro-pean Commission, Directorate- General for Economic and Financial Affairs, European Economy, Economic 
papers No 506.Importance of the import contentfor the short-term output effectsof an expansion of public investmentin Germany
*
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM. * Simulation of 
a deficit-financed expansion of public investment in Germany 
by 1% of GDP for two years. Nominal interest rates fixed glob-
ally or responding in line with standard monetary policy rules. 1 Imports dependent on aggregate demand of a country, not 
on individual expenditure components of GDP. 2 Modification 
of the import equation in Germany in line with the import con-
tent of individual expenditure components. 3 Aggregated us-
ing nominal GDP weights.
Deutsche Bundesbank00.20.40.60.81.0Average percentage deviation of real GDPfrom the baseline over the first two years
00.2In Germany
In the other euro-area countries 3Standard
NiGEM 1Modified 2
Interest rate response No change in
interest ratesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
16

other factors of production.11 However, the 
(short- term) impact on real GDP in other 
euro- area countries also peaks at +0.3% in 
this model framework. Here, too, the eco-
nomic effects in the periphery countries are 
found to be smaller than in the other euro- area economies and, if there is a monetary 
policy response, they are dampened mark-
edly. A recent study by the European Cen-
tral Bank fi  nds that an increase in public invest ment in Germany has a sizeable im-pact on the real economy.
12 However, the 
expenditure programme examined in that study is far more extensive than the one assumed  in the model presented here.
13 
Furthermore, the assumptions regarding 
the aggregate impact on productivity of the public capital stock are likely to fi  gure prom-
inently in the results. Nonetheless, this in-vestigation also confi  rms that the spillover 
effects are negligible, based on a rule- based monetary policy response.
14
Simulation results always depend on the selected  model framework and assump-
tions. The trade channel modelled in NiGEM 
makes it clear that an expansionary fi  scal stimulus via higher public expenditure in 
Germany would certainly affect other econ-omies, but that the impact would be small, 
particularly in some southern European countries. In addition, there is the often 
overlooked amalgamation through a single monetary policy which dampens the expan-
sionary demand effects, not least in those 
countries that do not have such close for-
eign trade links with the German economy. 
A public expenditure programme in Ger-
many thus seems to be an ill- suited means 
of considerably boosting the international economy.
15 As things currently stand, the 
German economy does not need a short- 
term stimulus, which would instead have a 
procyclical impact. There are, to be sure, 
potentially good reasons for a government 
to increase its investment expenditure. Such 
projects would, however, need to be se-lected with great care. But their fi  nancing should not put compliance with the Euro-pean and German fi  scal rules at risk (see the section “Public fi  nances” on pages 59 
to 77).
11 See S Elekdag and D Muir (2014), Das Public Kapi-
tal: How Much Would Higher German Public Invest-
ment Help Germany and the Euro Area?, International 
Monetary Fund, Working Paper, WP/ 14/ 227. For infor-mation on the empirical link between productivity and 
public investment in infrastructure, see J G Fernald (1999), Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link Be-tween Public Capital and Productivity, American Eco-nomic Review, Vol  89, No  3, pp  619-638; and P R 
D Bom and J E Ligthart (2013), What have we learned from three decades of research on the productivity of 
public capital?, Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol 28, 
pp 889-916.
12 See ECB, Public investment in Europe, Economic 
Bulletin, No 2/ 2016, pp 75-88.
13 Specifi  cally, an expansion of public investment by 
1% of GDP for fi  ve years was assumed, which is subse-quently scaled back only gradually.14 Furthermore, the short- term increase in real GDP in 
Germany with endogenous monetary policy is sub-
stantially smaller than would be the case for the refer-ence scenario without a monetary policy response. The high multiplier effect is thus likely to be due not least 
to the importance of infl  ation expectations in the 
applied  model, which are fuelled by the suppression of the central bank response.
15 It should also be noted that a temporary expend-
iture programme only initially increases real GDP 
growth in Germany compared with the baseline and, 
once the programme expires, real GDP growth actually falls, even if the level of macroeconomic activity is per-manently higher due to a capacity effect.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
17

moderately. The IMF continued to predict a 
gradual acceleration in world output, from 
+3.1% in the current year to +3.4% in 2017.
The rebound in commodity prices lost momen -
tum in the reporting period. Against the back -
drop of temporary production losses in major 
oil- producing countries, the spot price of a bar -
rel of Brent crude climbed to more than US$50 
in late May/early June. It subsequently plum -
meted, however, and the structural oversupply, 
which is easing only gradually, became more 
perceptible again. Futures prices did not de -
cline to the same extent, causing forward pre -
miums to rise noticeably. As this report went to press, the spot price for a barrel of Brent was 
US$46. Commodity prices excluding energy 
trended slightly upwards overall until July, 
although  the main categories saw mixed devel -
opments.
After seasonal adjustment, consumer prices in 
industrialised countries increased noticeably in 
the second quarter compared with the winter 
months. The sharp quarter- on- quarter rise in 
crude oil prices was a contributing factor here. 
Energy prices remained considerably down on 
the year, though. Accordingly, the inflation rate 
for the entire basket of consumer goods (head -
line inflation) was depressed (+0.6%). Core 
infla tion, which excludes energy and food 
prices, remained well above this level at 1.5%.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, real GDP in 
China was up by 6.7% on the year in the 
second quarter of 2016. This means that the 
Chinese economy maintained the pace of 
growth achieved in the preceding quarter.5 
Consumption continued to be an important 
mainstay of economic activity, with a contribu -
tion to growth in arithmetical terms of almost 
5 percentage points in the first half of the year. 
By contrast, investment activity has been sub -
dued so far this year. Although there has been 
a noticeable expansion in construction invest -
ment as monetary policy easing measures have 
led to a further discernible recovery in the 
demand  for real estate, investment in machin -
ery and equipment has tended to be weak; this 
is also borne out by declining imports of capital 
goods. Nevertheless, total imports of goods 
increased  by 3% in terms of volume in the first 
half of the year, mainly as a result of additional Slowdown in 
commodity price reboundConsumer price inflation still depressed in industrialised 
countries
Pace of growth 
maintained in ChinaWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 5 August 2016, or 1 to 11 August 2016 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201630405060708090100110US dollar basis, 2011 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
405060708090100110
60708090100110Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
Food and beverages
5 Viewed over the period, economic activity has actually 
accelerated according to calculations by the National 
Bureau  of Statistics of China. These calculations show that 
seasonally adjusted economic output was up by 1.8% on 
the first quarter, in which it had picked up by only 1.2%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
18

commodity imports, particularly crude oil.6 
Exports  of goods increased by only 1%. Thus, 
Chinese industrial output remained largely 
depend ent on domestic stimuli. Consumer 
price inflation has tailed off somewhat in the 
past few months. The slowdown in inflation 
from 2.3% in March to 1.9% in June was 
caused primarily by subsiding food price infla -
tion.
India’s Central Statistical Office identified a 
year- on- year increase in economic output of 
7.9% for the first quarter of 2016, the most 
recent  covered by its GDP estimate, suggesting 
that the pace of growth has accelerated fur -
ther. However, it has long been suspected that 
the official figures for the country’s GDP growth 
are overstated. Survey- based measures of activ -
ity, for instance, indicate a more leisurely pace 
of aggregate economic growth. It is probably 
with this in mind that the central bank main -
tained its easier monetary policy stance in the 
spring, even though consumer price inflation 
increased from 5.3% in the first quarter to 
5.7% in the second quarter. The central bank is 
striving for an inflation rate of 5% by the end 
of the current fiscal year.
In Brazil, first- quarter real GDP growth was only 
0.3% down on the preceding period after sea -
sonal adjustment. Indicators suggest a similar-  
sized decline for the quarter just ended. The 
recession thus softened considerably in the first 
half of 2016. The country’s serious internal pol -
itical crisis has also eased a little recently. As a 
result, the mood among firms and households 
has improved somewhat. This gives reason to 
hope that the economic situation will stabilise 
in the second half of the year. Even a slight 
recovery  appears possible. The substantial 
appre ciation of the Brazilian real was one of 
the main reasons why consumer price inflation 
continued to slide in the past few months, 
albeit  to a still high level of 8.8% in June.
In the quarter just ended, Russia’s real GDP was 
down by 0.6% on the year according to an ini -
tial estimate by the Russian Federal State Statis -tics Service. This compares with a fall of 1.2% 
in the first quarter. The downward momentum 
in imports, which declined by no less than a 
quarter last year, has now also tailed off. All in 
all, there are increasing signs that the recession 
will end in the second half of the year. A strong 
recovery is unlikely, however, owing to the 
Russian  economy’s structural weaknesses.7 
Consumer price inflation has hovered around 
the 7% mark in the past few months and the 
rouble has tended to post gains. Not least for 
these reasons, the central bank cut its key inter -
est rate in June.
United States
According to the first official estimate, season -
ally and price- adjusted GDP in the United States 
rose by 0.3% in the second quarter compared 
with the preceding three months and thus at a 
similarly muted rate as on average over the 
fourth quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 
2016.8 Although  this overall result was disap -
pointing in relation to most forecasts, the 
growth rate of private domestic final demand 
rose again to 0.7%, which is equal to the aver -
age rate since the beginning of the upswing in 
the third quarter of 2009. The main factor 
slowing aggregate growth recently was that 
stockbuilding gave way to destocking after the 
build- up of inventories had already decelerated 
gradually in the preceding quarters. In addition, 
government demand was scaled back some -
what for the first time since the fourth quarter 
of 2014. The moderate expansion of private 
domestic final demand was, in turn, largely due 
to the steep rise in consumption, which masks Strong growth 
trend in India possibly overstated 
Recessionary 
tendencies in Brazil have 
easedEconomic 
contraction  in Russia weakened  
further 
Sharp rise in 
private  consumption , but weak investment 
6 The strong growth in crude oil imports of 14% in the first 
half of the year is likely to have resulted, among other 
things, from the Chinese government’s efforts to build up 
a strategic oil reserve. There are also indications that the 
state is stockpiling other commodities.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The economic crisis in Russia, 
Monthly Report, May 2016, pp 14-16.
8 The growth rates for the final quarter of 2015 and the 
first quarter of 2016 were adjusted slightly downwards in 
the annual revision process. By contrast, annual average 
real GDP in 2013 and 2015 expanded somewhat faster 
than previously reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
19

sluggish develop ments in most investment cat -
egories. The fall- off in industrial and commer -
cial construction investment is primarily due to 
adjustments in the oil industry, which may have 
been concluded by the middle of the year. By 
contrast, the reduction in spending on machin -
ery and equipment was more broadly based. 
Housing investment also decreased after a pro -
tracted period of steady growth. Overall, there 
is some indication that investment will rebound 
with the termination of the adjustments in the 
oil industry and stockbuilding. However, since 
the recent elevated consumption momentum 
will probably not be maintained, only slightly 
higher, and therefore generally moderate, GDP 
growth is likely in the second half of the year.
Employment rose more sharply in June and July 
following a weak May, while the unemploy -
ment rate recently remained close to its cyclical 
low. According to the consumer price index 
(CPI) excluding energy and food, the core infla -
tion rate increased to 2.3% in June. This all in -
dicates that the US economy is operating at a 
normal level of capacity utilisation. The head -
line CPI rate stood at just 1.0%, however. In the 
light of this, the US Federal Reserve once again 
refrained from raising its policy rates.
Japan
Despite significant fluctuations in the GDP 
quarterly rates, the underlying cyclical trend in 
Japan has remained flat. The decline in real 
GDP in the fourth quarter of 2015 was surpris -
ingly offset in the first three months of this 
year. This favourable GDP result may have 
owed something, however, to the omission of 
the leap- year effect in the seasonal adjustment. 
Aggregate output was nevertheless only slightly 
higher than in the third quarter of 2013. In the 
second quarter of 2016, for which there were 
still no GDP figures when this report went to 
press, the economy remained in a lacklustre 
state according to standard indicators. Thus 
indus trial production, which is often a close 
proxy for aggregate output, stagnated. On the demand side there were signs of a renewed 
slackening of private consumption. This is con -
sistent with the significant decrease in goods 
imports, although this was accompanied by a 
surge in exports. The labour market remained 
robust, and the unemployment rate in June fell 
to its lowest level in almost 21 years (3.1%). The 
inflation rate for the basket of consumer goods 
excluding energy and food slowed to 0.4% in 
June. The Japanese central bank responded to 
these developments at the end of July by fur -
ther easing its stance. The government had 
earlier announced the suspension of its planned 
VAT hike in 2017 and a substantial increase in 
government expenditure in a supplementary 
budget.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, according to a prelim -
inary estimate, real GDP increased by 0.6% in 
the second quarter compared with the first 
three months of this year after adjustment 
for  seasonal factors. The quarter- on- quarter 
growth of the UK economy thereby acceler -
ated somewhat, due mainly to a jump in manu -
facturing output. Real value added in the key 
services sector again expanded markedly, 
whereas construction output fell further. The 
ongoing robust upturn in the second quarter 
contradicts the assessment of some observers, 
who seemingly perceived signs of a dampening 
effect resulting from the increased uncertainty 
surrounding the Brexit referendum. They 
pointed to the reduction in business gross fixed 
capital formation during the final quarter of 
2015 and the first quarter of 2016.9 However, 
half of this reduction was attributable to min -
ing and quarrying, which includes oil producers 
whose investment restraint was doubtless due 
to the low crude oil prices. In line with the 
favour  able overall economic setting, the 
unemploy ment rate in the three- month period US economy at 
normal capacity
Economy 
flatlining Robust momentum  up 
to mid- year
9 Figures on the expenditure side were not available for the 
second quarter of 2016 as this report went to press be -
cause they are normally only published with the second 
GDP estimate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
20

from March to May dropped to a new cyclical 
low (4.9%). Even so, inflation as measured by 
the year- on- year change in the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), excluding 
energy  and unprocessed food, remained muted 
in June (+1.1%).
New EU member states
Economic growth in the new EU member states 
(EU-6)10 strengthened in the second quarter. In 
the four countries that have published initial 
results , seasonally adjusted real GDP increased 
quarter on quarter, in some cases considerably. 
The first- quarter lull had been due primarily to 
a marked drop in investment. A major factor in 
this was probably the fact that EU funds for 
finan  cing infrastructure projects within the 
scope of the 2007 to 2013 financial framework 
could only be drawn down until the end of 
2015. Private consumption, which continued to 
benefit from the improved employment and 
wage developments, once again seems to have 
provided a positive impetus between April and 
June. Households’ purchasing power was add -
itionally boosted by lower consumer prices. 
They fell by 0.8% on the year across all six 
countries in the second quarter. Even after 
stripping out energy and unprocessed food, 
the HICP increased by just 0.2%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, the moderate cyclical upswing 
continued in the second quarter. According to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the 
second quarter of 2016 was up after seasonal 
adjustment by 0.3% on the quarter and by 
1.6% on the year.11 While the macroeconomic 
growth rate consequently slowed down dis -
tinctly compared with the first quarter, excep -
tional factors had fuelled the remarkably strong 
growth seen at the start of the year. On the 
whole, the economic recovery in the first half of 2016 proved to be very robust, while 
unemploy ment continued to decline.
It is likely that domestic growth stimuli lost 
momentum  in the second quarter, however. 
Although  the sustained labour market recovery 
presumably further strengthened households’ 
purchasing power, private consumption prob -
ably did not increase as much as in the first 
quarter. Retail sales only increased a little after 
seasonal and price adjustment, and new car 
registrations actually fell slightly.
Investment in the euro area appears to have 
experienced a setback in the second quarter. 
Construction investment, which had been cur -Stronger 
recovery  in Q2
Ongoing moderate  
upturnWeaker 
domestic  momentum 
in Q2
Setback in 
investmentBusiness gross fixed capital formationin the United Kingdom
Source: Office for National Statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20163234363840424446£ billion, quarterly, seasonally adjusted
024Excluding mining and quarrying
Mining and quarryingTotal
10 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech 
Repub lic, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.
11 It should be noted that the calculation of the year- on- 
year change for the four preceding quarters was based on 
the data as at 7 June 2016. Hence the new GDP figures for 
Ireland, for example, are not included (see footnote 12 on 
p 23).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
21

tailed less in the first quarter of 2016 than in 
other years due to the unusually mild winter, is 
expected to have fallen considerably in the 
second quarter after adjustment for seasonal 
variations. This is suggested by the marked 
contraction of construction output in April and 
May compared with the previous three months. 
Investment in machinery and equipment, too, 
may have failed to match the first- quarter level. 
In any case, the domestic turnover of capital 
goods producers in the second quarter was 
somewhat lower than in the first quarter after 
adjustment for seasonal and price variations. 
Although sales to other euro- area countries 
went up noticeably, they are less important in terms of volume than domestic turnover. While 
corporate profitability has not recovered fur -
ther in recent quarters, the ongoing favourable 
funding environment, the above- average level 
of capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sec -
tor and not least fiscal investment incentives in 
individual member states nevertheless suggest 
that the moderate underlying upturn in invest -
ment will continue.
Despite the continuing muted global dynamics, 
external demand probably generated positive 
stimuli in the second quarter. Whereas Eurostat 
data indicate that exports of goods fell on aver -
age in the months of April and May compared 
with the first quarter after seasonal and price 
adjustment, data from major member states 
that include the June figures paint a brighter 
picture. According to reports from individual 
countries, the tourist season also appears to be 
going well. This should have given a strong 
boost to exports of services. However, signifi -
cantly fewer goods were imported. Trade with 
non- euro- area countries contracted much 
more than that within the euro area.
In the second quarter, industry failed to main -
tain its good performance in the first three 
months. Industrial production fell between 
April and June by 0.4% after seasonal adjust -
ment compared with the first- quarter level. This 
decline affected all components. Consequently, 
considerably fewer capital goods and inter -
mediate goods were produced. The production 
of consumer goods and energy output likewise 
registered no further increase.
Economic developments in the euro area were 
again somewhat heterogeneous across the 
member countries in the second quarter. In 
France, economic output stagnated after pick -
ing up sharply in the first quarter. This owed 
something to a strike wave in those three 
months. Growth stimuli only came from gov -
ernment consumption, due in part to increased 
spending on security ahead of the European 
football championship in June. By contrast, 
private   consumption stagnated, and invest -External 
demand showing  positive momentum
Industrial 
activity  muted
Economic devel-
opments in euro area mixedAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 1698100102104106Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, 
log scale
9698100102104106
94969810010210498100102104106
Italy
SpainFranceEuro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
22

ment and exports shrank. Italy, too, showed no 
increase  in aggregate output. The already very 
subdued recovery was thus halted in the 
second quarter. The labour market gave mixed 
signals. Firms’ willingness to recruit continued 
to be encouraged by a cut in social contribu -
tions applicable this year for new permanent 
employment contracts. At any rate, surveys 
indicate  that employment increased distinctly 
in the second quarter. This should have encour -
aged private consumption. However, un -
employment only fell very slowly. Spain once 
again recorded the strongest expansion among 
the large member states, with a quarterly GDP 
rise of 0.7%. The ongoing difficulties in form -
ing a government seem not to have adversely 
affected the country’s dynamic economic 
recovery  so far. One contributory factor may 
have been the buoyant tourism industry, which 
is benefiting from the problems in other Medi -
terranean countries. Economic developments 
in the rest of the euro area were predominantly 
positive.12 The Netherlands and Belgium, as 
well as Slovakia and Cyprus, were able to con -
tinue their upward trend and increase real GDP , 
in some cases significantly. In Finland, Portugal, 
the Baltic states and Greece, economic output 
increased markedly. Only in Austria did GDP 
stagnate in the second quarter.
The labour market in the euro area is recover -
ing slowly but steadily. The seasonally adjusted 
standardised unemployment rate fell in the 
second quarter by 0.9 percentage point on the 
year to 10.1%. The decline was fairly broadly 
based across regions. The reduction in un -
employment faltered only in Italy and Belgium 
in the preceding quarters, while in Austria and 
Estonia it actually rose. The number of employ -
ees increased by 1.4% on the year in the first 
quarter of 2016. The job increase in the market- 
based services industries was particularly pro -
nounced. The manufacturing sector also 
recruited  more staff. The increase in wages 
remained  subdued in light of continued high 
levels of unemployment. In the first quarter 
they increased only slightly to 1.8% on the 
year.In the second quarter of 2016, quarter- on- 
quarter consumer prices in the euro area 
increased  very steeply by 0.4% after seasonal 
adjustment, after they had fallen in the two 
preceding quarters. The main reasons for this 
were higher crude oil prices and unfavourable 
weather conditions, which ensured that the Slow but steady 
labour market recovery
Jump in con-sumer prices mainly due to energy and food2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 1697100103106Retail sales (price-adjusted)
2010 = 100
2,0002,2002,4002,6002,8003,000
New passenger car 
registrations(quarterly totals)Scale reducedNumber
(thousands)
8590100110120 2010 = 100
Goods exports1
Goods imports1Seasonally adjusted, quarterly averages, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Nomin-
al export and import data according to foreign trade statistics 
(intra and extra trade). Price-adjusted using the producer price 
index (exports) or the import price index.
Deutsche BundesbankApr-
May
90100110120Industrial output
12 There are no data yet for the second quarter for Ireland. 
In the first quarter, real GDP shrank by 2.1% according to 
official data following a leap of 26.3% on an annual aver -
age in 2015. Originally, an increase of +7.8% had been 
recorded  for 2015. These GDP rates, which are difficult to 
interpret, may be attributable to restructuring operations of 
multinational enterprises. See Central Bank of Ireland, 
Recent  revision to the national income and expenditure 
accounts , Quarterly Bulletin, No 3/ 2016, p 11.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
23

previously negative effect of energy and food 
on the quarterly HICP rate turned positive 
again. Inflation was otherwise muted. The 
prices of services continued to rise moderately. 
By comparison, the sub- index for industrial 
goods excluding energy remained unchanged. 
Despite the upward dynamics of volatile com -
ponents at the current end, the year- on- year 
change in HICP fell slightly to -0.1% due to 
baseline effects. The inflation rate excluding 
energy and food fell to +0.8%. This was prob -
ably in part due to Easter falling in March and 
therefore in the first quarter this year, which is 
likely to have dampened the annual   rate of 
change for services, in particular.
The flat price trend for industrial goods exclud -
ing energy in the euro area in the second quar -
ter overlies divergences in individual countries. 
Thus whereas prices for industrial goods fell in 
seven countries (including Ireland, Greece, Por -
tugal and France) against those of the second 
quarter of 2015 (probably due to continuing weak demand), another seven countries re -
corded inflation rates between 0% and 1% (in -
cluding Spain, Italy and the Netherlands). In the 
remaining countries (including Belgium and 
Germany), the prices of industrial goods actu -
ally rose by 1% or more. Taking the average of 
all other member states in the euro area, an -
nual inflation in industrial goods prices has 
consistently been at least 0.5 percentage point 
lower than in Germany since the beginning of 
2014.
In July 2016, consumer prices in the euro area 
rose slightly on June according to Eurostat’s 
flash estimate. The steep drop in energy prices 
was almost completely offset by a sharp rise in 
prices for unprocessed food. The prices of 
services  rose moderately. Prices for other cat -
egories of goods barely changed. The annual 
change in the headline HICP rate increased 
slightly to 0.2% against June, and marginally to 
1.0% excluding energy.
The moderate upward trend in the euro area is 
set to continue over the coming months. 
Although  private consumption will probably 
not match last year’s growth, which was lifted 
by steep falls in energy prices, domestic de -
mand in the euro area will continue to be sup -
ported by the sustained improvement in the 
labour market and the underlying uplift in 
invest ment. No major impetus can be expected 
from the global economy, which is expanding 
only moderately at present. On the other hand, 
the Brexit referendum in the United Kingdom is 
likely to have very little impact on the euro- area 
economy in the immediate future. This, at 
least, is suggested by developments in the 
senti ment indicators for the euro area in July.Industrial goods 
prices in euro area excluding Germany slightly down of late, but up in Germany Headline HICP slightly higher in July
Sustained upturn 
expected in euro areaConsumer prices in the euro area
Year-on-year percentage change
Item2015 2016
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Total HICP 0.1 0.2 0.0 – 0.1
of which
Energy – 7.2 – 7.2 – 7.4 – 7.7
Food 1.2 1.4 0.8 0.9
HICP excluding 
energy  and food 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8
of which
Industrial goods 
excluding energy 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.5
Services 1.2 1.2 1.1 1.0
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to keep key interest rates unchanged in the 
report ing period. Therefore, the main refinan -
cing rate remains at 0%, while the marginal 
lending rate stands at 0.25% and the deposit 
facility rate at -0.40%. The Governing Council 
continues to expect the key ECB interest rates 
to remain at present or lower levels for an 
extended  period of time, and well past the 
horizon of its net asset purchases. Furthermore, 
the Eurosystem continued its purchases as part 
of the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP) as planned. These purchases are intended 
to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, 
if necessary, and in any case until the Govern -
ing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation consistent with its objective of 
achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term.
The Eurosystem staff projections drawn up in 
the reporting quarter revised the forecast for 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) rate, lifting the projected rate slightly 
compared with March to an average of 0.2% 
for 2016. For 2017, headline inflation is pro -
jected to rise sharply to 1.3% on the back of 
upward base effects in the energy component. 
As for 2018, the declining economic slack is 
expected  to push up inflation somewhat fur -
ther (to 1.6% in the baseline scenario). The 
Euro system projections are, therefore, largely 
consistent with the results of the ECB’s current 
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). Be -
yond these projections, the experts surveyed 
as part of the SPF expect a further increase (to 
1.8%) in the average inflation rate for 2021.
At its monetary policy meeting in July 2016, the 
ECB Governing Council discussed the conse -
quences of the referendum on the United King -dom’s membership of the EU for the euro area. 
The conclusion drawn was that the baseline 
scenario of an ongoing economic recovery and 
rising inflation rates in the euro area was still 
on course. Owing to the heightened uncer -
tainty brought on by the outcome of the refer -
endum, amongst other factors, the ECB’s Gov -
erning Council did, however, announce that it 
would closely monitor the outlook for price 
stability and reassess the most likely path of in -
flation as well as the risks over the coming 
months based on newly available information.
On 29 June 2016, the eighth and final targeted 
longer- term refinancing operation of the 
TLTRO I series launched in June 2014 was con -
ducted. This operation saw 25 institutions tak -
ing up an overall volume of €6.7 billion. Simul -
taneously, the first of a total of four new tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations Key interest 
rates left unchanged
Forecast for 
2016 HICP rate revised slightly upwards of lateECB Governing Council still sees intact baseline scenario of a recovering economy  and higher inflation
514 banks 
borrow  €399.3 billion in first TLTRO II
Money market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 1 
to 11 August 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 20160.500.2500.250.500.751.001.251.50
––++++++
025Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 27 April 2016 and 26 July 2016 saw 
a marked increase in euro- area liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors 
(see the table below). Compared with the 
average fi  gure for the March- April 2016 
maintenance period, ie the last period be-
fore the observation period, these needs 
rose by €78.8 billion to average €765.9 bil-lion during the June- July 2016 period, fl  uc-tuating within a broad corridor of between 
€635.4 billion and €829.0 billion. Much of 
this increase in average liquidity needs was 
attributable to the rise in government de-
posits, which increased by a total of €28.1 
billion net. On balance, however, a an even 
stronger driving factor was the decline in the combined total of net foreign assets and other factors – which are considered together because of liquidity- neutral valu-
ation effects – by €32.9 billion overall, caus-
ing liquidity to be absorbed in the same 
amount. In addition, the €17.8 billion rise in banknotes in circulation, based on com-pared averages, that was observed during 
the period under review had the same 
effect . The minimum reserve requirement rose across the two reserve periods by a 
total of €1.5 billion to €115.8 billion in the 
June- July 2016 period, thus additionally 
pushing up the arithmetical needs.
The outstanding tender volume totalled 
around €519 billion on average in the June- 
July 2016 period, almost unchanged com-pared with the March- April 2016 average. 
The period under review saw the allotment of the fi  rst of a new series of four targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations (TLTRO II) as well as the voluntary early repayment of 
the completed operations one to seven in the fi  rst series (TLTRO I) and the execution of the eighth –  and fi  nal  – TLTRO in this 
series . All these operations shared the value 
date 29 June 2016. In the case of the fi  rst 
TLTRO II, where the allotment rate can lie 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2016
27 April to
7 June8 June to26 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   7.3 –  10.5
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  23.5 –  51.6
3 Net foreign assets
1 +  13.0 +  25.8
4 Other factors 1 –  25.1 –  46.6
Total +   4.1 –  82.9
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –   4.2 –   6.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –   4.5 +  15.3
(c) Other operations + 105.2 + 121.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 –   0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  47.0 –  14.1
Total +  49.5 + 116.6
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  53.8 +  33.7
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.7 –   0.8
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14• and 15• of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
26

anywhere between the main refi  nancing 
rate (0.00%) and the deposit rate (-0.40%), 
depending on the individual institution’s 
net lending behaviour, demand stood at €399.3 billion (see the chart on page 28), 
placing it broadly at the lower end of mar-
ket expectations. However, the voluntary repayments of the TLTRO I series which 
totalled  €367.9 billion were also lower than assumed, accounting for 86.5% of the pre-
viously outstanding total amount of €425 billion. Considered together with the de-mand for the last TLTRO I, which stood at €6.7 billion, these operations still have an 
outstanding volume of €64 billion. Overall, 
on the value date the two allotments and 
the repayments of the TLTRO I series gener-ated a net supply of liquidity in the amount of €38.2 billion. The size of regular refi  nan-
cing operations continued to contract (see 
the chart on page 29). This caused demand 
for the main refi  nancing operations to fall to an average level of €47.6 billion in the June- July 2016 reserve period, down from €58.1 billion in the March- April 2016 re-serve period; in a comparison of the two reserve periods, the refi  nancing volume 
result ing from the three- month tenders de-
clined by €13.4 billion to an average of 
€24.5 billion.
The bulk of liquidity nevertheless continued 
to be provided via the Eurosystem’s pur-
chase programmes which boasted average 
balance sheet holdings of assets worth 
€1,227 billion in the June- July 2016 reserve 
period, of which €1,091 billion was attrib-
utable to the expanded asset purchase pro-
gramme (APP) (see the adjacent table). This 
programme has now been broadened to 
include the corporate sector purchase pro-
gramme (CSPP), with purchases of this kind commencing on 8 June 2016.
On balance, excess liquidity continued to 
rise, climbing to an average of €865 billion in the June- July 2016 reserve period, up by 
€147 billion on the average fi  gure for the 
March- April 2016 period. As in the previous 
periods, there were also times during the period under review when excess liquidity proved rather volatile, primarily as a result 
of swings in the autonomous factors (not-Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
6007008009001,000
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20160.50.40.30.20.100.1
–––––+
€ bn%Daily data
Excess liquidity1EoniaSpread over the deposit facility rate
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket)EoniaMain refinancing rate
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket)
Deposit facility rate
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight
(ECB EXTended basket)Basis
points
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 20102030
Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 5 August 
2016
Active programmes
CSPP +  12.4 15.0
PSPP + 219.8 957.3
ABSPP +   1.2 20.4
CBPP3 +  14.9 187.4
Completed programmes 
CBPP2 –   1.0 7.5
SMP –   4.9 108.4
CBPP1 –   1.6 16.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
27

ably government deposits with the Euro-
system).
The abundant supply of liquidity meant that 
overnight rates remained geared to the rate 
on the deposit facility during both reserve periods under review (see the chart on page 27). Eonia continued to hover a few 
basis points above the deposit facility rate, 
recording an average level of -0.33% in the 
June- July 2016 reserve period (compared with -0.34% in the preceding period). By contrast, as a reference rate for secured overnight money, GC Pooling Overnight 
(ECB basket) averaged fi  gures for the April- 
June 2016 reserve periods (a rounded -0.40%) and June- July 2016 (-0.39%) that were only marginally higher than the de-
posit facility rate; on some days, the interest 
rate even fell below this level (descending 
as low as -0.42%). Reasons cited for this dip 
include a certain focus on the securities 
provided as collateral as well as banks’ in-
ternal rules. A similar pattern was displayed 
by secured overnight money in the ECB EXTended  basket (which contains a broader pool of collateral). This had an interest rate averaging around one basis point above the rate for the ECB basket in each of the two 
reserve periods. With regard to the three month- end rates within the observation 
period, overnight money rates were incon-
sistent for while Eonia went up, rates for both GC Pooling baskets generally went 
down on these dates. By contrast, tangible increases were evident on 24 June 2016, ie 
the day following the UK referendum on whether to leave the EU. However, these fi  rmer rates (up to +7 basis points against 
the previous day in the ECB EXTended bas-
ket) proved to be only temporary. The 
underlying overnight turnover in both bas-
kets and for Eonia remained at a low level 
throughout the period under review. The respective averages came to €11.0 billion (Eonia), €3.9 billion (ECB basket) and €5.2 billion (ECB EXTended basket) across the 
two reserve periods under consideration.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor purchase programme (CSPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The 
marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility 3
90060030003006009001,2001,5001,800
–––++++++
January February March April May June July August
2016Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tendersPurchase programmes1
Second series
(TLTRO II)First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)Excess liquidity 2
Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
28

(TLTRO II) was conducted, as part of which 514 
institutions borrowed an overall amount of 
€399.3 billion. Banks also had the option on 
this date to make early repayments of their 
outstanding volumes from the first seven 
TLTRO I operations. In all, a total of €367.9 bil -
lion in outstanding TLTRO I loans was repaid on 
this occasion. Taken together, the net liquidity 
effect of the repayments under the earlier 
TLTRO I operations, the eighth TLTRO I and the 
first TLTRO II thus came to €38.2 billion.
The ECB Governing Council decided in March 
2016 to launch the TLTRO II series so as to re -
inforce its accommodative monetary policy 
stance and to further incentivise bank lending 
to the real economy. Counterparties are able to 
borrow in all TLTRO II operations a total amount 
of up to 30% of the credit volume outstanding 
to the non- financial private sector as at 
31  January 2016 (excluding loans to house -
holds for house purchase), less any amount 
which was previously borrowed and is still out -standing under the first two TLTRO I oper -
ations.1 In line with market expectations, banks 
made only partial use of their overall borrowing 
allowances in the first TLTRO II operation. Given 
that TLTRO II operations all have the same ma -
turity of four years, banks have an incentive to 
only make greater use of their borrowing 
allow ances at a later point in time – a mechan -
ism that would allow them to lock in the fa -
vourable funding conditions as far as possible 
into the future. In addition, expectations of a 
further cut in the deposit facility rate, which 
would also impact on the conditions of future 
TLTRO II operations, the very high and ever 
increas ing volume of excess liquidity as well as 
the low borrowing costs in the market might 
have had a bearing on banks’ bidding behav -
iour. The second operation in the TLTRO II series 
will be conducted in September of this year.Allocated 
borrowing  allowances only partially exhaustedOutstanding liquidity following open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve periods. The last period displayed 
is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201602004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,800€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
1 For further information on the conditions and oper -
ational details of TLTRO II, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Mon -
etary policy and banking business, Monthly Report, May 
2016, pp 27-28.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
29

On 5 August, the Eurosystem held assets in the 
amount of €957.3 billion as part of the public 
sector purchase programme (PSPP). The aver -
age residual maturity of the PSPP portfolio is 
currently eight years. The assets purchased to 
date under the third covered bond purchase 
programme (CBPP3) and the asset-  backed 
securities   purchase programme (ABSPP) came 
to €187.4 billion and €20.4 billion respectively.
In addition, the Eurosystem in June began 
imple menting the corporate sector purchase 
programme (CSPP) agreed upon by the ECB 
Governing Council in March 2016. The volume 
of assets purchased under the CSPP came to 
€15 billion as at 5 August. In sum, the volume 
of assets purchased under the APP is thus in 
line with the targeted average monthly volume 
of €80 billion.2
APP purchases and slightly higher volumes in 
the other monetary policy operations drove 
excess  liquidity up by around €143 billion in the 
reporting period, continuing the upward trend 
that excess liquidity has been following since 
the APP was launched. At last count, excess 
liquid ity amounted to around €978 billion. Vol -
umes are expected to continue rising through -
out the rest of this year on the back of the 
monthly APP purchases.
With the ECB Governing Council leaving policy 
rates unchanged in the reporting period, the 
unsecured overnight money market rate (Eonia) 
hovered within a narrow corridor between 
-0.32% and -0.35% (except for the end of the 
first half of the year), remaining close to the 
deposit facility rate. The secured overnight rate 
(Stoxx GC Pooling) ranged between -0.325% 
and -0.423%. At the same time, three- month 
Euribor continued its downward trend, dipping 
to an all-  time low of -0.298% as this report 
went to press. This narrowed the spread over 
the overnight rate to as little as just over three 
basis points in a reflection of increased expect -
ations that the deposit facility rate might be cut 
before the end of 2016. These expectations 
were given another boost following the unex -pected outcome (for the markets) of the UK 
referendum on membership of the European 
Union and the economic uncertainty it sparked. 
Money market forward rates, especially those 
for longer maturities, likewise eased substan -
tially for a time but much of the decline has 
unwound since then. Fluctuations in money 
market forward rates are thus a reflection of 
prevailing uncertainty and make it necessary to 
exercise caution when interpreting rates in 
terms of what they say about expectations of 
rate cuts.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
In the months between April and June 2016, 
the broad monetary aggregate M3 continued 
to expand markedly, albeit at a noticeably 
slower pace than in the first quarter. A key 
factor  driving monetary growth was once again 
the ongoing accumulation of overnight de -
posits by the money- holding sector amidst a 
further decline in opportunity costs for that 
form of deposit. As for the counterparts of M3, 
the recovery of loans to the non- financial pri -
vate sector, which had already been observed 
in the preceding quarters, persisted into the 
second quarter. Simultaneously, MFIs consider -
ably increased their securities- based lending to 
the non- financial private sector. Moreover, as in 
the previous quarters, monetary growth was 
supported by a strong increase in MFIs’ 
securities- based lending to general govern -
ment, which was fuelled to a large extent by 
the Eurosystem’s asset purchases. However, 
the positive effects of these drivers were again 
partially offset by steady outflows of funds 
from the euro area, a development that was 
likewise associated with the Eurosystem’s mon -
etary policy measures.Purchase 
volumes  still in 
line with target
Excess liquidity 
continues upward trend
Money market 
increasingly expecting another interest rate cutMonetary growth still strongly affected 
by monetary 
policy stance
2 As in the previous year, part of the planned purchase vol -
ume for this month was brought forward (“frontloaded”) 
due to the typical lull in market activity in August; where 
necessary, subsequent purchases will be adjusted so that 
the targeted monthly volume of purchases under the APP 
averages €80 billion despite a smaller volume of assets 
being purchased in August.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
30

Hence, monetary developments continue to be 
dictated to a substantial extent by monetary 
policy. Overall, at 5.0%, the annual growth rate 
of M3 remained virtually unchanged on the 
quarter and thus continued the sideways move -
ment observed since mid-2015.
M3 growth in the reporting quarter was again 
driven by the persistent considerable increase 
in overnight deposits observed since mid-2012; 
once more, both households and non- financial 
corporations built up overnight deposits sub -
stantially. The consistently strong demand in 
the non- financial private sector for this highly 
liquid monetary component can be explained 
by the interest rate environment, amongst 
other things. For example, the opportunity cost 
of holding money, measured as the spread be -
tween ten- year government bond yields and 
short- term money market rates, fell yet again in 
the second quarter. In addition, the narrowing 
interest rate spreads between overnight de -
posits and other short- term deposits (the latter 
encompassing short- term time and savings 
deposits ) created a favourable setting for shifts 
within M3 into overnight deposits. As a result, 
households and non- financial corporations fur -
ther reduced their holdings of other short- term 
deposits in the reporting quarter.In terms of monetary counterparts, lending to 
the money- holding sector in the euro area was 
yet again a crucial source of monetary growth 
in the reporting quarter. Loans to private non- 
MFIs adjusted for securitisation and other one- 
off effects grew by roughly the same amount 
in the reporting quarter as in the preceding 
quarter. The striking and much more pronounced 
discrepancy (compared with previous periods) 
between the unadjusted and adjusted loan 
figures  (see the table above) is attributable to 
the fact that, since June of this year, the ECB 
has also been adjusting loans to the euro- area 
private sector for positions arising from notional  
cash pooling services provided by MFIs, retro -
spectively as from December 2014. This elimin -
ates the distorting impact of the one- off effect 
in the Netherlands described in our February 
and May 2016 Monthly Reports .3
Adjusted in the same way, loans to the domes -
tic non- financial private sector, too, continued 
to increase against the backdrop of historically 
low interest rates and the persistently positive 
underlying trend shown by the euro- area econ -
omy. With regard to loans to non- financial cor -
porations, the upward tendency exhibited by M3 growth 
continues  to be driven by increase in over-night depositsLoans to domestic  private sector now adjusted for notional cash pooling services
Marked rise 
in loans to non-financial  corporations Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2016 Q2 2016 Q1
Central government deposits 4.3 40.1
Monetary aggregate M3 108.4 175.4
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 94.0 173.1
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) –  3.7 – 13.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 18.1 16.1
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 12.0 – 62.4
of which
Capital and reserves 24.1 – 10.9
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 36.2 – 51.4Assets 2016 Q2 2016 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 52.4 67.4
Loans 14.9 84.2
Loans, adjusted 1 50.7 53.6
Securities 37.5 – 16.7
Credit to general government in the euro area 127.9 123.1
Loans –  8.0 2.7
Securities 135.9 120.4
Net external assets – 61.6 – 70.4
Other counterparts of M3 – 18.0 33.0
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 For details, see ECB, Explanatory note on adjusted loans 
series, 27 July 2016; and A Colangelo, The statistical classi -
fication of cash pooling activities, Statistics Paper Series, 
ECB, No 16 / July 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
31

net inflows since the second half of 2013 con -
tinued on the whole, although the quarterly 
figure in the reporting quarter fell short of the 
unusually strong rise seen in the previous quar -
ter. On balance, increases were recorded across 
all maturity categories. Hence, the annual 
growth rate of loans to non- financial corpor -
ations continued to rise, but remained subdued 
at 1.7% at the end of June.
According to the results of the Bank Lending 
Survey (BLS) for the second quarter, the expan -
sion in lending was supported by banks’ lend -
ing policy and by the mounting financing needs 
of enterprises. The euro- area bank managers 
responding to the BLS reported a slight easing, 
on balance, of standards for loans to enter -
prises. At the same time, demand for bank 
loans on the part of non- financial corporations 
went up markedly in the second quarter. Sur -
vey participants mainly put this increase down 
to the low general level of interest rates and to 
businesses’ financing needs for adjustments to 
corporate structures, inventories and working 
capital as well as for debt refinancing and 
restruct uring.
Broken down by country, many of the loans to 
non- financial corporations originated as hith -
erto from credit institutions domiciled in the 
two largest member states (see the chart on 
page  33). Loans issued by French banks to 
French enterprises gained even more momen-
tum against the backdrop of recovering eco -
nomic activity in France, while the reporting 
quarter saw German credit institutions further 
expanding their lending operations, above all 
the volume of credit granted to non- financial 
corporations in the other core euro- area coun -
tries. This stands in contrast with the percep -
tible quarter- on- quarter decline in the volume 
of German bank loans to German enterprises. 
In Italy, the perceptible upward trajectory fol -
lowed by loans over the past few quarters 
remained  intact, albeit  at a very low level, while 
lending in Spain recorded a slight increase dur -
ing the quarter under review.Ongoing 
recovery  in non- financial corporations’ credit demand
Discernible 
country- specific differences in loan dynamicsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year percentage growth rate; growth contributions in
percentage points; end-of-quarter data; seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial 
liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the
private sector 2
Financial
corporations 3
Non-financialcorporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Loans to the private sector 2Securities-based lending to
general governmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
32

Growth in loans to euro- area households accel -
erated somewhat in the second quarter of 
2016, but the annual rate of expansion in this 
segment remained at a moderate 1.7% at the 
end of the reporting quarter. The main drivers 
of this growth, particularly in Germany and 
France, were once again loans for house pur -
chase. Periphery countries, where the need for 
households to deleverage has declined –  at 
times appreciably – in recent years, saw house -
holds run down their loans for house purchase 
at a slower pace. For the euro area as a whole, 
the banks responding to the BLS again reported 
on brisk household demand for loans for house 
purchase in the second quarter. According to 
the bank managers surveyed, demand was 
mainly buoyed by the low general level of inter -
est rates, consumer confidence, the outlook on 
the housing market and by anticipated changes 
in residential property prices. Credit standards 
in this segment were eased marginally in net 
terms.
Consumer credit remained unchanged on bal -
ance in the reporting quarter, but that was be -
cause of securitisation transactions in France;4 
in many other member states, the growth in 
consumer credit observed in recent quarters 
continued, most likely as a reflection of the 
ongoing   underlying strength of private con -
sumption growth in the euro area. This view is 
consistent with the renewed rise in demand for 
consumer credit indicated by the BLS, which re -
spondents primarily put down to consumers’ 
buoyant spending habits, the low general level 
of interest rates and the ongoing robustness of 
consumer confidence. Credit standards in this 
segment were eased somewhat.
In addition to granting loans, the MFI sector 
considerably expanded its securities- based 
lending to the private sector as well in the 
quarter under review. However, the strong 
growth in securities- based lending to general 
government, in which the Eurosystem’s gov -
ernment bond purchases under the PSPP play a 
major role, once again made this counterpart 
the strongest contributor to monetary growth. Since Eurosystem purchases of assets from 
commercial banks’ portfolios do not affect the 
MFI sector’s consolidated balance sheet, the 
continued rise in this counterpart suggests that 
a sizeable share of the monetary policy- related 
purchases of government bonds continued to 
be from holders outside the domestic banking 
sector.
On balance, however, the impact of the PSPP 
on the monetary aggregate is not as pro -
nounced as the increase in securities-  based 
lending to general government would imply, as 
the purchase programme at the same time 
gives rise to outflows of funds from the euro 
area to non- residents. These outflows in turn 
reduce the MFI sector’s net external assets, 
thus curbing M3 growth (see the chart on 
page 32). For example, the data currently avail -
able for the months of April and May indicate Moderate 
growth in loans to households driven by loans for house purchase 
Consumer credit 
still growing in many countries
Eurosystem 
government  bond purchases still a major driver of monetary  growth, …… but they also spurred portfolio investment outflows Loans to non-financial corporationsin the euro area
*
6040200204060
–––+++€ billion, quarter-on-quarter change, seasonally adjusted
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Loans  adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Additionally adjusted for po-
sitions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by 
MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area 1... France
... Italy
... Spain
... GermanyMFIs in ...
4 At the consumer credit level, the ECB does not adjust 
reported loan figures for loan sales and securitisation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
33

that during the reporting quarter, non- resident 
investors once again offloaded fairly large vol -
umes of government bonds issued in the euro 
area and, on a smaller scale, bonds of the pri -
vate non- bank sector as well. In addition, 
domestic  non- banks’ ongoing demand for 
non- resident debt securities triggered portfolio 
investment outflows. Overall, then, domestic 
securities are being substituted with foreign 
instru ments.
Monetary developments were also fuelled by 
perceptible outflows from longer- term financial 
liabilities, albeit on a much smaller scale than in 
previous quarters. This decline was mainly attribut able to outflows from long- term time 
and savings deposits and benefited from the 
pattern of interest rates. However, the money- 
holding sector also reduced the stock of long- 
term bank debt securities in its portfolio.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
Growth in the deposit business of Germany’s 
banks was less vibrant in the reporting quarter 
than it had been in the first quarter of 2016. 
The underlying investment behaviour of non-  
banks remained unchanged, however, and 
continued to see an ongoing increase in short- 
term deposits  and a simultaneous reduction in 
long- term deposits. Significant inflows were 
once again recorded by overnight deposits, 
espe cially those of households and non-  
financial corporations. This should be viewed, 
as before, in conjunction with the historically 
narrow yield premium offered by alternative, 
less flexible bank deposits (see the adjacent 
chart).
At the sector level, households once again con -
tributed most to the current growth in short-  
term bank deposits. Households not only fur -
ther built up their overnight deposits but – for 
the first time in eight quarters – also boosted 
their short- term time deposits once more, 
albeit  on a much smaller scale. Non- financial 
corporations, too, lifted their overnight deposits 
again distinctly, but noticeably reduced their 
other bank deposits at the same time. The non- 
financial private sector’s keen interest in highly 
liquid bank deposits was probably also stimu -
lated further in the quarter under review by 
high levels of disposable household income 
and non- financial corporations’ strong earnings 
position.
Unlike the non- financial private sector, financial 
corporations further reduced their bank de -
posits on balance. As in the previous quarters, 
investment behaviour in this sector is likely to Fresh outflows 
from longer- term financial liabilitiesDeposit growth 
in low- interest- 
rate environ-
ment still 
dominated  by 
build- up of overnight  deposits …
… and 
driven by the 
non-financial 
private sector
Deposit business 
with financial corporations still characterised by search for yieldInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 2016012345% pa, monthly data
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2up to 2 years
over 2 years
up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
34

have been shaped by shifts into higher- yielding 
assets.5 In addition, the public sector also 
scaled back its stock of deposits held with do -
mestic banks markedly in net terms, although 
this reduction – unlike in the other sectors – 
applied exclusively to short- term deposits.
Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- 
bank sector continued to rise in the reporting 
quarter. As in the previous quarters, this growth 
was driven solely by the increase in lending to 
private non- banks, with banks not only grant -
ing loans to the private sector but also raising 
their holdings of privately issued securities, 
which they had reduced – in some cases mark -
edly – in the preceding quarters. This increase is 
possibly associated with the CSPP which started 
being implemented in June, following its an -
nouncement in March. At the same time, Ger -
man banks reported a decline in lending busi -
ness with the domestic public sector that 
affected  both securitised lending and loans. 
This is likely to reflect, not least, the low finan -
cing needs given the favourable state of public 
finances (see details of developments in public 
finances on pages 59 to 77).
As previously, loans to households made up the 
bulk of loans to the private sector. This was pri -
marily down to the continued vibrant house -
hold demand for loans for house purchase, 
which picked up again slightly in the quarter 
under review and was bolstered by the excep -
tionally low level of interest rates. During the 
reporting quarter, for example, the interest rate 
on long- term loans for house purchase saw 
another  marginal decline to stand at 1.8% at 
the end of the quarter.
Other reasons for this are provided by the latest 
BLS results, which suggest that, apart from the 
low interest rates, household demand for loans 
for house purchase was also buoyed by stable 
consumer confidence, the upbeat outlook for 
the housing market and developments in resi -
dential property prices. The institutions taking 
part in the survey reported on three factors 
that were dampening financing requirements: households drawing on their own funds; draw -
downs of loans from other banks; and the 
entry into force in March 2016 of the Act 
Imple menting the Mortgage Credit Directive 
and Amending Accounting Rules (Gesetz zur 
Umsetzung der Wohnimmobilienkreditrichtlinie 
und zur Änderung handelsrechtlicher Vorschrif -
ten). The banks also cited this Act as the main 
reason for once again tightening their credit 
standards, on balance, in the reporting quarter.
Judging by the BLS results, the surveyed banks 
did not ease their minimum credit standards for 
potential borrowers and thus did not assume 
higher risks for lending in the reporting quarter. 
Bearing this in mind, the favourable general 
climate  – the high levels of households’ finan -
cial assets, stable incomes and, not least, the 
lack of attractive alternative investment op -Distinct increase 
in lending business  with domestic non- banks on balance
Loans to the 
private  sector still driven by loans for house purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2016
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 37.2 26.6
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 1.9 – 1.8
over 2 years – 2.5 – 2.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 2.2 0.8
over 3 months – 3.6 – 2.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 2.2 – 3.2
Securities – 4.3 – 7.8
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 20.5 15.2
of which to households 3 11.2 11.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 8.2 0.3
Securities – 8.7 12.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Indications of portfolio shifts 
into higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly Report, 
May 2016, pp 34-37.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
35

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respond-ents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2016 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 20161.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 161.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
60300306090
––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
36

tions – more households with a solid financial 
background would suggest that showed an 
interest in taking out loans, meaning that banks 
were ultimately able to step up their lending. 
Overall, growth in mortgage lending to house -
holds during the reporting quarter came in at 
an annualised rate of 3.8% at the end of the 
quarter and is thus still distinctly short of the 
long- term average of just under 5% recorded 
since the beginning of the 1980s.
Noticeable inflows were likewise recorded in 
consumer credit to households in the quarter 
under review. This is consistent with the con -
siderable rise in demand for consumer credit in 
the reporting quarter observed by BLS respond -
ents. The surveyed institutions identified con -
sumers’ stronger spending habits, the high 
level of consumer confidence and the low gen -
eral level of interest rates as the main drivers of 
this increased demand. The respondent banks 
did not change their lending policies in this 
segment.
By contrast, the volume of loans which German 
banks extended to domestic non- financial cor -
porations remained virtually unchanged in the 
quarter under review, after having expanded 
– in some cases markedly – in the preceding 
quarters. Lending activity was weak in the 
second quarter on account of a significant 
decline  in short- term loans which nonetheless 
continued to be highly volatile. Long-  term 
loans, on the other hand, saw another distinct 
rise in the reporting quarter.
German banks participating in the BLS painted 
a slightly more upbeat picture of enterprises’ 
demand for loans, which they said had in -
creased slightly in the second quarter of 2016 
while credit standards remained unchanged. 
The banks surveyed saw the financing needs 
for debt restructuring, refinancing and renego -
tiations as well as the low general level of inter -
est rates as major factors shoring up demand. 
For example, at the end of June, domestic en -
terprises paid interest amounting to 2.6% for 
small- volume and 1.2% for large- volume loans in the short- term segment, while interest on 
long-  term loans stood at 1.8% and 1.6% re -
spectively of late. On the other hand, the BLS 
revealed that demand was being dampened 
ceteris paribus  by enterprises’ ability to fall 
back on alternative sources of funding in the 
shape of ample internal financing options or 
loans provided by other banks.
And internal financing has indeed grown stead -
ily in importance in recent years on account of 
German enterprises’ strong profitability and 
stable investment income, keeping firms’ de -
mand for bank loans comparatively low. In 
addition, other external sources of funding, Perceptible rise 
in consumer credit
Lending to 
non- financial corporations moving sideways 
Credit standards 
for enterprises virtually unchanged2012 2013 2014 2015 2016–10+1+2+3Seasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and
securitisation; end-of-quarter dataLoans by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
321012
–––++Non-financial corporations 1
1 Non-financial  corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  2 Year-
on-year rate of change.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholdsUp to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchasePercentage growth rate 2
Growth contributions in percentage pointsGrowth contributions in percentage points
Percentage growth rate 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
37

such as loans to group affiliates, trade credits 
and loans from shadow banks, are increasingly 
gaining in significance, narrowing the share of 
bank loans in companies’ more broadly diversi -
fied funding portfolios further still.
The BLS conducted in the second quarter of 
2016 contained ad hoc questions on participat -
ing banks’ financing conditions, on the impact 
of the new regulatory and supervisory activities 
(including the capital adequacy requirements 
defined in CRR/CRD IV), as well as the banks’ 
participation in the targeted longer- term refi -
nancing operations (TLTRO I and TLTRO II). Ger -
man banks once again reported a marginal 
quarter- on- quarter improvement in their fund -
ing situation in the context of the situation on 
the financial markets. As for the new regulatory and supervisory activities, the first half of 2016 
saw the banks further reducing their risk-  
weighted assets on balance and significantly 
strengthening their capital position. The sur -
veyed banks showed only slightly more interest 
in the first TLTRO II operation in June 2016 than 
they had done in the earlier TLTROs. Sig-
nificantly more banks are generally interested 
in  the future TLTRO II operations, however, 
citing  the operations’ attractive conditions as 
the reason  for their participation or interest. 
Respond ents reported  that they would use the 
borrowed funds chiefly for lending, in line with 
the operations’ objective. All in all, the TLTROs 
to date had slightly improved the participating 
banks’ financial situation, but reportedly hardly 
affected  their credit standards.More banks 
interested in future TLTRO II operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments on the international financial 
markets in the second quarter of 2016 were 
also dominated by the uncertainty surrounding 
the British referendum on whether to remain in 
or leave the European Union (EU). Another im -
portant factor was monetary policy in the in -
dustrialised nations, which was still geared to 
expansion – not least because of the Leave 
vote and concerns about the downside risks to 
the global economy that it could entail. Many 
market participants were surprised by the vote 
and shifted funds into safe investments (safe-  
haven inflows). Nonetheless, the turmoil that 
observers had feared such an outcome would 
cause on the international financial markets 
failed to materialise. Long- term government 
bond yields in the major currency areas con -
tinued to decline and temporarily reached his -
toric lows. This was the case in Germany, Japan 
and the United Kingdom, for example. Mirror -
ing this, the stock markets initially also recorded 
sharp share price losses in response to the out -
come of the referendum. However, as uncer -
tainty eased, a counterswing fairly rapidly set in 
on the bond and especially the stock markets. 
Overall, the Euro Stoxx was trading above its 
level at the end of March 2016 as this report 
went to press, and the US markets even marked 
new record highs. European bank shares sig -
nificantly underperformed the market. They 
suffered from deteriorating earnings expect -
ations and from the continuing large levels of 
non- performing loans, especially in Italy. Fund -
ing conditions for enterprises in the euro area 
improved considerably. The euro’s  effective ex -
change rates against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners remained virtually unchanged 
as compared to the end of March 2016. While 
the single currency fell perceptibly against the 
yen, it appreciated strongly, particularly against 
the pound sterling.Exchange rates
The euro depreciated somewhat against the US 
dollar from its end- of- March level, falling to 
US$1.12 by the end of the reporting period. At 
the beginning of May, meanwhile, it had been 
trading at its highest level since January 2015, 
at just under US$1.16. Exchange rate develop -
ments were dominated by market participants’ 
uncertainty about the outcome of the UK refer -
endum and by the eventual Leave vote, which 
took many people by surprise. In addition, 
changing expectations regarding the US central 
bank’s future monetary policy stance caused 
perceptible fluctuations in the euro- dollar rate.
Under the influence of brightening economic 
sentiment in the euro area, together with the 
absence of guidance from the US central bank 
that it would raise interest rates in June, as 
market participants had expected, the euro 
initially  appreciated distinctly up until the be -
ginning of May. Subsequently, the euro- dollar 
rate was dominated by the changing results of 
surveys about the referendum. Signs of a shift 
in the majority view towards remaining in the 
EU tended to boost the euro exchange rate, 
right up to the eve of the referendum on 
23  June. When, on 24  June, it unexpectedly 
became apparent that a majority had voted to 
leave the EU, the single currency fell sharply, 
dropping just under 3% against the US dollar in 
one day. Apparently, market participants re -
garded the referendum result as a possible 
strain on the euro-  area economy, or feared 
adverse  political spillover effects from the vote.
Latterly, market participants have focused more 
on US monetary policy again. Following the 
publication of a series of higher- than- expected 
leading indicators and economic data for the 
US economy, and the August publication of a 
surprisingly good labour market report for July, 
market participants again judged it more prob -
able that key interest rates in the United States UK referendum 
dominant topic on the financial markets
Euro under pressure  following  
the UK Leave vote …
… but stabilised 
following US interest rate decision as this report went to pressDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
39

would soon be raised, despite uncertainty 
about the consequences of a Brexit. That the 
euro did not lose even more ground in net 
terms was in part because the US central bank 
did not, at its meeting at the end of July, give 
any guidance on a precise date for its next rate 
hike and recent US productivity data came in 
worse than expected. In net terms, the euro 
depreciated by approximately 2.0% against the 
US dollar as compared with the end of the first 
quarter.
The single currency recorded perceptible losses 
of 11.6% against the Japanese yen. This was 
mainly driven by increased uncertainty on the financial markets, which caused many market 
participants to unwind yen- based carry trades 
which they had taken on in the low-  interest 
currency.1 Meanwhile, the prospect raised by 
the Japanese House of Councillors elections 
that the government headed by Prime Minister 
Abe, which was re- elected by a two- thirds ma -
jority, could use its mandate to push through 
an even more expansionary fiscal and monet -
ary policy prevented an even steeper appreci -
ation of the yen in net terms. The fiscal pack -
age presented at the end of July was even 
more massive than expected, with a total vol -
ume of over ¥28 trillion (over €248 billion), 
which further supported the euro. However, 
the Bank of Japan’s announcement that it 
would virtually double the annual purchase 
volume  of exchange traded index funds to 
approxi  mately ¥6 trillion (around €53 billion) 
sent the euro lower against the yen again. 
Appar  ently, the scale of these measures failed 
to meet market participants’ expectations. As 
this report went to press, the euro was trading 
at ¥113.
On the other hand, the euro made significant 
gains against the pound sterling, of just under 
8.7% in all, having picked up by approximately 
5% immediately following the referendum. The 
Leave vote put the British currency under even 
more strain than the euro. This reflected con -
cern about the future development of the UK 
economy, which had been robust up to the 
middle of the second quarter, but whose 
growth prospects observers now viewed as 
more clouded.2 At the beginning of August, 
the Bank of England decided to respond with 
monetary policy. As expected, it lowered the 
key interest rate by 25 basis points, but add -
itionally took the unexpected decision to raise 
the purchase volumes of government and cor -
porate bonds over the next 6 and 18 months 
by £60 billion (approximately €70 billion) and Significant losses 
against the Japanese  yen a result of growing  uncertainty  …
… but clear 
gains against the pound sterling Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankAM J J A S OND J F MAM J J A S
2015 20161.051.101.151.201.25
110120130140
0.700.750.800.85
859095100105Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange 
rate: US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchangerate: ¥133.73
 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange
rate: 103.11 1
1 For more on the influence of increased uncertainty in the 
financial markets on exchange rate developments, includ -
ing the yen, see: Deutsche Bundesbank, Exchange rates 
and financial stress, Monthly Report, July 2014, pp 15-28.
2 For more on economic developments in the UK, see p 20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
40

£10 billion (just under €12 billion) respectively. 
It is additionally making £100 billion (approxi -
mately €116 billion) available to commercial 
banks in long- term refinancing operations. This 
package of measures resulted in more ex -
change gains for the euro. As this report went 
to press, the single currency was trading at 
£0.86.
Despite the euro’s losses against the US dollar 
and the yen, its effective exchange rates against 
the currencies of 19 major trading partners 
remained  virtually unchanged as compared to 
the end of March (-0.3%). This is attributable 
to distinct exchange gains against the Swedish 
krona and particularly the pound sterling; their 
joint weighting when calculating the effective 
exchange rate stands at just under 18%. The 
Swiss franc appreciated considerably in its func -
tion as a safe- haven currency immediately after 
the Leave decision. The upward movement was 
dampened by the Swiss central bank, which 
announced that it had intervened on the for -
eign exchange market and would continue to 
be active. Overall, the euro was around 0.7% 
weaker against the Swiss franc at last count.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
On balance, the trend of declining yields on the 
international bond markets persisted world -
wide in the period under review. Overall, the 
yield spread of ten- year Bunds to US Treasuries 
of the same maturity remained virtually un -
changed compared to the end of March; as 
this report went to press, it amounted to 
1.7 percentage points in favour of US Treasury 
yields. This development was partly driven by 
the UK vote to leave the EU, which took market 
participants by surprise and caused investors to 
shift funds into international benchmark bonds 
at short notice. In addition, international finan -
cial investors took a somewhat more sceptical 
view of global economic developments imme -
diately after the referendum, which encour -
aged the central banks in the major currency areas to act cautiously and maintain an expan -
sionary monetary policy stance.3 At last count, 
ten- year US Treasury yields stood at 1.6%, 
21 basis points below their level at the end of 
March 2016. The interest rates on ten- year 
Japanese  government bonds fell from an 
already  low level, intermittently reaching new 
historic lows of -0.29% and closing at -0.1% at 
the end of the reporting period. The UK’s cen -
tral government bonds recorded a drastic 
decline  in yields of 88 basis points. This decline 
continued towards the end of the period under 
review following the monetary policy decision   
taken by the Bank of England, leaving the 
bonds at a historic low of 0.5%.
Ten- year Federal bonds yielded 29 basis points 
less than at the end of March 2016, standing at 
-0.2% at the end of the period under review. In 
mid- June, yields entered negative territory for 
the first time, reaching a historic low of -0.24% Effective euro 
exchange rate virtually unchanged
Declining trend 
in bond yields continues
Yields on  ten-year  Bunds negativeYields* in euro area and selected 
countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years. 1 Announcement of the results of the 
UK referendum on whether to remain in or leave the EU.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20161.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
––+++++++++% pa, daily dataUnited StatesEuro area
JapanUnited Kingdom
Australia
Switzerland
1
3 For the measures taken by the Bank of Japan, see p 40.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
41

at one point. This makes the Bund one of the 
few government bonds from the various coun -
tries and currency areas to be currently trading 
at negative yields in this maturity segment. Like 
the Japanese central government’s ten- year 
security  , whose yield entered negative territory 
for the first time at the end of February 2016, 
Swiss government bonds with the same matur -
ity, for example, also traded below zero. At the 
beginning of July they marked a historic low of 
-0.63%, and ended the period under review 
yielding -0.6%. Within the monetary union, 
ten- year bonds in the Netherlands also inter -
mittently fell into marginally negative territory. 
The implied volatility of options on the Bund 
future, which had risen significantly around the 
date of the referendum, dropped in compari -
son with the end of March and was below the 
five- year average at the end of the reporting 
period. The lessening volatility reflects the 
easing  of uncertainty experienced by market 
participants about further developments in 
bond yields.
The German yield curve derived from Federal 
securities yields shifted downwards from the 
end of March under the influence of the above- 
mentioned factors and flattened a little overall. 
Federal securities with residual maturities of up 
to 13 years were negative at the current end, 
whereas the transition to negative yields had lain in the 8-year maturity segment as recently 
as the end of March. Two- year Federal secur -
ities yields fell to -0.7%. This could partly reflect 
market expectations of a further reduction in 
the deposit rate, which currently stands at 
-40  basis points. Another probable factor is 
that market participants without access to the 
deposit facility hold liquidity in the form of 
short- dated securities and are prepared to pay 
a premium for this. Bonds with a maturity of up 
to seven years latterly had a yield below the 
threshold drawn by the deposit facility and 
therefore cannot currently be purchased under 
the rules set out in the public sector purchase 
programme (PSPP).
Bond yields in other euro- area countries fol -
lowed the broad market trend and predomin -
antly dropped. The temporarily heightened 
uncer tainty surrounding the Leave vote caused 
yield spreads vis- à- vis the German Bund to rise 
for a time. However, the GDP- weighted yield 
on ten- year euro- area bonds (excluding Ger -
many) dropped by 33 basis points overall, ie 
even slightly more steeply than that of the 
Bund’s benchmark bond. At last count, it 
reached a historic low of 0.72%. Bonds from 
Italy and Portugal profited less from the general 
trend. Here, financial agents priced in country- 
specific risks. Portuguese government bond 
yields dropped in the ten- year segment. The 
yield spread to Bunds with equivalent matur -
ities, however, widened slightly. Bond investors 
clearly take a critical view, in terms of debt sus -
tainability, of the measures resolved by the new 
Portuguese government, such as the reduction 
of the working week, the revocation of wage 
cuts in the public sector and the suspension of 
privatisation. On the other hand, the European 
Commission’s and ECOFIN’s handling of the 
exces sive deficit procedure had no visible 
effects . Although it is agreed that the Portu -
guese and Spanish governments are contraven -
ing European budgetary rules, no sanctions 
have been imposed and the correction dead -
lines have been put back further. The inad -
equate disciplinary effect of the Stability and 
Growth Pact, which is attributable not least to Yield curve for 
Bunds flatterNarrower yield spreads in the 
euro areaYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Announcement 
of the results of the UK referendum on whether to remain in or leave the EU.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.2
––––+
Residual maturity in years31 March 2016
11 August 201623 June 2016 1%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
42

deficiencies of implementation, could have 
been priced in in advance. Yields on Italian 
bonds with a ten- year maturity fell very slightly 
overall, to a level of 1.1%. Thus there were only 
limited spillover effects from Italian banks, 
some of which needed equity injections, to the 
central government’s financing conditions. As a 
result, the interest dispersion in the euro area 
remained virtually unchanged and thus stayed 
below its five- year average. The falling yields in 
the euro area and the narrowing yield spread 
to Bunds were not driven by a decline in de -
fault risks. CDS premiums remained largely un -
changed compared to the end of March.
The corporate bond market is being heavily 
influ enced by the corporate sector purchase 
programme (CSPP), which was adopted as a 
new element of the expanded asset purchase 
programme (APP) at the start of April 2016 and 
launched on 8  June 2016. Under CSPP , the 
Euro system buys corporate debt securities that 
fulfil its criteria for eligible collateral, ie corpor -
ate bonds that are classified as at least invest -
ment grade under the Eurosystem Credit 
Assess ment Framework (ECAF).4 Debt securities 
from issuers supervised under the Single Super -
visory Mechanism (SSM), as well as their sub -
sidiaries, are not eligible, thus excluding bank 
bonds in particular. Under the effects of the 
purchase programme, financing conditions for 
enterprises in the real sector improved mark -
edly as of the end of March. For example, yields 
on European non- financial corporations with a 
BBB rating (as measured by the average rating 
from the rating agencies Fitch, Moody’s and 
Standard & Poor’s) and a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years fell by 70 basis points to a 
record low of just over 1.0%.5 The five-  year 
average, at 2.8%, is significantly higher. The 
yield spread over Bunds with matching matur -
ities also narrowed, falling by 42 basis points to 
136 basis points. This is more than 50 basis 
points lower than the five- year average. Cor -
porate bonds therefore outperformed equities 
and Bunds from March onwards. Furthermore, 
the fall in corporate bond yields was not ac -
companied by a corresponding drop in default risk. Measured in terms of the premiums on 
European credit default swaps (itraxx index) for 
the non- financial sector, default risk fell only 
marginally. All in all, this suggests a high valu -
ation level in this market segment. Moreover, 
there are indications of a deterioration in the 
liquidity situation on the corporate bond mar -
ket, as measured by transaction costs. The 
finan  cing conditions for the euro area’s finan -
cial corporations also improved, with yields on 
European financial corporations with a BBB rat -
ing and a residual maturity of seven to ten 
years falling in the reporting period by 79 basis 
points to 2.6% at last count.6 The yield spread 
over Bunds with matching maturities narrowed, 
on balance, by 51 basis points. The collapse in Very favourable 
financing conditions  for enterprisesYield spreads of corporate bondsin the euro area
*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill-Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with residual maturity of seven to 
ten years. 3 Announcement of the results of the UK referen-
dum on whether to remain in or leave the EU.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20160100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating category
3Basis points, daily data
4 The eligibility of collateral is set out in the Eurosystem 
Credit Assessment Framework (ECAF). See Deutsche Bun -
desbank, The Common Credit Assessment System for 
assess ing the eligibility of enterprises, Monthly Report, 
January 2015, pp 33-45.
5 Sources: In each case, iBoxx indices (“financials”, “non 
financials”) with a residual maturity of seven to ten years.
6 See footnote 4 above.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
43

share prices afflicting the euro area’s financial 
sector corporations thus failed to spill over into 
the market for bank bonds. Only in the context 
of the referendum did the yield spread expand 
by just over 40 basis points, but it has since 
narrowed again.
In the euro area, the five- year forward inflation 
rate in five years derived from inflation swaps 
shed 9 basis points on balance since the end of 
March 2016 and currently stands at just over 
1.3%. At the start of June, market- based infla -
tion expectations initially nudged upwards, be -
fore briefly falling to 1.25% immediately after 
the Brexit vote. Strikingly, the survey- based 
infla tion expectations that capture the annual 
average for the period six to ten years ahead 
remained virtually unchanged during the same 
space of time.7 The difference between the 
market- based and survey- based values is partly 
attributable to the inflation risk premium, 
which has been negative for some time now, 
as well as, for instance, possible liquidity pre -miums or distortions resulting from market seg -
mentations. One reason for the recent drop in 
the indicator is the marked decline in the yield 
on the ten- year benchmark Bund, which has 
attracted particularly large safe- haven inflows. 
At the same time, five- year bonds are not cur -
rently eligible for purchase by the Eurosystem 
because their yields are too low. This has damp -
ened the decline in yields on five- year bonds 
compared with those on ten- year bonds. In the 
upshot, this could distort the forward rates for 
maturities of between five and ten years, and 
thus, indirectly, forward infla tion rates in their 
function as an indicator of inflation expect -
ations. This hypothesis is borne out at least by 
movements in the forward inflation rate, which 
fell sharply following the United Kingdom’s 
vote to leave the EU before recovering slightly 
as uncertainty subsided.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
amounted to €332½ billion in the second quar -
ter of 2016 and was therefore somewhat 
below its previous- quarter level (€367 billion). 
After deducting redemptions and taking 
account  of changes in issuers’ holdings of their 
own bonds, net issuance came to €18½ billion. 
In addition, foreign borrowers placed debt 
secur ities worth €21½ billion in the German 
market. The outstanding volume in the German 
bond market thus rose by €40½ billion net in 
the period under review.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €14 billion in the second 
quarter (compared with €23½ billion in the 
first quarter). Debt securities of specialised 
credit institutions (€17 billion) constituted the 
lion’s share of issues, followed to a lesser extent  
by other bank debt securities which can be 
structured flexibly (€6½ billion). This contrasted 
with net redemptions of public Pfandbriefe and 
mortgage Pfandbriefe totalling €6½ billion and 
€3 billion respectively.Lower forward 
inflation rates in the euro areaNet issuance in 
the German 
bond market
Rise in credit 
institutions’ capital  market debtForward inflation rates* and inflation 
expectations in the euro area
1.00.500.51.01.52.02.5
––+++++%, weekly averages
2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources: Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising 
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco) realised across the next five or ten years.
Deutsche BundesbankDifference between forward inflation rates
and Consensus inflation expectationsFive-year forward inflation rate
in five years based on swapsConsensus inflation
expectations
for six to ten years ahead
7 Source: Consensus Economics, Consensus Forecasts, 
annual  average for the period six to ten years ahead.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
44

In the quarter under review, the public sector 
issued bonds in the amount of €3½ billion net, 
compared with net redemptions of €2 billion 
one quarter earlier. These figures include issues 
by resolution agencies set up for German 
banks, which are ascribed to the public sector 
for statistical purposes. Central government 
itself  issued mainly Treasury discount paper 
(Bubills ; €8 billion), and to a lesser extent 
30-year bonds (€2 billion). This contrasted with 
net redemptions of five- year Federal notes 
(Bobls) and ten- year bonds, totalling €6 billion 
and €3 billion respectively. In the quarter under 
review, state and local governments redeemed 
their own bonds to the tune of €½ billion net.
Domestic enterprises issued debt securities 
worth €1½ billion net in the second quarter. 
On balance, the vast majority of these were 
bonds with maturities of more than one year. 
Overall, net issuance was solely attributable to 
non- financial corporations (€4½ billion), while 
other financial intermediaries made net re -
demptions (-€3 billion). Thus far, the data are 
not indicative of an acceleration in the issuance 
activity of non- financial corporations in the 
German market, whose bonds are eligible for 
purchase by the Eurosystem under the now up- 
and- running CSPP .
In the second quarter, the Bundesbank was the 
dominant buyer in the domestic bond market, 
purchasing bonds for €51 billion under the 
Euro system’s purchase programmes. The vast 
majority of these bonds were issued by the do -
mestic public sector (€49½ billion). Domestic 
non- banks purchased debt securities to the 
tune of €33½ billion. The focus of investor 
interest here was primarily on foreign securities 
(€28 billion). By contrast, foreign investors and 
domestic credit institutions sold bonds amount -
ing to €24½ billion and €19½ billion net 
respect ively.
International equity markets posted gains over -
all, amid heavy volatility. The UK’s broad FTSE 
350 equity index and the S&P 500 in the United 
States made marked gains on the end of March (up 10.8% and 6.1%, respectively) and were 
most recently trading near to or at record 
highs. While the German CDAX and the broad 
Euro Stoxx index saw smaller gains of 5.3% 
and 2.2% respectively, at the end of the report -
ing period they were nonetheless at, or just 
under, their highs for the year. Only Japan’s 
broad equity index, the Nikkei 225, remained 
virtually unchanged on balance. Equity prices in 
the second quarter were strongly influenced by 
the referendum in the United Kingdom. Uncer -
tainty regarding its outcome and the conse -
quences for the global economy of a possible 
exit from the EU led to heavy volatility on the 
markets even before votes were cast. Ultim -
ately, however, the expectation came to prevail 
that a majority would vote to remain in the EU. 
Prices consequently dropped very sharply im -
mediately following the decision to leave the 
EU. However, the market turmoil that observers 
had feared failed to materialise. Prices initially 
fell sharply in a very volatile market environ -
ment, but a counterswing fairly rapidly set in as Net public 
sector  issuance
Increase in 
enterprises’ capital  market debt
Purchases of 
debt securities
International 
equity markets dominated by UK referendumInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2015 2016
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 16.5 54.6 64.7
Credit institutions – 39.4 5.5 – 19.7
of which
Foreign debt securities –  5.5 9.3 –  5.8
Deutsche Bundesbank 36.2 38.3 50.8
Other sectors 19.7 10.8 33.6
of which
Domestic debt securities 5.5 – 16.1 5.8
Non-residents – 30.9 11.9 – 24.3
Shares
Residents 10.5 7.8 12.0
Credit institutions –  2.8 –  9.4 1.9
of which
Domestic shares –  6.8 –  6.9 0.8
Non-banks 13.3 17.3 10.1
of which
Domestic shares 1.1 8.6 5.1
Non-residents 8.9 –  1.5 –  5.2
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 24.6 27.1 19.8
Investment in retail funds 2.6 5.7 6.1
of which
Equity funds –  2.6 –  0.9 0.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
45

uncertainty subsided. As this report went to 
press, all key indices had recovered the losses 
incurred after the referendum. Even the UK’s 
broad FTSE 350 equity index climbed 12.3% 
following its post- referendum slump. However, 
in light of the marked appreciation of the euro 
(+8.7%), this nevertheless translates into signifi -
cantly lower profits for investors calculating in 
euros. Prices were buoyed by the prospect of 
continued expan sionary monetary policy and a 
series of good fundamentals, such as a com -
pany report season in the United States that 
has thus far surpassed analysts’ expectations. 
Furthermore, in Japan, the recently announced economic policy measures helped shore up the 
country’s broad equity index.
European bank stocks underperformed the 
market as a whole throughout the period 
under review. This reflects the lower earnings 
outlook for banks, which had been below aver -
age since the end of March, ie even well ahead 
of the referendum. According to IBES surveys, 
analysts revised dividend growth expectations 
for European banks in 2017 down by 10.6% 
between March and August, while expected 
dividend growth for all the companies included 
in the Euro Stoxx fell by just 3.3%. Prior to the 
publication of the EBA stress test, valuations of 
European banks were also affected by uncer -
tainty regarding the possibility of further capital 
needs. This was compounded by concerns 
about the level of non- performing loans on the 
balance sheets of some banks in euro- area per -
iphery countries. Shares of financial institutions 
came under additional pressure once the stress 
test results were published. While the simu -
lated EBA stress scenario showed that banks 
were overwhelmingly sufficiently capitalised, 
attention turned once again to structural fac -
tors, such as the profitability of banks, which 
investors regard as weak overall (partly owing 
to the low- interest- rate environment), future 
business models and holdings of balance- sheet 
legacy burdens. Furthermore, in Italy, fears 
spread that the capital increase required for a 
major Italian bank, which is to be organised by 
a banking syndicate, could hurt other Italian in -
stitutions. Overall, as this report went to press, 
European bank shares were down 8.8% on 
their value at the end of the first quarter, com -
pared with gains of 7.2% for US bank stocks.
In the run- up to the referendum, uncertainty 
among market participants regarding further 
price developments increased markedly, reach -
ing new year’s highs in Germany and the euro 
area in mid-  June (as measured by the implied 
volatilities of stock price indices calculated from 
options), before subsiding fairly rapidly. How -
ever, the risk premiums for the European and 
German equity indices remained virtually un -Bank shares 
particularly  hard hit
Price uncertainty 
higher initially, but then subsides Equity market
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Expected future volatility calculated using the prices of op-
tions on the Euro Stoxx. 2 Announcement of the results of the 
UK referendum on whether to remain in or leave the EU.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility of Euro Stoxx 1Bank indicesDaily data
%Overall price indicesBeginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
8090100110120130
5060708090100110120130140
10203040
2015 2016Euro area United Kingdom
Italy United States
2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
46

changed, on balance, over the entire reporting 
period.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
remained  muted in the second quarter. Domes -
tic enterprises issued €½ billion worth of new 
shares. The outstanding volume of foreign 
shares in the German market rose by €6 billion 
over the same period. Equities were purchased 
primarily by domestic non- banks (€10 billion) 
and domestic credit institutions (€2 billion). By 
contrast, foreign investors sold German equi -
ties in the amount of €5 billion.
During the quarter under review, domestic 
invest ment companies recorded inflows of 
€26 billion, after raising funds totalling €33 bil -
lion in the previous three- month period. The 
fresh cash mainly accrued to specialised funds 
reserved for institutional investors (€20 billion). 
Among the asset classes, mixed securities-  
based funds attracted the most inflows (€9½ 
billion), though bond- based funds (€5 billion), 
open- end real estate funds (€4 billion) and 
funds of funds (€3½ billion) also sold fund 
shares. Foreign funds traded in the German 
market attracted net inflows totalling €8 billion 
in the second quarter of 2016. Domestic non- 
banks were the main buyers, adding mutual 
fund shares worth €33½ billion to their port -
folios, for the most part domestic fund units. 
German credit institutions purchased mutual 
fund shares for €2 billion, while foreign invest -
ors sold mutual fund shares worth €2 billion.
Direct investment
In contrast to cross- border portfolio invest -
ment, which saw net outflows totalling €66 bil -
lion in the second quarter of 2016, direct in -
vestment generated net capital imports of €16 
billion.
In the second quarter of 2016, direct invest -
ment abroad by German enterprises amounted 
to €12 billion. Domestic investors primarily bol -
stered their equity capital (€11½ billion), doing Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund shares
Capital imports 
in direct investment 
German direct 
investment abroadMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2015 2016
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I Current account + 58.5 + 64.7 + 73.1
1 Goods 1 + 69.4 + 64.4 + 78.2
2 Services 2 –  5.9 –  5.7 –  5.2
3 Primary income +  2.1 + 19.4 +  4.5
4 Secondary income –  7.1 – 13.5 –  4.4
II Capital account +  1.1 –  0.4 +  1.6
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 72.8 + 22.7 + 58.3
1 Direct investment +  3.1 +  3.8 – 16.1
Domestic investment 
abroad + 18.5 + 30.7 + 12.2
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 15.5 + 26.9 + 28.3
2 Portfolio investment + 52.7 + 41.1 + 65.8
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 26.9 + 47.2 + 34.2
Shares
3 + 10.7 +  1.3 +  4.6
Investment fund shares 4+  8.5 +  9.7 +  7.8
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  1.3 +  6.2 –  1.3
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 11.0 + 31.2 + 26.5
of which
Denominated in euro 6 +  1.4 + 24.7 + 17.7
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  3.4 +  5.0 –  4.8
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 25.8 +  6.1 – 31.6
Shares 3 +  8.8 –  3.0 –  5.5
Investment fund shares –  3.6 –  2.8 –  1.8
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 28.6 –  6.4 – 31.9
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 18.7 – 10.2 – 39.3
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  2.3 + 18.3 +  7.6
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  5.9 +  4.9 +  4.0
4 Other investment 10 + 11.6 – 28.4 +  3.9
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 +  9.7 – 29.8 – 29.9
Enterprises and  households
12 +  3.3 –  8.9 –  3.6
General government +  4.5 –  0.6 –  4.4
Bundesbank –  5.9 + 10.9 + 41.9
5 Reserve assets 13 –  0.5 +  1.2 +  0.8
IV Errors and omissions 14 + 13.2 – 41.5 – 16.3
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
47

so largely via new cross- border investment 
(€9½ billion). By contrast, claims from credit 
transactions grew only slightly on balance (€½ 
billion). Trade credits were issued to the tune of 
€3 billion, while repayments of financial credits 
amounted to €2½ billion. Broken down by 
region , it is clear that domestic enterprises 
made major investments in Luxembourg (€3 
billion), Switzerland (€2 billion) and Belgium 
(€1½ billion) during the reporting period.
The key factor behind the overall development 
in direct investment in the second quarter of 
2016 was the relatively strong credit provision 
by foreign proprietors to affiliated enterprises 
in Germany, amounting to €28½ billion. Thanks to group- internal lending, foreign investors’ 
claims against affiliated enterprises in Germany 
grew on balance by €23½ billion. This was 
achieved almost exclusively through the grant -
ing of financial credits to domestic enterprises 
(€23 billion). Foreign investors also shored 
up their equity capital by €5 billion. The lion’s 
share was focused on new investment (€4½ 
billion). Parallel to this, foreign enterprises 
reinvested  their earnings in Germany (€1 bil -
lion). There were large flows of money to 
domes tic enterprises from Luxembourg (€9 bil -
lion), the Netherlands (€6 billion) and the 
United Kingdom (€3 billion). This occurred 
largely via an increase in financial credits to 
domes tic parent companies.Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
48

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy grew at a slower pace in 
the second quarter of 2016. According to the 
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real 
GDP in the second quarter rose by a seasonally 
and calendar- adjusted 0.4% on the quarter, 
after recording a steep 0.7% increase in the 
first quarter. Aggregate capacity utilisation 
therefore remained at an above- average level. 
The weaker economic momentum was mainly 
attributable to a clear drop in investment in 
both machinery and equipment and in con -
struction. Private consumption also grew less 
strongly than at the beginning of the year. By 
contrast, the outcome of the referendum on 
the United Kingdom’s continued membership 
in the European Union (EU) did not appear to 
have had any effect on the German economy 
in the second quarter. The future impact of the 
referendum result will – at least in the short 
term – probably also be quite minimal.
The weaker demand for new machinery and 
equipment probably represents a natural re -
bound from the surge in investment at the 
begin ning of the year. Another possible factor 
is that industrial activity has not yet experi -
enced a sustained recovery. For its part, the 
downturn in construction investment was 
largely due to weather- related factors, after 
excep  tionally mild temperatures in the winter 
months had allowed additional building output 
in the first quarter. The slower pace of private 
consumption may also owe something to the 
turnaround from falling to rising oil prices, 
as  this cancelled out the previously realised 
gains in purchasing power. On the other hand, 
the fairly robust export momentum had a 
stabilising  effect on overall economic activity. 
The key factor here was the greater demand 
from within the euro area, which was sufficient 
to offset the sluggish momentum stemming 
from non- euro- area countries in the second 
quarter.German exports proved to be a major mainstay 
of economic growth in the second quarter. This 
would indicate that the lull in demand ob -
served in the second half of 2015 has now 
been overcome. Goods exports were markedly 
up on the quarter again in price and seasonally 
adjusted terms, with the regional figures avail -
able for April and May pinpointing exports to 
other euro- area countries as being the main 
driving force behind the positive result. Exports 
to other EU countries declined, however. Here, 
a sharp drop in the value of exported goods to 
the United Kingdom stood out in particular, 
although  exchange rate effects probably played 
a part in this. Outside the EU, German export -
ers suffered substantial losses in their trade 
with Russia, but above all with the United 
States. The latter may have been in connection 
with the inventory adjustments in the United 
States, which generally have a strong impact Quite strong 
economic growth  
in 2016 Q2
Special factors 
in the case of investmentExports remain 
a key growth 
factor
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16949698100102104106108110
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
49

on import demand. A noticeable increase was, 
however, recorded in exports to China. Exports 
to the OPEC countries also recorded strong 
growth following the period of stagnation at 
the beginning of the year, possibly in connec -
tion with the higher crude oil prices.
Investment activity tailed off in the second 
quarter of 2016. This was especially true in the 
case of machinery and equipment, where a 
countermovement took place following the 
brisk start to the year. Enterprises were, among 
other things, probably more reluctant to invest 
in their motor vehicle fleets, which would ex -
plain the very sharp drop in new commercial motor vehicle registrations following a strong 
increase in the previous quarter.
Construction investment also lost significant 
momentum in the second quarter. This, how -
ever, was due to a considerable extent to a cor -
rection to the weather- related surge in output 
in the first quarter. On the whole, the construc -
tion sector still appears to be in good shape.
Seasonally adjusted private consumption was 
less buoyant in the second quarter than in the 
first three months of the year. The underlying 
economic conditions are still intact, however, 
owing to the ongoing positive outlook for in -
come and the labour market. Additional sup -
port will also be generated this year by rising 
government transfer payments. The slump in 
the second quarter was probably due first and 
foremost to the turnaround in crude oil prices. 
Oil prices rose again perceptibly for a time fol -
lowing the sharp decline around the turn of 
2015-16, eroding consumer purchasing power. 
Retail sales went up only marginally, and even 
posted a slight decrease in real terms. Foot -
wear and clothing were the sole exception 
here, the demand for which saw a sharp rise 
following a lull in the winter months – probably 
due to the weather. By contrast, passenger car 
sales are likely to have continued exerting a 
positive influence on private consumption. This 
is shown by the increase in the second quarter 
in the number of new non- commercial motor 
vehicle registrations for the third period in suc -
cession.
Imports fell substantially in the second quarter 
after adjustment for seasonal variations. This 
reflected the temporary slump in domestic 
demand . The real decline was stronger than in 
nominal terms, which was due to the fact that 
energy prices, and thus also import prices as a 
whole, rebounded following the slump around 
the turn of the year. In regional terms, the 
decrease   in nominal goods imports was quite 
broadly based. There was much less demand 
for goods from countries outside the EU, in 
particular, especially the newly industrialised Weaker 
investment  in machinery  and equipmentPositive construction  activity tempor-arily obscured by weather- related bounce- back effects
Private 
consumption  dampened by higher energy 
prices
Substantial 
decline in 
imports90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Apr-
May
8090100110120130
Apr-
May
8090100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
price-adjusted 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
50

economies in Asia, Russia, the OPEC countries, 
the United States and China.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output decreased distinctly in the 
second quarter and was down ¾% on the pre -
vious quarter after adjustment for seasonal 
variations. This narrowed the gap between in -
dustrial production, which had grown unex -
pectedly strongly at the beginning of the year, 
and the subdued development in orders in the 
winter half- year. Producers of intermediate and 
capital goods suffered a decline, with the 
sharpest drop in output (2¾%) being recorded 
by German manufacturers of machinery. Only 
manufacturers of consumer goods were able 
to step up their output slightly.
According to Ifo Institute data, the level of cap -
acity utilisation of tangible fixed assets in manu -
facturing stood at 84¾% in July. It was there -
fore up slightly on the figure for April and per -
ceptibly exceeded its multi- year average, which 
is regarded as the normal utilisation rate. This, 
combined with the progressive improvement in 
the business climate and the favourable busi -
ness expectations, is an indication that indus -
trial activity is still intact, despite the recent 
countermovement in output.
Seasonally adjusted construction output de -
clined surprisingly sharply compared with the 
first quarter of 2016 (-4¼%). Much of this de -
crease was due to the sharp increase in output 
at the beginning of the year, which was bol -
stered by the exceptionally mild weather condi -
tions. Apparently, this did not result in add -
itional output, which might have been ex -
pected given the good orders situation. On the 
contrary, it would appear that construction 
projects were merely brought forward and 
were therefore missing from the figures in the 
second quarter. This bounce- back effect was 
particularly pronounced in the main construc -
tion sector.The negative development in industry in the 
second quarter was reflected only to a limited 
extent in industry- related services. The eco -
nomic indicators, for example, are showing just 
a sideways movement, but not a decline in 
wholesale revenue. According to the Ifo Insti -
tute survey, the assessment of the current situ -
ation in wholesale trade even showed an im -
provement in the second quarter. The assess -
ment of the current situation in other services 
sectors also improved somewhat. Motor vehicle  
sales are likely to have decreased slightly, how -
ever, which is indicated by the sharp fall in the 
number of new motor vehicle registrations in 
the second quarter, following quite a consider -
able increase at the beginning of the year. The 
retail trade sector did not record any further 
revenue increases in the reporting period after 
having already reported weak growth in the 
previous quarter.Marked decline 
in industrial output , …
… but industrial 
activity still 
intact
Construction 
activity contract -
ing surprisingly sharplyServices sector activity still robustOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
51

Employment and  
labour market
The labour market situation remained very 
favour  able. Both employment and the number 
of vacancies continued to rise. As in the pre -
ceding quarters, this was due mainly to the 
very buoyant growth of jobs subject to social 
security contributions. The underlying unemploy -
ment dynamics were likewise positive. How -
ever, the growing number of asylum applica -
tion decisions led to an increase in the number 
of refugees registering as job seekers. The fact 
that total registered unemployment nonethe -
less continued to decrease can be explained by 
the greater use of labour market policy instru -
ments.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany rose by 121,000, or 0.3%, 
in  the second quarter of 2016. The increase 
was therefore somewhat more moderate than 
in the first quarter of the year. It was again 
employ ment subject to social security contribu -
tions which increased in particular. According 
to the initial figures of the Federal Employment 
Agency, the number of employees subject to 
social security contributions in April and May 
alone rose by an estimated 0.4% (or 131,000 
persons) on the average of the first quarter. By 
contrast, the trend in exclusively low- paid part- 
time employment, which has been declining 
since the introduction of the statutory general 
minimum wage at the beginning of 2015, 
came to a standstill of late. The number of self- 
employed persons is likely to have fallen slightly.
Looking at the individual sectors, new positions 
subject to social security contributions were 
again created above all in the area of business- 
related services and in the health and social 
work sector. Both sectors combined accounted 
for roughly half of the increase in employment. 
A significant number of new positions were 
created in the public sector for the third quar -
ter in succession. Job growth in the construc -
tion sector tailed off significantly, however, 
after it had expanded strongly in the winter Positive labour 
market develop-ments continued in Q2
Virtually no 
change in favourable employment trend
Increase above 
all in a number of services sectors Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16July40.541.041.542.042.543.043.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.031.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
52

half- year. Manufacturing firms were also more 
reluctant to recruit new staff.
The high demand for labour is still being met to 
a considerable extent by immigrants. According 
to the migration statistics for 2015 recently 
published by the Federal Statistical Office, the 
(net) influx of foreign workers from other EU 
member states increased again slightly to 
333,000 from an already elevated level. The 
number of persons migrating from east Euro -
pean EU countries alone amounted to 260,000. 
According to the immigration monitor figures 
of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB), 
in the last 12 months up to May 2016 slightly 
more than half of the growth in employment 
subject to social security contributions or in 
low- paid part- time work was accounted for by 
non- German nationals, primarily from other 
EU countries. By contrast, the inflow of refu -
gees has barely been reflected in additional 
employment to date as many of the refugees 
can, initially, only be integrated into the Ger -
man labour market to a limited extent. The 
number of persons in employment subject to 
social security contributions or working in low- 
paid part- time jobs coming from the most sig -
nificant war- torn and crisis- stricken countries of 
Asia and Africa rose by just 32,000 compared 
with the same month one year earlier.1
Registered unemployment fell slightly in the 
second quarter. Taking the average of the 
report ing period, 2.70 million persons were 
registered as unemployed in seasonally ad -
justed terms, which is 31,000 fewer than the 
average for the first three months of the year. 
The unemployment rate went down by 0.1 per -
centage point to 6.1%, which reflects the con -
tinued fairly robust underlying cyclical trend of 
the German economy. The use of labour mar -
ket policy measures was stepped up signifi -
cantly in connection with the growing number 
of refugees available to the labour market. This 
masks the rising number of underemployed 
refugees in the unemployment statistics. Accord-
ing to the Federal Employment Agency’s defin -
ition, total underemployment (excluding short- time work) – which also includes persons who 
are not counted as unemployed on account of 
their participation in labour market policy 
measures – went up by around 30,000 persons 
during the second quarter. This trend con -
tinued in July with a further decline in un -
employment and an increase in underemploy -
ment.
The Federal Employment Agency published 
specific labour market statistics pertaining to 
refugees for the first time in June.2 According 
to these statistics, 297,000 recognised refu -
gees, asylum seekers and “tolerated persons” 
were registered as seeking employment in 
June, 131,000 of whom were unemployed. The 
remaining job seekers were not available to the 
labour market on account of their participation 
in integration or labour market policy measures 
or were employed for more than 15 hours per 
week and were therefore not counted as being 
unemployed. More than three- quarters of 
these unemployed persons were recognised 
refugees. Should these persons be in need of 
state assistance – which is the case most of the 
time – they receive the basic allowance for job 
seekers (unemployment benefit  II) and are 
assisted  by the job centres.
The upbeat employment momentum should 
persist in the coming months. The most im -
portant leading employment indicators – the 
ifo employment barometer, the IAB labour 
market barometer for employment and the 
Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job index – 
have remained very stable in the last few 
months. The results of the survey conducted by Additional 
demand for labour still being covered to a considerable extent by immigration 
More under-
employed refugees , but further drop in unemployment thanks to favourable economy and labour market policy measuresLabour market data on refugees  available  for 
the first time
Employment 
outlook remains 
positive
1 See IAB (2016): Zuwanderungsmonitor Juli 2016, Aktuelle 
Berichte des IAB . The IAB counts Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghani -
stan and Pakistan as well as the African countries of Eritrea, 
Nigeria and Somalia as being among the most significant 
countries at war or in crisis.
2 The current reporting practice in the Federal Employment 
Agency’s statistics for persons with a nationality of one of 
the main countries of origin of asylum seekers (irrespective 
of their actual status and excluding refugees from other 
countries) has been enhanced to include the systematic 
record ing of their “residence status”. See Federal Employ -
ment Agency, Geflüchtete Menschen in den Arbeitsmarkt -
statistiken – Erste Ergebnisse, Hintergrundinformationen , 
June 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
53

the German Chamber of Industry and Com -
merce (DIHK) in the early summer on enter -
prises’ staffing plans, spanning a slightly 
broader horizon of 12 months, were positive, 
like those of the previous survey. The business 
services sector and, in particular, the public 
sector  , reported more unsubsidised vacancies 
to the Federal Employment Agency. However, 
the number of reported vacancies also rose in 
the manufacturing and construction sectors. 
The subcomponent of the revised IAB labour 
market barometer that projects developments 
in unemployment in the coming three months 
has risen slightly of late. It is now marginally 
above the neutral threshold, pointing to a fur -
ther slight decrease in registered unemploy -
ment over the next few months. A key factor in 
this is probably the expected increase in the 
use of active labour market policy measures in 
connection with the recent influx of refugees, 
which is why the growing numbers of refugees 
joining the labour market is having little impact 
on unemployment figures for the time being.
Wages and prices
The second quarter of 2016 saw overall earn -
ings (including one- off payments and ancillary 
agreements) climb only modestly by +2.2% 
year on year, just as they had done in the first quarter. This was due not only to the moderate 
pay rises in the current pay round, which in 
some cases come into effect only after a 
several- month freeze at the old pay rates, but 
also to negative baseline effects owing to one- 
off and special payments in the second quarter 
of 2015, as well as to low graduated increases 
stemming from pay agreements negotiated in 
earlier pay rounds. Basic pay rates, too, showed 
only a modest further increase of +2.1% during 
the second quarter.
So far this year, new wage agreements have 
been concluded for just under 8 million salaried 
employees. The agreed volumes correspond to 
a moderate annualised wage increase of just 
under 2½%. In some industries, supplementary 
agreements were reached which have further 
increased wage costs and may therefore have 
curtailed the increase in pay rates. For example, 
contributions to certain supplementary pension 
schemes in the central and local government 
public sector will rise, while employers in the 
main construction sector will take on a larger 
share of food and accommodation expenses.
The Minimum Wage Commission unanimously 
recommended that the Federal Government 
raise the statutory general minimum wage to 
€8.84 from January 2017, which would repre -
sent a 4% wage increase for those who receive 
it. The recommendation was based on the gen -
eral trend in negotiated wages between Janu -
ary 2015 and the end of June 2016, measured 
using the negotiated wage index of the Federal 
Statistical Office, excluding special payments 
and on an hourly basis.3 The Federal Minister 
for Labour and Social Affairs announced that 
this recommendation would be implemented.
Prices ceased their downward trend in the 
second quarter of 2016; instead, higher crude 
oil listings resulted in steep price increases 
Pay increases 
still modest in 2016 Q2Mostly moderate  agreements  in current pay round
Minimum wage 
to be raised to 
€8.84 per hour from 2017
Energy- induced 
price rise at almost all levelsNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding  additional  benefits  and  lump-sum  payments  (eg 
holiday pay, bonuses).
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 201600.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated
rates of pay,total
Basic pay
 1
H1
3 The Commission also factored in the increase in negoti -
ated pay rates for public-  sector employees of central and 
local government, which had in some cases not yet been 
implemented as at the reporting date, because it had be -
come legally effective prior to June 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
54

across virtually all stages of the economy com -
pared to the first quarter. Excluding energy, 
however, the underlying tendency remained 
muted, with the decline at the upstream stages 
tailing off noticeably. While the rate of price 
increases  at the consumer level intensified 
somewhat, even after stripping out energy, this 
was mainly attrib utable to exceptional factors.
Import prices rose significantly in seasonally ad -
justed terms during the second quarter, mainly 
because energy prices surged following the 
pick- up in crude oil prices. Excluding energy, 
the considerable falling trend in prices seen in 
the preceding quarters tailed off. This was 
mainly because the pronounced negative price 
trend for intermediate goods petered out on 
the back of rising metal and ore prices. By con -
trast, the cost of imported consumer and cap -
ital goods continued to fall, probably also as a 
result of the euro’s slight appreciation. Indus -
trial producer prices flatlined after declining 
over the last few quarters. The rise in crude oil 
prices had less of an impact than at the import 
level, given the small weighting of petroleum 
products. It was also offset by the fact that the 
price of other goods continued to fall, albeit 
only slightly vis- à- vis the previous quarters. In 
comparison to the second quarter of 2015, 
however, prices at the industrial producer level 
dropped by 2.6% overall – only slightly less 
than in the first quarter. At the import level, the 
year-  on- year price decline increased slightly to 
5½%. Export prices fell less strongly than im -
port prices year on year, leading to a marked 
improvement in the terms of trade.
While the year- on- year increase in construction 
prices in the second quarter was still moderate, 
at +2.1%, it was slightly sharper than in the pre -
ceding quarters. Inflationary pressures in the 
real estate market intensified distinctly during 
the first half of 2016. According to the Associ -
ation of German Pfandbrief Banks (vdp), the 
year- on- year rise in prices for owner- occupied 
housing averaged 5½% in the first two quar -
ters of 2016 as against 4½% in 2015.Excluding 
energy, falling price trend at import and producer  level tailing off
Slight rise in 
construction prices, sharp rise in house pricesExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 20169295100105110
97100105110
97100105 105110115
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
July95100105
JulyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
55

Consumer prices rose by a seasonally adjusted 
0.6% in the second quarter compared with the 
first three months of the year. Half of this in -
crease was attributable to higher energy prices 
in the wake of the rise in crude oil quotations. 
While prices went up somewhat even after 
stripping out energy, this was mainly attribut -
able to exceptional factors. Thus the surge in 
the price of commercial goods excluding en -
ergy can largely be explained by fluctuations in 
the prices of clothing and footwear, which 
have become significantly more volatile in re -
cent years. Moreover, an adjust ment to the 
minimum tax rate resulted in higher tobacco 
prices. Prices of food and services, including 
rents, rose only moderately by contrast. As the 
rate of inflation had likewise increased very 
sharply in the second quarter of 2015, the year- 
on- year increase as measured by the national 
consumer price index (CPI) dipped from +0.3% 
to +0.1%, and from +0.1% to 0.0% as defined 
by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP). Excluding energy, the rates held steady 
at around +1%.
In July, seasonally adjusted consumer prices 
remained  at the same level as in June. Although 
the price of petroleum products fell signifi -
cantly as a result of falling crude oil prices, un -
processed food became much dearer, probably 
owing to the unfavourable weather conditions. 
Prices for industrial goods and services showed 
little change. Rents continued to increase only 
moderately. Both the CPI and the HICP climbed 
0.4% on the year, after +0.3% and +0.2% 
respect ively (excluding energy, each index rose 
by +1.3% after standing at +1.1%). Judging by 
recent forward prices for crude oil, headline 
infla tion is likely to remain at a similar level over 
the next few months but may move above 1% 
in early 2017.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy should continue to grow 
in the third quarter in line with the fairly robust 
underlying cyclical upthrust. Despite the low level of new orders received in the second 
quarter, the mood in German industry has im -
proved distinctly. Notwithstanding the intense 
public discussion about the economic implica -
tions of the United Kingdom’s announced 
departure  from the EU, German firms have so 
far only slightly moderated their positive ex -
pectations. This supports the assessment that 
the economic consequences of the Brexit vote 
for Germany are likely to be very limited in 
scope, at least in the short term. German firms’ 
positive expectations regarding foreign sales 
suggest that exports, too, will grow solidly in 
the third quarter. Overall, production by indus -
trial firms should once again make a marked 
contribution to aggregate growth between July 
and September. Given that capacity utilisation 
is already above its average level, this should 
lead to more investment in machinery and 
equipment. Construction investment should 
also provide a greater impetus in the third 
quarter after the effects of the weather- related 
second- quarter bump in building activity have 
petered out, as is indicated by the positive sen -
timent and orders situation in the construction 
sector. In addition, private consumption should 
once more be a significant driver of domestic 
economic growth after faltering in the second 
quarter. Both employees’ income prospects 
and the labour market situation remain favour -
able, and the preceding rise in crude oil prices 
has reversed.
At present, it is difficult to gauge the real eco -
nomic impact that the UK’s decision to leave 
the EU will have on Germany. The future frame -
work for economic cooperation is still unclear 
and the associated negotiations will probably 
last several years. There might be short- term 
consequences if, for example, uncertainty 
causes German enterprises and consumers to 
postpone investment and spending decisions. 
However, the latest survey results indicate that 
this has barely been the case so far. Ifo Institute 
data suggest that although business expect -
ations in manufacturing weakened in the wake 
of the referendum in the UK, they remain in 
positive territory and are still up on the first Jump in con-
sumer inflation due to energy and special factors 
Prices static 
in July
Quite robust 
growth in Q3Brexit has unsettled  German  firms and consumers only slightly, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
56

quarter of 2016. Output and export expect -
ations in industry have likewise deteriorated 
only slightly. The ifo Institute’s surveys even 
showed a slight recent improvement in busi -
ness expectations in wholesale and other ser -
vices excluding trade. Moreover, according to a 
special survey conducted by the Chambers of 
Industry and Commerce,4 most firms in Ger -
many are not planning to scale back their in -
vestment or headcount while negotiations be -
tween the UK and the EU take place. Con -
sumers also remain confident. The consumer 
climate indicator, as estimated by the market 
research institution Gesellschaft für Konsum -
forschung  (GfK), showed almost no change for 
August compared to July. The majority of the 
employees surveyed by the GfK do not fear 
that the result of the Brexit referendum will put 
their own jobs at risk.
However, there may be certain consequences 
for foreign trade already in the short term, 
since it is being influenced by exchange rate 
changes and the increased levels of uncertainty 
in the UK. This uncertainty is depressing de -
mand in the United Kingdom, which in turn is 
dampening imports – and thus Germany’s 
exports . Germany exported €89.3 billion worth 
of goods to the UK in 2015. The gross value 
added of these exports is equivalent to around 
2% of Germany’s aggregate output, with the 
automotive sector accounting for the lion’s 
share. The negative impact of the sharp depre -
ciation of the British pound on German exports 
is being offset by the positive effects of the 
euro’s depreciation against many other cur -
rencies. The German economy may also be 
affected , for example, if the UK’s plan to leave 
the EU influences foreign direct investment and 
labour mobility.… but may 
impair foreign trade in short termDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Apr-
May
Apr-
May90100110120130
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1%
%
4 The Chambers of Industry and Commerce carried out a 
survey on the real economic impact of the Brexit vote 
among 5,672 German enterprises between 27 and 29 June 
2016. See also the press release issued by the German 
Chamber of Industry and Commerce (DIHK) on 7 July 2016; 
available at http://www.dihk.de/presse/meldungen/  
2016-07-07-blitzumfrage- brexitDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
57

Industrial orders fell by ½% in seasonally 
adjusted  terms in the second quarter. While 
non- euro- area countries were the biggest cus -
tomers at the start of the year, orders from the 
euro area rose perceptibly during the second 
quarter, primarily benefiting German capital 
goods manufacturers. Significantly more do -
mestic orders were received, too, particularly 
for intermediate goods and consumer goods. 
Orders from non- euro- area countries declined 
sharply, however. The turnaround in the 
regional  pattern of orders was due mainly to 
big- ticket orders, with fewer coming from non- 
euro- area countries and more originating from 
Germany and the euro area. This indicates that 
the current export trend is likely to persist and 
that German industry will increasingly benefit 
from higher demand from the euro area.
Following a steep decline in the second quar -
ter, the construction sector is likely to return to 
a growth path in the third quarter. The upbeat 
expectations in main construction business edged up even more, while the volume of 
orders received remained at roughly the same 
level as in the second quarter. Combined with a 
marked widening in the temporal range of 
orders, this should result in a clear boost to 
demand , so that only supply bottlenecks could 
conceivably prevent a sharp increase in output. 
The breakdown of new orders among the indi -
vidual construction subsectors was very mixed. 
The strongest stimuli came from orders for 
industrial  and commercial buildings, whereas 
there were noticeably fewer orders for road 
construction.
The ongoing positive labour market situation, 
high income expectations, stable prices and the 
sizeable mid- year pension increases mean that 
favourable underlying conditions remain in 
place for dynamic consumption demand. The 
very optimistic consumer mood suggests that 
private consumption will continue to expand 
during the third quarter.Industrial orders 
down despite bigger demand from euro area
Construction 
capacity utilisation  remains highGood outlook for private 
consumption Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
58

Public finances*
General government budget
The setting for Germany’s public finances re -
mains favourable this year. Although there has 
been mounting uncertainty since the Brexit 
vote, its short- term impact on the government 
budget appears to be marginal. The year 2016 
looks set to end with another surplus, albeit 
one which is likely to be smaller than last year 
(2015: 0.6% of gross domestic product (GDP)). 
On the back of a favourable cyclical position 
and labour market situation, government 
budgets are also benefiting from further dimin -
ishing interest expenditure.1 However, that 
advan tage is likely to be outweighed by add -
itional structural outlays in other areas. First, 
expenditure on refugees and other immigrants 
is rising on the year, particularly because in 
2015 many refugees only arrived in autumn, 
which meant that the related expenditure only 
affected a few months. Second, the budgetary 
stance is expansionary this year in other fields, 
too. The tax and social contributions ratio is 
unlikely to change much, in part because the 
(limited) income tax cuts are partially offset by 
fiscal drag2 and the health insurance institu -
tions have, on average, raised their additional 
contribution rates distinctly. However, over and 
above the additional spending on immigration, 
expenditure is being increased in various areas, 
such as housing allowance, infrastructure and 
child day- care. Moreover, the social security 
funds’ payments for healthcare, long- term care 
and pensions will also experience dynamic 
growth over the year as a whole. An additional 
burden is presented by calls on guarantees in 
connection with the spin- off of a portfolio 
belong ing to HSH Nordbank.3
The debt ratio stood at 71.1% at the end of the 
first quarter of 2016. While this was barely 
down from the level at the end of 2015 (71.2%), 
the downward movement should basically 
accel erate. Thus the debt ratio frequently traces 
an erratic course in the short term. Amongst other things, central government raised funds 
through securities repurchase agreements 
(repos) on a relatively large scale in the first 
quarter, while money market deposits were 
increased  (balance sheet extension). For the 
year as a whole, growth in nominal GDP in the 
ratio’s denominator will significantly depress 
the debt ratio, and a surplus is on the cards. 
Furthermore, liabilities in connection with gov -
ernment support measures for the financial 
sector should continue decreasing, in spite of 
the burdens relating to HSH Nordbank.
The medium- term outlook for Germany’s public 
finances remains sound.4 Although expenditure 
connected with the influx of refugees cannot 
yet be gauged precisely, from today’s perspec -
tive it appears to be manageable at up to ½% 
of GDP annually. Recent experiences underline 
the importance of creating safety cushions 
below the deficit ceilings that provide room for 2016: declining 
surplus and …
… further 
receding  debt ratioFavourable medium- term outlook
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. 
The subsequent more detailed reporting on the budgets of 
central, state and local government and of the social secur -
ity funds is based on the figures as defined in the govern -
ment finance statistics (which are generally in line with the 
budget accounts).
1 In the national accounts –  unlike in the government 
 finance statistics – premiums and discounts on the nominal 
value of bond issues are recorded on an accrual basis. A 
premium is thus recorded as negative interest expenditure 
spread over the life of the bond.
2 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
total positive revenue effect of income tax bracket creep 
and the negative impact of the fact that specific excise 
duties  are largely independent of prices.
3 Guarantees in the amount of €2½ billion are being 
called, impacting on state government deficits as defined 
in the national accounts.
4 For the medium term up to 2020, the Federal Ministry of 
Finance expects general government to post slight sur -
pluses of ¼% of GDP and the debt ratio to drop below the 
60% limit in the final year. The ceiling of 0.5% of GDP for 
the general government structural deficit would thus be 
adhered to including a certain safety margin. See Federal 
Ministry of Finance, Mittelfristige Finanzprojektion der 
Öffentlichen Haushalte, Monatsbericht, July 2016, pp 19-
22. The Independent Advisory Board of the Stability Coun -
cil also considers compliance with the limit to be achiev -
able by some margin based on the current planning; see 
Independent Advisory Board of the Stability Council, Fifth 
statement, On compliance with the upper limit for the 
structural general government deficit pursuant to Section 
51 (2) of the Budgetary Principles Act, 8 June 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
59

manoeuvre within the fiscal framework to cope 
with unexpectedly unfavourable developments. 
In view of the requirements set by the national 
debt brake, this suggests that policymakers 
should generally strive to generate moderate 
structural surpluses in the future as well.
Yet there are calls from some quarters for Ger -
many to fully exhaust the budget limits in order 
to provide additional fiscal impetus to the 
economy. But given the German economy’s 
ongoing buoyant momentum, there is no need 
for an additional stimulus; moreover, the effect 
of such a German stimulus package on other 
countries is likely to be negligible (see the box 
on pages 13 to 17). Nonetheless, it is important 
to seek to achieve improvements in the struc -
ture of the budget. To do so, it would be advis -
able to give greater prominence to growth-  
enhancing expenditure categories, exploit effi -
ciency reserves and limit the burden of taxes 
and social contributions. In particular, policy -
makers should resist the temptation to use the 
present favourable situation to adopt new 
spending programmes that will place further 
ex ante  strains on future budgets and necessi -
tate additional countermeasures later on. This 
applies inter alia  to the statutory pension insur -
ance scheme, which already faces major chal -
lenges going forward (see the excursus on 
pages 68 to 77).Positive shocks relating, amongst other things, 
to interest expenditure, have recently triggered  
in the main higher expenditure in other areas. It 
would therefore make sense in future, if add -
itional budgetary leeway emerges over and 
above the desired safety margins, to reduce the 
burden of taxes and social contributions. The 
Federal Employ ment Agency, for instance, has 
accumulated relatively large reserves, which is a 
sensible precaution in the current favourable 
setting given the pronounced cyclicality of its 
budget. But since larger surpluses are expected 
in the coming years, thought could be given to 
lowering the contribution rate in order to 
dampen the continued build- up of its reserves. 
Another point to consider is that central, state 
and local government budgets are profiting 
from solid economic growth by way of clearly 
increasing tax receipts, while the tax ratio has 
meanwhile almost climbed back up to the rela -
tively high level recorded in the year 2000. In 
view of this, it would be worth considering cut -
ting income tax. One particular option would 
be to reduce the “solidarity surcharge”. This add-  
on to various income taxes imposed by the Fed -
eral Government and linked to the existence of 
particular financing needs generates revenue of 
½% of GDP , whereas the special- purpose grants 
to the east German federal states, which were 
given as the reason for introducing the surcharge, 
are now low in comparison and will have been 
phased out by the end of the decade.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government 
Tax revenue
Year- on- year growth in tax revenue5 in the 
second quarter of 2016 came to 6% (see the 
adjacent chart and the table on page 61). This 
increase was driven by a surge in profit- related Fiscal policy 
could enhance underlying con-ditions without impacting budget and …… use extra scope above safety margins to reduce taxes and social contributions 
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201601234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
60

taxes (+14½%), particularly in non- assessed 
taxes on earnings (+56½%, mainly investment 
income tax on dividends). This can probably be 
ascribed largely to earlier dividend distribution 
dates than last year, which means that a coun -
terswing should be expected as the year pro -
gresses. Though revenue growth in assessed 
taxes on earnings slowed after the first quarter 
of 2016, it was still strong. By contrast, receipts 
from withholding tax on interest income and 
capital gains continued their steep decline. Al -
though developments in gross wages and sal -
aries remain positive, wage tax receipts saw 
dampened growth (+2½%), reflecting increases 
in the basic income tax allowance and the child 
tax allowance, and in child benefit, which is de -
ducted from revenue, as well as additional tax 
relief. At 4%, the rise in turnover tax receipts 
was in line with expectations for growth in the 
(nominal) macroeconomic reference variables 
(private consumption, private housing con -
struction and parts of government spending). 
Revenue from tobacco tax was still rising strongly in the second quarter (+12½%). How -
ever, this one- off effect in connection with the 
entry into force of the Regulation Governing 
the Implementation of the Tobacco Products 
Directive (Verordnung zur Umsetzung der Richt -
linie über Tabakerzeugnisse)  on 20 May 2016 is 
likely to be offset by lower revenue over the 
rest of the year.
According to the official tax estimate from May, 
tax revenue (including local government taxes) 
is expected to expand only moderately (by 
2½%) in 2016 as a whole. This is due mainly to 
factoring in sizeable tax refunds owing to past 
court rulings.6 Growth will also be constrained 
by legislative changes, however, particularly the Dynamic 
increase in tax revenue in Q2 due to sharp rise in taxes on earnings
Dampening effects expected in H2Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2016 1,2Q2
2015 2016 2015 2016
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 300.1 317.0 + 16.9 +  5.6 + 3.0 153.2 162.1 + 8.9 +  5.8
of which
Wage tax 85.8 87.9 +  2.1 +  2.4 + 3.3 44.3 45.3 + 1.0 +  2.4
Profi  t-related taxes 3 50.1 57.4 +  7.3 + 14.5 + 1.6 25.5 29.2 + 3.7 + 14.6
Assessed income tax 25.5 27.5 +  2.1 +  8.1 + 6.2 12.3 12.9 + 0.6 +  5.0
Corporation tax 11.3 15.8 +  4.5 + 39.6 + 5.3 5.9 7.3 + 1.5 + 25.3
Investment income tax
4 13.4 14.1 +  0.7 +  5.4 – 9.6 7.3 8.9 + 1.6 + 22.2
Turnover taxes 5 102.6 107.1 +  4.5 +  4.4 + 4.6 50.8 52.7 + 2.0 +  3.8
Energy tax 14.2 14.5 +  0.3 +  1.9 + 1.0 9.5 9.9 + 0.3 +  3.7
Tobacco tax 5.9 6.9 +  1.0 + 16.2 – 3.1 3.7 4.1 + 0.5 + 12.4
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2016. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 These mainly affected profit- related taxes. For informa -
tion on the rulings included, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Monthly Report, May 2016, p 67. Unlike the cash flows de -
scribed here, the impact of these court rulings is recorded 
in the national accounts as increasing expenditure and is 
recognised at the time each ruling is announced (ie in pre -
vious years). Consequently, tax revenue as recorded in the 
national accounts will register a much bigger rise.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
61

income tax relief mentioned previously. Rev -
enue growth in the first half of 2016 was sig -
nificantly better than forecast. Even though a 
certain slowdown is currently expected for the 
rest of the year – above and beyond the ex -
pected effects of the court rulings – the May 
tax estimate could thus be surpassed.
Central government budget
Central government generated a large surplus 
of €14 billion in the second quarter, as it had 
done one year previously. Revenue rose by a 
moderate 1% on balance (€1 billion). Tax re -
ceipts saw renewed dynamic growth of 6½% 
(€5 billion), a large part of which (€2 billion) 
was again attributable to smaller transfers to 
the EU budget, which are deducted from tax 
revenue. However, other revenue fell by €4 bil -
lion, as one year earlier central government 
had received substantial proceeds from the 
mobile phone frequency auction. Overall ex -penditure rose in parallel with revenue. Once 
again, higher payments to the social security 
funds (primarily the statutory pension insurance 
scheme and, following the expiry of the re -
duced transfers, to the health fund) placed a 
strain on the budget, as did transfers to the rest 
of the world and for military procurements. 
This was offset by another considerable drop in 
interest expenditure of €1½ billion, which was 
due to higher premiums on new bond issu -
ance. In the budget accounts – unlike in the 
national accounts on which the European fiscal 
rules are based  – these premiums are not 
spread evenly over the entire term of the newly 
issued debt instruments but instead are recog -
nised in full immediately as lowering expend -
iture.7 Both economic logic and prudent budget 
management suggest that it would make sense 
to change over from recording such payments 
in the budget on a cash flow to an accrual 
basis.
In the first half of 2016, the central government 
surplus rose by €4½ billion on the year to €11½ 
billion. For the year as a whole, however, a def -
icit of €6½ billion is projected, amounting to 
a  deterioration of €18 billion. Yet given the 
favour  able figures so far, such a steep slump in 
the second half of the year is not discernible at 
present. On the one hand, transfers to the EU 
budget are likely to be higher than last year 
and the refunds relating to court rulings that 
were anticipated in the May tax estimate will 
probably have a greater impact. In addition, €2 
billion will be transferred to state government 
as an “immigrant integration payment” agreed 
in July. On the other hand, positive baseline 
effects  will result from the non- recurrence of 
the combined €5 billion transfer to the Fund to 
promote municipal investment and the Energy 
and climate fund made in the second half of 
2015 and of the temporary ceding of turnover 
tax receipts to state government in the face of 
the sharp influx of refugees. In addition, central Surplus still high 
in Q2 despite dropout of frequency  auction  windfallH1 buoyant, slump in H2 unlikelyCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–15–10–50+5+10+15
2016
20152014Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201420162015€ billion
7 On balance, interest expenditure as recorded in the 
budget actually generated positive revenue of almost €1 
billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
62

government has not yet claimed its planned 
substantial reimbursement from the Flood relief 
fund (€1½ billion).
The much better- than- envisaged performance 
is also evidenced in a comparison with the 
budget estimates. First, additional tax revenue 
(€2 billion) is likely based on the May estimate. 
Second, other revenue will be boosted by sev -
eral favourable factors such as a somewhat 
higher Bundesbank profit and an unexpected 
contribution refund by the supplementary pen -
sion scheme of central and state government 
(Versorgungsanstalt des Bundes und der Län -
der, or VBL). Third, given the persistently low 
yield level, savings of more than €5 billion 
should be made on the estimated interest ex -
penditure. All things considered, the refugee 
reserve built up from the 2015 budget surplus 
is thus unlikely to be half depleted as planned, 
but instead will probably be stocked up consid -
erably thanks to a budget surplus. After includ -
ing the forecast near-  neutral cyclical compon -
ent and the deficits of the off- budget entities, 
which will probably be slightly smaller than 
esti mated (€5½ billion), the central govern -
ment budget would thus safely comply with 
the debt brake limit for the structural balance 
of -0.35% of GDP (-€10 billion).
Under the Federal Government’s current 
approach , additional transfers to the refugee 
reserve are recorded in the context of the debt 
brake as worsening the structural balance and 
future withdrawals from the fund as improving 
it. However, the EU rules are geared to the 
fiscal  balance, which disregards changes in 
reserves   and financial transactions.8 In a con -
sistent approach under the debt brake frame -
work, therefore, changes in reserves should be 
excluded from the structural balance. Other -
wise, there is the risk that, in the event of large 
withdrawals from reserves, the budget limit 
under the EU rules will not be safeguarded by 
the national debt brake – even though this is 
the debt brake’s basic aim.9The draft budget for 2017, which was approved 
by the Federal Cabinet at the beginning of July, 
again contains no new net borrowing. Spend -
ing is predicted to rise by 3½% (€12 billion) 
compared with the 2016 budget plan. If the 
marked savings on interest expenditure are 
stripped out, the increase amounts to no less 
than 5%. Higher budget appropriations come, 
in particular, from the Ministry of Labour and 
Social Affairs for the statutory pension insur -
ance scheme and – as a consequence of the 
recent mass immigration – for benefits under 
the means- tested basic allowance. The budgets 
of the defence, transport and construction 
ministries, too, are being raised distinctly. On 
the revenue side, additional tax receipts of 
€13½ billion are projected compared with the 
target figure for 2016. Other revenue is down 
on balance – evidently because of precaution -
ary budgetary items, eg for the rule on the per 
capita  payment to state government for refu -
gees, which has not yet been finalised and 
hence is not specified in the budget. A with -
drawal of €6½ billion from the refugee reserve 
is envisaged (and, based on the budget target 
figure for 2016 and the planning for 2017, the 
reserve would thus be exhausted at the end of 
2017). After also deducting coin seigniorage, 
the draft budget contains a calculated deficit of 
€7 billion.
To calculate the structural balance relevant 
under the debt brake, the Federal Ministry of 
Finance starts from the planned net borrowing 
of €0 and deducts both a €½ billion revenue 
surplus from financial transactions and a cyclical 
strain of €1 billion (see the table on page 64). Outturn well 
above target, surplus expected
Counting 
reserves towards 
structural 
balance  
inconsistent  with debt brake rulesDraft budget 
for 2017 again 
contains  no new 
net borrowing, but scheduled 
depletion of the 
refugee reserve
Debt brake 
ceiling  clearly undershot only if withdrawal from reserve is counted
8 For information on the concepts relating to the debt 
brake, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Key central government 
budget data in connection with the debt brake, Monthly 
Report, February 2016, pp 68-69.
9 If transfers to reserves were not counted towards the 
structural balance under the debt brake as an expense, the 
balance would be better. The control account would thus 
be credited accordingly. While (under the Federal Govern -
ment’s accounting practice) reserves can be used to plug 
future shortfalls at the budget preparation stage, this is ex -
plicitly ruled out when crediting the control account intro -
duced along with the debt brake. A credit balance on the 
control account can only be used to offset shortfalls at the 
budget implementation stage.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
63

Given the high utilisation of production cap -
acity and low unemployment level, however, 
there seems to be no reason to assume  a nega -
tive cyclical effect (see page  49). Rather, the 
Bundesbank estimates that there will be a posi -
tive cyclical impact on the budget, making its 
structural position appear less favour  able.10 The 
structural balance under the debt brake also 
incorp orates the deficits expected  for the off-  
budget entities Flood relief fund, Fund to pro -
mote municipal investment, and Energy and 
climate fund, which come to a combined total 
of €3½ billion. Hence, there is a marked safety 
margin of €7½ billion below the debt brake 
ceiling of €10½ billion. If, however, the with -
drawal from the refugee reserve is excluded 
from the calculation in keeping with the EU 
rules, as described above, there would be 
hardly any safety margin.
On balance, however, a more favourable out -
turn than estimated seems attainable for 2017, 
too. The anticipated brighter 2016 budget out -turn should partly provide a better starting 
point for 2017. This should outweigh the fore -
seeable additional strains, notably caused by 
the agreement reached between central and 
state government in the intervening period on 
a flat immigrant integration payment of €2 bil -
lion. Looking at the refugee reserve, it would 
be advisable to use any amounts that are not 
needed to pay down debt by the end of 2017 
at the latest. By that time it should be possible 
to relatively accurately gauge future expend -
itures on refugees,11 and these should then be 
financed out of regular budget income streams. 
The practice of maintaining the reserve for un -
expected developments should then be discon -
Estimates are 
cautious, however Central government’s medium-term fi  scal planning for 2016 to 2020 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2014Actual2015Target2016Draft2017Fiscal plan
2018 2019 2020
Expenditure
1 295.9 311.4 316.9 328.7 331.1 343.3 349.3
of which
Investment 2 24.9 29.6 31.5 33.3 34.5 35.1 30.8
Revenue 1, 3 295.9 311.4 316.9 328.7 331.1 343.3 349.3
of which
Tax revenue 1 270.8 281.7 288.1 301.8 315.5 327.9 339.4
Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfers to (–)/withdrawals from (+) reserves 0 – 12.1 6.1 6.7 0 0 0
Fiscal balance 4 –  0.3 11.8 –  6.4 –  7.0 –  0.3 –  0.3 –  0.3
Cyclical component 5 –  5.9 –  1.4 –  1.2 –  1.0 –  0.7 –  0.0 0.0
Balance of fi  nancial transactions 6 –  2.4 1.9 0.1 0.5 . . .
Balance of relevant off- budget entities
Energy and climate fund –  0.1 1.9 –  0.4 –  1.2 . . .
Relief fund (2013 fl  ood) –  0.7 –  0.9 –  3.5 –  1.5 . . .
Fund to promote municipal investment – 3.5 –  1.5 –  0.8 . . .
Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 7 7.5 3.9 –  4.3 –  2.9 . . .
Structural fi  scal balance 7 7.2 15.8 – 10.7 –  9.9 . . .
Memo item
Ceiling – 26.6 – 18.6 – 10.2 – 10.6 – 11.0 – 11.3 – 11.7
1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation assistance to Federal states from 2011. 2 Excluding shares in the ESM. 3 Including coin seigniorage. 4
 Corresponds to the difference between the revenue and expenditure of the core budget as defi  ned in the government fi  nance statistics 
and equals net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) less transfers to (–)/withdrawals from (+) reserves and less coin seigniorage. 5 Data for 2014 and 2015 taken from the 2015 budgetary account. Data for 2016 to 2020 according to Federal Government’s 2016 spring forecast. 
6 According to the defi  nition of the relevant fi  scal year. 7 Meaning of structural: plus the balance of relevant off- budget entities less the 
cyclical component and less the balance of fi  nancial transactions.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10 For information on the Eurosystem cyclical adjustment 
approach used here, see Deutsche Bundesbank, A disag -
gregated framework for analysing public finances: Germa -
ny’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly 
Report, March 2006, pp 61-76.
11 In view of the negotiations with state government 
about cost- sharing for refugee- related expenses, the figure 
of €19 billion specified in the Federal draft budget docu -
ments seems equally as excessive as the state govern -
ments’ budgeted figure of €21 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
64

tinued. Moreover, dissolving the reserve could 
also prevent future conflict with the European 
fiscal rules, as described above.
The medium- term fiscal plan to 2020 continues 
the balanced budget policy. In order to achieve 
this, a global expenditure cut of €5 billion is 
envisaged in 2018.12 This would have to be fac -
tored into the next budget draft preparation, 
which will commence before the benchmark 
figures are adopted in March 2017, an election 
year. This implies that no budgetary leeway will 
be available in 2018. While a better- than-  
expected budget performance in 2017 could 
again have a positive knock- on effect  on 2018, 
the flat immigrant integration payment of €2 
billion promised to state governments immedi -
ately after the Cabinet’s budget meeting al -
ready poses an additional burden, and it would 
still be prudent to regain a greater safety mar -
gin below the debt brake limit in the medium   
term. This could allow central government to 
better tackle the demographic challenges that 
are gradually emerging or resurgent funding 
costs in future.
A second- quarter surplus of €2 billion is re -
ported for central government’s off-  budget 
entities  covered by the Federal Ministry of 
Finance’s  quarterly overviews (excluding bad 
banks and other entities keeping commercial 
accounts), following a slight deficit one year 
earlier. This improvement owed much to privat -
isation proceeds booked by the Financial Mar -
ket Stabilisation Fund in connection with last 
year’s flotation of Deutsche Pfandbriefbank, 
the successor to Hypo Real Estate. The off-  
budget entities will face additional burdens in 
the second half of 2016 compared with the 
same period last year, notably stemming from 
central government’s wish to reclaim €1½ bil -
lion from the Flood relief fund as well as the 
dropout of central government’s special trans -
fers of €3½ billion to the Fund to promote 
muni  cipal investment and €1½ billion to the 
Energy and climate fund. Additional factors 
with a negative year- on- year impact on the 
full- year result include the extra payment of €2 billion already recorded in the first quarter for 
the redemption of a ten- year inflation- linked 
Federal bond13 and the transfer of the €1½ bil -
lion bank levy, recorded as income in 2015, to 
Europe’s new Single Resolution Board. For the 
year as a whole, the Federal Ministry of Finance 
predicts in its July Monthly Report  that the 
relevant  off- budget entities will post a deficit 
of  €3½ billion, after generating a surplus of 
€9 billion in 2015.
State government budgets14
In the monthly cash statistics, state govern -
ment core budgets registered a surplus of 
€4½ billion in the second quarter, compared 
with just over €3 billion a year earlier. Revenue 
expanded significantly by 6½% (€5½ billion), 
driven by further buoyant tax revenue growth 
(+9% or €5½ billion). Expenditure climbed by a 
total of 5% (€4 billion). Very sharp rises were 
recorded not only in other operating expend -
iture (+22% or €1½ billion) but also in transfers 
to other levels of government (primarily local 
authorities, up by a total of 7½% or €1½ bil -
lion), both presumably under the impact of the 
extra spending necessitated to support refu -
gees and other immigrants. Alongside wage 
and salary increases, another significant rise in 
the number of retired civil servants made a 
marked contribution to growth in personnel 
expenditure (+3½% or €1 billion).
Following the May tax estimate – which takes 
account of marked shortfalls that will occur in 
the second half of the year owing to court rul -
ings – a significantly slower pace of growth in 
tax revenue is projected for 2016 as a whole, 
(+3½%, excluding the local government tax Fiscal plan 
to 2020 retains balanced budgets, but more ambitious target advisable
Improvement 
and surplus for off- budget entities in Q2, …
… but clear 
deterioration and deficit expected for year as a wholeSomewhat 
higher surplus 
in 2016 Q2 on 
back of further 
surging tax revenue  growth
Slight dip 
expected in 2016 fiscal outturn  followed by persistent surpluses 
12 This amount is already somewhat lower than the agreed 
benchmark figures after the May tax estimate had shown 
additional revenue of €2½ billion for each of the three 
years covered by the fiscal plan.
13 The Federal budget finances the additionally accruing 
indexing costs via simultaneous transfers to a special fund.
14 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2016 was analysed in a short article in the 
Bundesbank’s July 2016 Monthly Report. These are the 
most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
65

receipts  of the city- states Berlin, Bremen and 
Hamburg). Although the rise in refugee- related 
expenditure is likely to decelerate significantly 
in the second half of 2016, the result for the 
year as a whole would thus be worse than in 
2015 (surplus of €3 billion). However, the actual  
outturn will probably be far better than the 
budgeted figures, which envisage a total deficit 
of €10½ billion, whereas the Federal Ministry 
of Finance’s July forecast for 2016 (which takes 
account of financial support recently pledged 
by central government such as the flat-  rate 
immi grant integration payment) projects only a 
small deficit of €½ billion. From 2017 onwards, 
the state government core budgets viewed as a 
whole are expected to post persistent sur -
pluses, which seems quite plausible.
Citing the cost shock caused by the influx of 
immigrants and refugees, the city- state of 
Bremen, in its budgetary legislation15 for 2016 
and 2017, invoked the exemption clause to its 
debt brake rules, which had already entered 
into force. In each of those years, the add -
itional borrowing amounts to around 5% of 
the state’s total expenditure in 2015. The repay-
ment schedules (which must be produced if the 
exemption clause is invoked) envisage an initial 
five years – including the budget year – with -
out any repayments, after which equal amounts 
totalling only around ¼% of the 2015 expend -
iture are to be paid off over the following 25 
years. Given such lengthy repayment sched -
ules, there is a danger that the exemption 
clause will be invoked again in other instances 
before the first debts are paid off, with unam -
bitious repayment conditions attached to these 
exceptions, too. This could result in a de facto  
failure to achieve the objective of limiting the 
state’s debt level. The Stability Council has scru -
tinised the budget plans and, at its June meet -
ing, already deemed Bremen’s planned consoli -
dation measures for 2016 to be inadequate, 
requiring the state to remedy this within a short 
space of time. All in all, it is important for 
Bremen to take further consolidation measures 
to significantly close its budgetary gap vis- à- vis the average fiscal position of the federal 
states.16
No agreement has yet been reached on the 
reform   of the current financial arrangements 
within the German federal system, which is due 
to be implemented in 2020. Central govern -
ment rejected the compromise negotiated at 
the end of 2015 among the federal states. The 
primary aim of that proposal seemed to be to 
engineer a much more lucrative outcome for all 
of the states versus the status quo  by channel -
ling substantial additional central government 
transfers (nearly €10 billion) to the state gov -
ernment tier and then apportioning them to 
the individual states according to criteria which, 
in some cases, have very little economic justifi -
cation and are ultimately political in nature. Be -
fore any more central government funds are 
transferred to state government there is a 
pressing need to markedly strengthen the 
states’ individual responsibility for their budgets, 
not least by making a transparent connection 
between additional spending and the tax fund -
ing this incurs. For this and other reasons, there 
is much to be said for introducing state- specific 
add- ons or discounts on income tax.17 This 
would also create a stronger incentive to first 
exploit further potential for improving cost 
effect iveness. At the same time, giving states 
the option to levy such add- ons would make it 
easier for them to comply with the debt brake 
rules.Bremen invokes 
exemption clause, repayment  in distant futureStates need greater 
individual  
financial  
responsibility 
15 Only the budgets for Bremen’s state government and 
the municipality of Bremen had been finalised at that time. 
The budget for the municipality of Bremerhaven had not 
yet been adopted. As this municipality accounts for a 
smaller share of the total state budget, however, the fig -
ures cited in this section will probably require little amend -
ment.
16 This is true irrespective of the state’s comparatively 
good track record in budget implementation up to mid-
2016, which should allow Bremen to meet the consolida -
tion requirements without any further readjustments and 
thus refrain from using the additional borrowing authorisa -
tions.
17 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of financial rela -
tions in the German federal system, Monthly Report, Sep -
tember 2014, pp 33-52.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
66

Social security funds18
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme posted 
a second-  quarter surplus of €1 billion, which 
– as in the first quarter – constituted an im-
provement of €½ billion on the year. Revenue 
grew strongly (by 4%), largely as a result of 
ongoing   favour able wage and employment 
develop  ments. Given that the pension incr ease 
in mid-2015 (2.1% in western Germany, 2½% 
in eastern Germany) had been dampened by a 
special factor,19 expenditure growth was some -
what weaker, at 3%.
In 2016, by contrast, the mid-  year pension in -
crease was very large (4.25% in the western 
states and 5.95% in the eastern states).20 Con-
sequently, expenditure growth is set to be sig -
nificantly faster in the second half of the year, 
while the rise in revenue will probably be com -
paratively steady. The deficit for the year as a 
whole is therefore likely to be higher than in 
2015 (€1½ billion). The scheme’s reserves will 
be depleted this year and, given the likely trend 
towards rising deficits, more so subsequently. 
Nonetheless, the current pension estimate 
contained   in centr al government’s three-  year  
fiscal plan projects that the contribution rate 
will remain   stable up to and including 2 020, 
without the financial reserves falling beneath 
the floor of 0.2 times the scheme’s monthly 
expend  iture.
Up to the end of the decade, the pension-  to- 
earnings ratio21 is also likely to remain relatively 
stable, at over 47%. Subsequently, however, as 
the “baby boomers” retire and life expectancy 
continues to increase, Germany is set to see a more sustained rise in the pensioner ratio and, 
consequently, a fall in the pension-  t o- e arnings 
ratio. To curtail this development whilst limiting 
the contributions burden, the option of a fur -
ther rise in the statutory retirement age beyond 
2029 should not be ruled out (see the excursus 
on pages 68 to 77).Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency posted a sur -
plus of €1 billion (excluding the civil servants’ 
pension fund)22 in the second quarter of 2016, Surplus grew 
markedly in 2016 Q2
Large pension 
rise accelerates expenditure growth
Pension level 
relatively stable up to 2020, while statutory retirement age rises furtherF
inances 
continued
 
 to 
improve in Q2Finances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016646668707274
–4–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
18 The financial development of the public long-  term car e 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the first quarter of 2016 was analysed in the short articles of the June and July Monthly Reports. These are the most recent data avail -
able.
19 A statistical break caused by a change in the national 
accounts methodology in 2014 reduced the 2015 pension increase by 1 percentage point.
20 This year’s pension increase was particularly large be -
cause both significant wage growth and last year’s contri-
bution rate cut (from 18.9% to 18.7%) pushed up the 
annual   pension adjustment. In addition, the decline in the 
pensioner ratio (ratio of “equivalent pensioners” to “equiva -
lent contribution payers”) has resulted in stronger growth 
in pensions via the sustainability factor. The aforemen -
tioned special factor likewise played a role.
21 The pension-  to-  earnings ratio in the statutory pension 
insurance scheme is the ratio of the standard pension 
(given average earnings over 45 contribution years) to aver -
age pay (before tax and less social contributions in both 
cases).
22 The figures that follow likewise refer to the agency’s 
core budget (excluding the civil servants’ pension fund).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
67

which constituted a further improvement of 
just under €½ billion on the year. Revenue 
growth was moderate, at only 2½%. The main 
factor countering the clear rise in contribution 
receipts (+3½%) was a fall in revenue from in -
solvency benefit contributions (the level of 
which was cut at the beginning of the year). 
Total expenditure remained almost unchanged 
(-½%). The decline in spending on unemploy -
ment benefit I (insurance- related benefit) con -
tinued (-3%) as unemployment remained low. 
Expenditure was also dampened by the discon -
tinuation of the publicly subsidised phased 
retire ment scheme. By contrast, outlays on 
active  labour market policy measures soared further (+16%), probably mainly as a result of 
training measures connected with the influx of 
refugees.
Looking at 2016 as a whole, this positive trend 
is likely to broadly continue. As things stand, 
the agency’s surplus is set to rise (from just over 
€3½ billion in 2015), once again leaving it sub -
stantially higher than in the budget plan (€1.8 
billion). Currently, the Federal Employment 
Agency’s finances are benefiting from positive 
employment and wage developments on the 
revenue side and the favourable labour market 
situation, with low unemployment among con -
tribution payers, on the expenditure side. But 
the healthy state of the agency’s finances 
should not be exploited by funding non-  
insurance- related benefits with contribution 
receipts . Instead, societal tasks, such as inte -
grating the influx of immigrants into the labour 
market, should be financed out of general tax 
revenue. As the favourable labour market con -
ditions are currently expected to continue in 
the longer term, it would be better to consider 
cutting the contribution rate in order to lighten 
the burden on contribution payers and curtail 
further growth in the reserves.
Excursus: longer- term 
pension  developments
Pensions are once again the subject of growing 
debate in Germany. As the statutory pension 
insurance scheme currently remains in good 
finan cial shape, it would appear that the oner -
ous demographic changes that gave rise to 
earlier reforms and are continuing unabated23 
are, to some extent, taking a back seat. How -
ever, adjustments in a pay- as- you- go pension 
scheme cannot be avoided in an ageing society 
in which birth rates are falling and life expect -
ancy is rising. In particular, younger generations 
would face a sharp contribution rate hike if Significant 
surplus  likely for 
year as a whole and …
… contribution rate cut worth considering in 
view of growing 
reserves
Pension 
discussions Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20167.07.58.08.59.09.5
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Revenue
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total 
expenditure 1Log scale
23 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for Germany’s 
statutory pension insurance scheme, Monthly Report, April 
2008, pp 47-72.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
68

adjust ments were not made elsewhere. In this 
context, the other critical factors affecting pen -
sion insurance are the pension level and the 
period over which a pension is drawn.
Against this background, decisions were made 
over the course of the last decade to scale back 
annual pension adjustments and gradually raise 
the statutory retirement age from 65 to 67 
years. Up to 2030, the pension contribution 
rate increase should therefore be limited to no 
more than 22% and the pension level guaran -
teed under the statutory pension insurance 
scheme24 maintained at a minimum of 43%. 
Additionally, the government- subsidised Riester  
pension plan – a new form of funded pension 
scheme – was introduced. The aim was to in -
crease insured persons’ awareness of the need 
for supplementary private pension provision 
and establish what would, in this regard, be an 
improved, voluntary retirement saving option 
as a counterbalance to the declining pension 
level provided under the statutory pension in -
surance scheme.25
Despite the recent large- scale extension of 
benefits (mothers’ pension and full pension at 
63 without actuarial deductions), the contribu -
tion rate and statutory pension level caps could 
be maintained up to 203026 – especially if 
favourable  employment developments con -
tinue. To date, however, official projections do 
not extend beyond 2030. In the light of demo -
graphic trends, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme will come under even greater pressure 
from 2030 on. This excursus looks at selected 
aspects of the current discussion in greater 
detail .
Old- age provision 
underestimated  in official  
projections 
In view of rising life expectancy, raising the 
statutory retirement age by two years by 2029 
serves as a significant starting point in prevent -
ing the period over which insured persons draw pensions from growing longer and longer while 
the period over which they make contributions 
remains unchanged.27 In the absence of such a 
measure, the ratio of pension expenditure to 
contribution payments would continue to 
climb, resulting in a correspondingly higher 
contribution rate being required to fund pen -
sions.
The decision was also made to reduce the level 
of pensions provided under the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme. The calculations per -
formed by the Federal Government in this 
regard  show changes in standard pensions that 
recipients are entitled to draw after 45 uninter -
rupted years of contributions (on an average 
income),28 meaning that they ignore the raising 
of the statutory retirement age to 67 and, by 
extension, the intended increase in the number 
of years worked by employees. From the per -
spective of individual pensioners, however, 
longer contribution periods equate to add -
itional pension benefits. Assuming a corres -
pondingly longer period of employment, the Earlier reforms 
in response to demographic trends
Official projec-
tions end in 2030, but demographic pressure will persist thereafterRising retirement age stabilises ratio of pension- drawing periods to contribution periods and …
… supports 
pension level 
under statutory 
pension insur-ance scheme
24 Ratio of an annual average standard pension less con -
tributions to the health and long- term care insurance 
schemes to average annual income less social contribu -
tions, before the deduction of taxes in each case (section 
154 of the Sixth Book of the Social Security Code ( Sozialge -
setzbuch  VI)).
25 In addition, the subsidisation of company pension 
schemes, in particular, was expanded through tax privileges 
and the right to deferred compensation was introduced. It 
was also decided to switch to the downstream taxation of 
pensions provided under the statutory pension insurance 
scheme.
26 See Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Pen -
sion Insurance Report 2015, November 2015.
27 This measure will first take full effect for the 1964 co -
hort – ie individuals who will not reach retirement age until 
2031, at 67, instead of in 2029, at 65.
28 For the official projections, see Federal Ministry of 
Labour  and Social Affairs, Pension Insurance Report 2015. 
While it is possible to draw a comparison over time by 
focusing   on one standard insured person, it would make 
sense in the light of the statutory retirement age being 
raised to increase a standard pensioner’s number of contri -
bution years, as the explicit objective is to extend the work -
ing life. It goes without saying that no two insured persons 
have the same employment history, with the employment 
situation over time playing an especially important role 
here. The calculations carried out by the Federal Ministry of 
Labour and Social Affairs are subject to applicable social 
welfare legislation. Future rises in the contribution rate for 
the public long- term care insurance scheme, which are to 
be shouldered by pension recipients alone rather than by 
employed persons, would have a negative impact on the 
ratio. Tax aspects are likewise factored out.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
69

pension level provided under the statutory 
pension  insurance scheme when an employee 
retires  would not fall from currently just under 
48% to 44½% in 2029; instead, it would only 
drop half as sharply to 46½% (see the chart 
above).29
The level of financial security that is deemed 
sufficient or appropriate under the statutory 
pension insurance scheme is ultimately for poli -
cymakers to decide: the higher the level, the 
higher the contribution rate and/or statutory 
retirement age must be; the lower the level, 
the greater the individual’s reliance on private 
provision to secure his or her aspired standard 
of living. When the Riester  pension plan was 
launched in 2002, the objective was to make it 
easier – especially for low- paid recipients  – to 
attain their aspired standard of living by offer -
ing subsidies. The Riester  pension plan was ori -
ginally intended to make it possible to broadly 
offset the envisaged reform- driven reduction in the level of benefits paid out by the statutory 
pension insurance scheme.
In this respect, the Pension Insurance Report 
assumes an annual saving component of 4% of 
average income30 and envisages an annual 
nominal return of 4%. Furthermore, the annual 
Private 
provision  …… bolsters pension  level as 
retirement age 
risesPension level up to 2031 showing variations according to retirement age*
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, pension insurance report 2015, November 2015 and Bundesbank calculations. 
The data cited for the period up to 2029 and for 45 contribution years were taken from the pension insurance report. * If there are no 
changes in the assumptions, the case depicted shows that contribution and saving periods are extended in parallel with the rise in the statutory retirement age. Thus when the retirement age is raised, different years of birth are compared for each year. Its increase up to 
the age of 67 is to be achieved by 2029. This means that a person turning 65 in 2029 will have to work an additional two  years, ie until 
2031, for the first time. For 2031, the figure therefore shows the pension levels both of a person aged 65 (grey) and of a person aged 
67 (blue) in that year. 1 Total amount of pension accumulated through the statutory pension insurance scheme and earnings from the 
Riester pension plan. 2 Standard pension in relation to average income, less social security contributions and before tax in each case.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 05 10 15 20 25 30 31404346495255As a percentage of average income
Introduction of
Riester pension
plan and private
pension scheme
factorFirst
retirees
aged 67Statutory
retirement age
ceases to be raised
Current
statusStatutory
retirement
age begins
to be raisedPensions raised
while average
incomes falls... the contribution period stands at 45 years... the contribution period is increased to 47 years
(statutory retirement age)
... the contribution period stands at 45 years... the contribution period is increased to 47 years 
statutory retirement age)Overall pension level1 if ...
Pension level under statutory pension insurance scheme 2 if ...
29 The pension level figures (for the statutory pension in -
surance scheme and overall) presented here refer to the 
point in time at which an insured person retires (eg if, in 
2029, an insured person retiring at the age of 65 receives a 
pension level under the statutory pension insurance scheme 
of 44½% and a pension level of 46½% at the age of 66 
years and eight months, this means that the contribution 
periods for a calendar year are linked to different birth co -
horts). The further scaling- back of annual pension adjust -
ments compared to average wage growth over the 
pension- drawing phase can be inferred in qualitative terms 
for the corresponding period from the evolution of the 
pension level under the statutory pension insurance scheme 
over time, assuming 45 years of contributions.
30 Major assumptions are payments into a certified private 
pension plan from the age of 21 (entry into the labour mar -
ket) or from the introduction of the Riester  subsidy until the 
insured person turns 65 including the Riester  subsidy (as of 
2008: 4% of income; previously: graduation from 1% in 
2002 to 2% from 2004 and 3% from 2006).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
70

contribution amount is cut by a lump sum of 
10% every year.31 However, these calculations 
on supplementary funded private pension 
schemes also ignore the rise in the statutory 
retire ment age. The saving period prior to 
retire ment is thus longer and the capital stock 
is then annuitised over a shorter period of time. 
Both factors result in a higher monthly Riester  
pension payout. Thanks to this effect, monthly 
overall pension payments from the statutory 
pension insurance scheme coupled with the 
Riester  pension plan therefore rise to an add -
itional extent as a consequence of postponing 
retirement. While, according to the Federal 
Government’s calculations, the level is set to 
remain  broadly unchanged at the current level 
of just over 50% up to 2029, a perceptibly 
higher level of 53% is reached on the assump -
tion that contribution and saving periods are 
extended in parallel with the gradual rise in the 
statutory retirement age (for scenarios based 
on more cautious return assumptions, see 
pages 74 and 75).32 In 2031, when individuals 
first reach the new statutory retirement age of 67, 
the gap between the total pension level at 67 
and at 65 will be around 2½ percentage points.
Rising financial pressure set to 
persist beyond 2030
However, demographic changes will continue 
beyond 2030 – and the uncertainty surround -
ing these changes is, of course, greater. That 
being said, longer- term projections showing 
how pension policy variables will be adjusted 
from the present perspective to safeguard the 
financial sustainability of the statutory pension 
insurance scheme would provide not only poli -
cymakers but also younger cohorts, in particu -
lar, with an improved basis for planning.
While insured persons who retired in 1960 at 
the age of 65 had a remaining life expectancy 
of around 13½ years, this figure stood at an 
average of 19 years for men and women in 
2011. The relative pension- drawing period33 
rose sharply in this period from 30% to 42% (see the chart on page 72). By gradually raising 
the statutory retirement age from 65 to 67, this 
could now be stabilised at more or less the cur -
rent level until 2031, when individuals first 
reach the statutory retirement age of 67. In the 
absence of further adjustments, however, a sig -
nificant increase would have to be expected in 
subsequent years. The relative pension- drawing 
period could, on the other hand, largely be sta -
bilised – albeit at a historically high level – if the 
statutory retirement age were raised in add -
itional stages from 2030 by an average of 
three- quarters of a month every year to 69 
years in 2060.34 In fact, it is not until 2064 that 
individuals would first retire at the age of 69 
(ie the 1995 cohort). This would also prevent 
Longer- term 
projections reveal ongoing impact of demo-graphic changes
Raising retire-
ment age in response to rising  life expectancy stabilises  relative pension- drawing period31 In addition to the administration and contract costs 
incurred  solely in connection with the capital investment, 
this covers the capital guarantee. However, no costs during 
the pension phase, particularly to cover the uncertain life -
time, are taken into account. As a result of these costs, the 
return in the saving period is reduced by around ½ per -
centage point and, particularly when taking this into 
account  including the pension period, the costs considered 
here are probably lower than the actual average of prod -
ucts available on the market. See M Gasche et al (2013), 
Die Kosten der Riester - Rente im Vergleich, MEA Discussion 
Paper 04-2013. However, the cost of Riester  products is 
frequently criticised as being too high. Providing greater 
transparency in the form of product information sheets 
ought to make it easier in future for consumers to identify 
cost- effective pension plans.
32 As a general rule, these are also standardised calcula -
tions. For example, the rise in an individual’s retirement age 
may differ from the rise in the statutory retirement age. 
Furthermore, it should be noted, inter alia, that other in -
come or assets, such as a company pension plan, life insur -
ance, savings or non- subsidised residential property, are 
not taken into account. Conversely, in some cases, less is 
saved than in the standardised scenario.
33 The relative pension- drawing period describes the ratio 
of pension- drawing periods (defined here as life expect -
ancy from retirement age) to previous contribution periods 
(defined here as retirement age minus 20 years).
34 The data are based on further life expectancy in vari -
ant 2 of the 13th coordinated population projection (con -
tinued trend paired with higher immigration). See Federal 
Statistical Office (2015), Germany’s population by 2060. 
Results of the 13th coordinated population projection. In 
this context, the exception enabling the long- term insured 
to retire early on a full pension without actuarial deduc -
tions (currently after 43 years of contributions; rising to 
45 years of contributions by 2029) – which is irreconcilable 
with the principle of equivalence  – would also warrant 
scrutiny: at the very least, it would make sense for the 
required  contribution periods to be raised in line with the 
statutory retirement age.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
71

the pensioner ratio from climbing, in turn trig -
gering a drop in the level of pensions.35
Demographic shifts are not solely the result of 
increasing life expectancy. There is a need for 
additional adjustments once the last of the 
baby boom generation enters retirement, 
which is expected by the middle of 2030, fol -
lowed by smaller cohorts in subsequent years 
as (all other things being equal) the ratio of 
pensioners to contribution payers will rise 
notice ably. The resulting increase in the pen -
sioner ratio – especially by 2035 – means that 
in the present framework, the pension level 
under the statutory pension insurance scheme is set to drop (and contribution rates to rise). 
However, the ever increasing share of the sub -
sidised funded pension scheme, owing to 
longer savings periods, may prop up the overall 
pension level at the same time.Further need for 
adjustments as baby boomers enter retirementLife expectancy, retirement age and pension-drawing period
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Germany's population by 2060. Results of the 13th coordinated population projection, Wiesbaden, 
2015 (variant 2, continued trend based on higher immigration), and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Unweighted average between men 
and women. 2 This describes the ratio of pension-drawing periods (defined here as life expectancy from retirement age) to previous 
contribution periods (defined here as retirement age minus 20 years).
Deutsche Bundesbank1960 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 603035404550656769AgeAge
As a pecentage of
contribution periods... of 65Retirement age ...
... raised to 67 (statutory retirement age)
... of 65... further raised to 69 by 2060
... raised to 67 by 2031
... raised to 69 by 2060Relative pension-drawing period 2 at a retirement age ...Remaining life expectancy at the age of 651
788082848688
Current
status
35 Pension adjustments are subject to the “sustainability 
factor”, which is designed to limit envisaged contribution 
rate increases. This sustainability factor decreases (in -
creases) the pension adjustment in the event of rising (fall -
ing) pension ratios, ie the number of “equivalent pension -
ers” (pension expenditure divided by the standard pension 
paid out) relative to the number of “equivalent contribution 
payers” (contribution receipts divided by the pension con -
tribution of the average earner).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
72

To estimate the impact of these factors on the 
pension level, the Pension Insurance Report’s 
forecast is extrapolated schematically up to 
2060 below (see the chart on page 74).36 In the 
simulations, the pension level under the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme falls to around 
40½% by 2060 provided that the contribution 
and saving period remains limited to 45 years 
– as in the Pension Insurance Report. In the 
case of an extension to 47 years, in line with 
the decision to increase the statutory retire -
ment age, the pension level under the statutory 
pension insurance scheme is around 2 percent -
age points higher and therefore just over 42% 
in 2060 once the last stage in the increase has 
been reached. If it is further assumed that the 
relative pension- drawing period will largely be 
kept constant even after 2031 and that the 
working phase is successively increased by a 
further two years to 49 contribution years by 
2060, the pension level under the statutory 
pension insurance scheme would stabilise at 
roughly 44% from around 2035.
The growth of the overall pension level differs 
fundamentally, however, from the sole consid -
eration of statutory pension insurance scheme 
payments, owing to the increasing importance 
of funded pensions.37 Thus, under the assump-
tions made with regard to returns and savings 
volumes, the overall pension level for the 
period starting from 2030 after 45 contribution 
years would already be consistently above the 
current value of around 50%. Though the 
number of baby boomers entering retirement 
up to the mid-2030s will have a dampening 
effect  on the statutory pension insurance 
scheme level, the higher number of years of 
contributing into the Riester  pension plan fol -
lowing its introduction in 2002 will translate 
into a significant increase in the overall pension 
level, particularly in the time that follows. If the 
relative pension- drawing period is further sta -
bilised by the retirement age continuing to rise 
past 67, persons born since the beginning of 
the 1980s, for whom payment into a subsid -
ised private pension scheme is assumed, will 
even reach an overall pension level of around 58½%. On the other hand, if the retirement 
age is not increased past 67, the overall pen -
sion level would fall again slightly from around 
2050 owing to increasing life expect ancy.Pension level 
under statutory pension insur-ance scheme significantly higher as retirement  age increases
Overall pension 
level is much higher36 As more differentiated calculations with the German 
Federal Government’s more comprehensive dataset and 
model or the statutory pension insurance scheme are not 
available, a simplified simulation was carried out. The scen -
ario outlined here assumes that from 2030, per capita 
wages (where the employment level is falling on account 
of demographic changes) will rise nominally by 3% each 
year and that the return will be 4%. The corresponding 
assumptions are thus extrapolated from the Pension Insur -
ance Report unchanged, see Federal Ministry of Labour 
and Social Affairs (2015), op cit. With an expected inflation 
rate below but close to 2%, this implies an annual average 
real wage and economic growth of just under 1% and a 
real return of 2%. To calculate the pension adjustments, 
the pensioner ratio is approximated using the demographic 
old- age dependency ratio (defined as the ratio of people 
who are 65 and over to people between 20 and 65 years 
old) from the 13th coordinated population projection (vari -
ant 2: birth rate constant at 1.4 children per woman, in -
creasing life expectancy, long- term net immigration of 
200,000 people per year). If the additional increase in the 
retirement age leads to longer working periods, pension 
levels in this case would be somewhat too low as a result. 
Furthermore, between 2030 and 2035 it is assumed that 
there will initially be a greater increase in the contribution 
rate on account of baby boomers entering retirement fol -
lowed by a much weaker increase, from 21.8% in 2030 to 
22.8% by 2035, then to just over 24% in 2060. A similar 
scale for the increase in contributions by 2060 is also given 
in the report by the Ageing Working Group 2015, see Euro -
pean Commission (2015), 2015 Ageing Report. Should the 
insured persons respond to a further increase in the stand -
ard retirement age by extending their employment period, 
the hike in contribution rates will probably be attenuated. 
In the case of a similar increase in the retirement age from 
67 to 69, a dampening effect of ½ percentage point is cal -
culated, see Bach et al (2014), Wirkungen von Rentenrefor -
men auf Rentenbeitrag und Rentenniveau sowie Beschäfti -
gungseffekte der Rentenbeitragsänderung , DIW Berlin und 
MEA, Berlin, München. However, this would not have a 
significant effect on the results given here. With regard to 
the Riester  pension plan, a cost ratio of 10%, which is as -
sumed in official calculations, is used.
37 In the scenarios, those born in and after 1982 are the 
first to save in the Riester  pension plan for their entire em -
ployment period. For those who were born in and after 
1988 and turn 67 in 2055, the maximum payment of 4% 
of income  over the entire employment period is taken into 
account for the first time. These calculations based on the 
Pension Insurance Report are only an example of the 
poten tial pension level based on the intentions of central 
government legislators. Despite extensive government 
allow ances, which account for the greater part of pension 
insurance, not least in the case of persons with low income 
and families with children, a significant proportion of per -
sons in the statutory pension insurance scheme do not 
have a Riester  contract. However, many insured persons 
have probably (alternatively or in addition) chosen other 
forms of saving or provision, such as their company pen -
sion scheme, life insurance, other financial assets or resi -
dential property.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
73

Influence of different returns
The German Federal Government’s Pension In -
surance Report assumes a nominal return of 
4% when setting the overall pension level. This 
return was also used as a basis in the calcula -
tions presented previously. In many cases, this 
value has frequently been criticised as being 
too high given that interest rates have fallen 
considerably in recent years. To illustrate the 
implications of different return assumptions, 
different scenarios were calculated where the 
case of a further increase in the statutory retire -
ment age by 2060 to around 69 years old is 
taken as a baseline.First, an alternative interest rate of 3% is 
assumed . The nominal interest rate would then 
roughly match the average nominal wage 
growth per capita and would thus be slightly 
higher than nominal gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth with a medium to long- term 
annual  potential growth of just under 1% and 
inflation of just under 2%. Another scenario 
assumes  a significantly lower nominal return of 
1½% as an example. With inflation at just 
under 2% – in line with the Eurosystem’s defin -
ition of price stability – this implies a real inter -
est rate that would be negative over a very 
long period and would be markedly below the Returns in 
Pension  Insurance  Report considered too high in some casesScenarios with more cautious 
assumptions 
and …Pension level up to 2060*
Source: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, pension insurance report 2015, November 2015, and Bundesbank calculations. 
* To derive the underlying assumptions compare the figures on pp X and Y as well as the footnote 36 on p Z. The retirement age is 
raised to 69 years on a gradual basis between 2030 and 2060. Hence, retirement at 69 (for individuals born in and after 1995) would 
not in fact commence until 2064. 1 Total amount of pension accumulated through the statutory pension insurance scheme and earn-
ings from a Riester pension plan. 2 Standard pension under the statutory pension insurance scheme in relation to average income, less 
social security contributions and before tax in each case.
Deutsche Bundesbank2000 05 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 604043464952555861As a percentage of average income
... 45 years of contributions have been accumulated... the contribution period is increased
to 47 years (statutory retirement age)
... 45 years of contributions have been accumulated... the contribution period is increased to 47 years... the contribution period is increased
to 49 years between 2030 and 2060Overall pension level1 if ...
Pension level achieved through
the statutory pension insurance scheme 2 if ...... the contribution period is increased
to 49 years between 2030 and 2060
464952555861 Overall pension level if the contribution period is increased to 49 years by 2060 and ...
... return  stands at 4%
... return stands at 3%
... return stands at 1.5%
... the retiree receives a pay-out of
the nominal value of the paid-up capitalWhere earnings varyWhere the statutory retirement ages varies
Current
statusDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
74

real growth rate assumed here.38 This would be 
an unusual estimate39 and is probably an ex -
tremely cautious one. Finally, the third scenario 
assumes that the capital guarantee of the Ries-
ter pension plan applies, ie the average nom -
inal return after deducting costs is 0%.40 How -
ever, this would appear to be unrealistically low 
when combined with the unchanged assump -
tion of nominal macroeconomic (wage) growth 
rates of around 3% over the entire period.
The overall pension level would naturally be 
lower if there are lower returns from private 
pension schemes (see the chart on page 74). In 
the case of a very low interest rate of 1½% 
over 50 years, it would initially fall slightly to 
around 49% in 2035 but would subsequently 
return to its current value of just over 50%. 
Even if only the capital paid in and the govern -
ment allowances were paid out (capital protec -
tion scenario), the overall pension level could 
be stabilised at 48½% from around 2035. A 
3% return would give a very stable overall pen -
sion level of just over 51% by 2035, which 
would then increase to 54½% by 2053 and 
would subsequently remain  fairly constant at 
this level.
Conclusions
In view of Germany’s dwindling population, 
not all the parameters of the pay- as- you- go 
pension system can be kept stable. Over the 
past decade, this has led to the introduction of 
a range of measures constituting a compromise 
approach made up of a higher contribution 
rate, later retirement and a diminishing (rela -
tive) pension level. The previously stated calcu -
lations underline the challenges lying ahead for 
the statutory pension insurance scheme be -
yond the current planning horizon, which 
covers the period up to 2030. Confidence in 
the pension insurance scheme could be 
strengthened and uncertainty about financial 
security in old age reduced if there was greater 
clarity regarding the design of long- term adjust-
ment rules governing the statutory pension insurance  scheme’s parameters, these being 
the retirement age, the pension level and the 
contribution rate as they stand today.41 In order 
to produce meaningful reference variables in 
good time, also for gauging supplementary pri -
vate pension requirements, and thus to enable 
greater planning certainty, it would be im -
mensely helpful to have official projections that 
extend beyond 2030.42 Alternative scenarios 
could be used to illustrate the evolution of 
positive and negative deviations from expect -
ations.
The first point of interest here is the extent to 
which the statutory pension insurance scheme 
is likely to be able to sustain living standards. To 
safeguard the financial stability of the scheme 
and the pension levels of those insured under … effects on the 
overall pension level
Long- term 
projections  the benchmark for policymakers and insured persons Transfers aimed at fighting poverty  currently means- tested and funded by tax revenue
38 General inflation is set to have an equal influence on 
nominal interest rates and wages in the long term and 
therefore should not have a decisive effect on pension 
levels, which are stated as ratios. Generally, the interest 
rate- wage differential is a relevant factor in the simulation 
results.
39 The Federal Government’s sustainability report assumes 
real GDP growth of around 1% and a real interest rate of 
3% as a starting point, see Federal Ministry of Finance  , 
Vier ter Bericht zur Tragfähigkeit der öffentlichen Finanzen , 
February 2016. The European Commission’s sustainability 
report also assumes another positive interest- growth differ -
ential in the long term, see Fiscal Sustainability Report 
2015, Institutional Paper, 18 January 2016.
40 At the time of payout, a Riester  contract guarantees at 
least the contributions paid into the scheme, including gov -
ernment promotion measures.
41 As an additional step, the tax- financed Federal grant 
could, in principle, be adjusted as well. Such a move could 
easily be justified as a means of facilitating the reimburse -
ment of non- insurance- related benefits. However, this 
would represent an extraneous way of financing the regu -
lar pensions of equivalent pensioners and is therefore disre -
garded here as a potential means of financing pensions. 
Moreover, talk of expanding the pool of persons insured 
under the statutory pension insurance scheme offers no 
lasting solution to the longer- term adjustment needs that 
have arisen from demographic change. New contributors 
to the scheme might temporarily bolster the finances of the 
scheme for as long as they pay into the system, but this 
positive effect would be countered by the long- term add -
itional demand placed on the system by these individuals 
once they retire. Assuming the demographic characteristics 
of new insured persons were no different from those of 
persons currently insured under the scheme, the problem 
would remain unresolved in the long term.
42 See also Demographic change and the long- term sus -
tainability of public finances in Germany, Monthly Report, 
July 2009, p 43, as well as the corresponding proposals 
presented by the Federal Government’s Social Advisory 
Council (see Gutachten des Sozialbeirats zum Rentenver -
sicherungsbericht  2004 ( Bundestags- Drucksache  18/ 6870, 
item 27 ff).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
75

the scheme, it is particularly important to sup -
port a high employment level through favour -
able macroeconomic conditions, thus enabling 
relatively continuous working lives. The prin -
ciple of equivalence is a significant feature of 
Germany’s contribution- funded statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme, and one of its effects is 
to limit distortions arising from pension insur -
ance contributions, especially any which im -
pact the labour market. Under the existing 
social  insurance system, the pan- societal task 
of combatting poverty is not generally funded 
by income from the insurance scheme itself but 
by the central, state and local government 
budgets, which are tax- funded. The corres -
ponding transfers, which are specifically tar -
geted at reducing poverty, are paid out subject 
to an individual means test and take account  of 
any additional income or assets the recipient 
may have.
Aside from forecasting future pension levels, 
the projections are meant to outline the man -
ner in which the contribution rate and statu -
tory retirement age as parameters should be 
adjusted if pension funding is to be maintained. 
In principle, a higher contribution rate can be 
used to finance a higher pension level once an 
individual reaches retirement age. However, 
this would increase the load borne by contribu -
tion payers and, viewed in broader terms, a 
heavy and rising burden of contributions puts a 
drag on economic activity, which is ultimately 
the funding base for the pay- as- you- go sys -
tem.43 This is all the more so given that, owing 
to Germany’s demographic developments, 
contribution rates are set to increase not just 
for the statutory pension insurance scheme but 
also for the statutory health and public long-  
term care insurance schemes. Moreover, cen -
tral, state and local government budgets will 
have to contend with heavier demographically- 
induced burdens (including Federal grants to 
the statutory pension insurance scheme which 
increase in size in line with the contribution 
rate, or the pension burden), thus intensifying 
the pressure to raise the tax burden. Given that 
the burden presented by taxes and social secur -ity contributions is already fairly high, and in 
view of the general macroeconomic circum -
stances, it makes sense to keep up efforts to 
at  least minimise the envisaged hike in the 
pension  contribution rate due to the ageing of 
society  by adjust ing the other parameters at 
the same time.
If there is to be a rise in the pension level under 
the statutory pension insurance scheme com -
pared with its currently expected level and if, 
parallel to this, a higher- than- anticipated in -
crease in the contribution rate is to be avoided, 
action needs to be taken with regard to the 
statutory retirement age. By further raising the 
statutory minimum age for claiming a pension, 
for example in line with rising life expectancy, 
the ratio of the pension- drawing period to 
years worked, which at a level of more than 
40% has already reached an all- time- high, 
could be kept stable beyond 2029. Such a 
move would effectively increase the statutory 
retirement age to around 69 by 2060. At the 
same time, the resulting higher level of employ -
ment would boost economic growth as well as 
the wage bill upon which the pay- as- you- go 
system and other government budget funding 
both rest, provided the ratio of persons in work 
to persons claiming a pension does not narrow 
too sharply. One of several factors suggesting 
there is scope for increasing the number of 
years worked is the fair probability that longer 
lives will be accompanied by better health. Irre -
spective of this aspect, there are limits to how 
far an elderly person’s active working life can 
be lengthened, and at some point this option 
may no longer be possible. That being said, 
today ’s statutory pension insurance scheme 
already  offers individuals opportunities to take 
early retirement in the event of invalidity.Hike in contribu-
tion rate already in the pipeline can be minimised  by adjusting other pension param-
eters, tooRaising the 
retirement age 
to 69 by 2060 
could stabilise 
the relative 
pension- drawing 
period and 
noticeably shore 
up pension 
levels
43 This is to be assumed not least because of the compul -
sory nature of pension contributions. Even so, in accord -
ance with the principle of equivalence that is broadly 
applied  in both the statutory pension and unemployment 
insurance schemes, contributions to these schemes are 
likely to be perceived as less akin to a tax than regular taxes 
or contributions made to the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
76

Even if the standardised ratio of the pension-  
drawing period to the number of contribution 
years were stabilised by raising the retirement 
age to 69 years, a further considerable hike in 
the contribution rate to around 24% remains 
on the cards. Furthermore, the pension level 
under the statutory pension insurance scheme 
would go down from its current level of around 
48% to roughly 44% (compared with a decline 
to around 42% if no further hike occurs).44 The 
decisive factor here is that the retirement of the 
last baby- boom cohorts up until roughly the 
mid-2030s, as outlined earlier, will significantly 
worsen the ratio of wage and salary earners to 
pensioners, thus making it necessary to com -
pensate under the existing rules through a 
combination of higher contribution rates and 
lower pension levels. If the retirement age were 
to factor in rising life expectancy, as has been 
recommended, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme would, however, ensure a more or less 
constant pensioner ratio and hence a relatively 
stable pension level going forward, even if the 
birth rate remained low and the size of the 
population therefore waned. Conversely, if the 
envisaged large increase in the contribution 
rate is to be reduced again and/or a higher 
pension level is to be achieved under the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme, the statutory 
retirement age would have to rise more sharply 
over time.
When discussing the development of the 
standardised pension level provided by the 
statutory pension insurance scheme, it is im -
portant to bear in mind that there is a tendency 
to understate this figure if, as in the Pension 
Insurance Report, the approved increase in the 
statutory retirement age is omitted. Moreover, 
the overall pension level should go up com -
pared with its current level if private pension 
arrangements are made to the extent envis -
aged by the Riester  pension plan.45 And even if much lower returns are assumed than those 
stated in the Pension Insurance Report, the 
overall pension level will still stabilise. Even if 
the currently very low interest rates were to 
continue for some years to come their level 
would be qualified by the investment horizon 
for pension schemes of up to around half a 
century. As recent discussions on the matter 
have indicated, it would be very helpful if the 
government’s promotion of private pension 
provision could be made simpler and more 
transparent. In this regard, the information 
given on the respective costs and anticipated 
payouts (especially for Riester  and company 
pension plans) could be improved in order to 
give those contributing to the schemes a sim -
plified overview of their potential overall pen -
sion level, seen from the present perspective.
All in all, the good financial shape in which the 
statutory pension insurance scheme currently 
finds itself, coupled with the official projections 
which only go up to 2029, should not blind us 
to the fact that further adjustments are un -
avoidable if the financial sustainability of the 
scheme is to be ensured. In this context, longer 
working lives should not be taboo, but instead 
considered as a key factor.Further need 
for adjustments as the baby boomers  enter retirement
Need to take 
account of later retirement and private asset formation  when discussing pension  levels44 To give individual insured persons a greater degree of 
personal flexibility in setting a pension level that suits their 
wishes, additional rules could be drawn up that would 
make it easier for employees to retire at a personally 
defined  retirement age somewhere above the regular 
statutory retirement age. In such a scenario, however, 
account  would have to be taken of their ability to plan 
ahead.
45 The calculations made here are based on the standard -
ised procedure applied in the Pension Insurance Report, 
which uses variables that often spark public debate. This 
debate is focused on the premise that the government-  
backed Riester  pension plan constitutes an additional pillar 
of private pension provision. At present, there is a long way 
to go before all of those eligible to sign up for a Riester  
pension plan actually do so to the extent described here 
and, in many instances, people’s pension arrangements are 
not confined to this model alone, instead encompassing or 
being supplemented by a variety of other investment forms 
as well.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
77

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2016  
78

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ...........  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 9 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 0 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 1 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 2 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2016
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2014          Oct 6.1 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 7.0 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5         Dec 8.1 3.8 3.8 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan 8.6 3.8 3.6 3.8 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.1 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 8.8 3.9 3.9 4.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 9.7 4.4 4.4 4.5 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.05 0.03 0.8
         Apr 10.2 4.7 5.1 4.8 0.9 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.0 4.8 4.8 4.9 1.3 0.5 − 2.9 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.4 5.0 4.7 4.8 1.3 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July 11.8 5.2 5.0 4.8 1.8 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.2 4.9 4.7 4.8 2.2 1.0 − 3.1 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.3 5.0 4.7 4.8 2.1 0.7 − 3.3 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct 11.2 5.1 5.0 4.8 2.2 0.9 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 10.7 5.0 4.8 4.8 2.6 1.1 − 3.3 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.4 5.0 4.5 4.8 2.2 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016          Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 4.8 2.7 1.0 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.2 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.1 1.2 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.2 5.5 5.1 4.9 3.0 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.1 4.6 4.9 3.2 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.0 4.9 4.9 3.5 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.6 4.9 5.0 ... 3.8 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2014          Oct 
+ 29,558 + 28,355 + 50,890 − 4,999 + 68,516 + 5,394 − 19,066 + 1,045 1.2673 99.1 95.0
         Nov + 26,171 + 24,430 + 59,036 + 16,939 + 9,596 + 5,135 + 26,665 + 701 1.2472 99.0 94.9
         Dec + 40,751 + 26,282 − 1,489 − 11,250 + 40,684 + 1,901 − 33,948 + 1,125 1.2331 99.0 94.8
2015          Jan + 8,190 + 15,546 − 19,202 + 43,382 − 67,536 + 4,977 − 1,172 + 1,147 1.1621 95.2 91.0
         Feb + 15,217 + 28,986 − 46,512 + 13,291 − 51,358 + 12,415 − 25,114 + 4,255 1.1350 93.3 89.5         Mar + 31,468 + 29,539 + 32,907 + 37,613 − 11,095 + 10,363 − 4,264 + 291 1.0838 90.6 86.9
         Apr + 25,237 + 30,086 − 2,919 − 5,652 + 46,619 + 6,265 − 46,356 − 3,795 1.0779 89.7 86.0
         May + 8,373 + 26,827 + 29,955 + 8,546 + 10,242 + 4,049 + 8,793 − 1,674 1.1150 91.6 87.8         June + 37,499 + 34,775 + 52,007 − 17,093 + 58,588 − 6,188 + 13,607 + 3,093 1.1213 92.3 88.5
         July + 40,938 + 39,741 + 35,838 + 11,235 + 75,484 + 9,879 − 53,760 − 7,000 1.0996 91.3 87.5
         Aug + 20,665 + 19,491 + 6,546 + 4,875 + 8,581 − 6,744 − 1,555 + 1,390 1.1139 93.0 89.0         Sep + 35,712 + 30,284 + 15,333 − 26,501 + 10,265 − 4,327 + 27,613 + 8,282 1.1221 93.8 89.7
         Oct + 31,397 + 33,983 + 110,995 + 58,836 + 15,473 + 11,274 + 31,421 − 6,009 1.1235 93.6 89.6
         Nov + 32,667 + 33,470 − 33,913 − 86,265 + 23,496 + 21,148 + 5,245 + 2,462 1.0736 91.1 87.1         Dec + 42,223 + 31,582 + 93,562 + 66,716 + 82,571 + 21,781 − 85,632 + 8,126 1.0877 92.5 88.3
2016          Jan + 9,463 + 13,908 − 16,395 − 31,926 + 87,039 + 14,844 − 85,197 − 1,155 1.0860 93.6 89.1
         Feb + 14,376 + 28,013 − 5,502 + 45,000 + 34,158 + 6,811 − 92,532 + 1,061 1.1093 94.7 90.0         Mar + 36,771 + 39,425 + 70,765 + 30,453 + 21,452 − 3,096 + 20,892 + 1,064 1.1100 94.1 89.5
         Apr + 36,088 + 34,699 + 42,863 + 7,863 + 121,134 − 6,116 − 78,420 − 1,599 1.1339 94.8 p 90.1
         May + 15,390 + 31,149 + 44,107 + 36,836 + 9,853 − 1,639 − 4,064 + 3,120 1.1311 95.1 p 90.5         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1229 94.7 p 90.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1069 94.9 p 90.4
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2013 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.6 − 0.8 0.6 − 3.2 1.1 − 1.7 3.0
2014 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.9 − 0.7 0.6 0.6 8.5 − 0.3 2.4
2015 1.7 1.4 1.7 1.1 0.2 1.3 − 0.2 26.3 0.8 2.7
2015          Q1 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.1 − 0.5 1.4 0.3 28.1 0.2 1.8
         Q2 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.5 0.6 1.2 1.3 24.3 0.9 2.8
         Q3 1.6 1.3 1.7 1.0 − 0.1 1.1 − 1.7 24.4 0.8 3.5
         Q4 1.7 1.6 2.1 0.7 0.8 1.4 − 0.7 28.4 1.1 2.7
2016          Q1 1.7 1.4 1.3 1.7 0.5 1.4 − 1.3 2.3 0.8 2.0
         Q2 1.6 ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2013 − 0.6 1.0 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.0 − 0.7
2014 0.9 0.9 1.3 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.9
2015 1.5 − 0.1 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.1 1.6 1.0 17.6 1.1 3.6
2015          Q1 1.5 0.0 0.6 1.9 − 3.5 1.5 2.9 24.9 0.0 1.6
         Q2 1.4 − 1.7 1.6 − 1.7 − 1.1 1.8 − 2.7 10.0 1.1 5.7
         Q3 2.0 0.1 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.1 1.1 1.5 20.2 2.1 3.8
         Q4 1.3 1.2 − 0.3 − 5.5 0.0 2.0 2.6 16.0 1.3 3.0
2016          Q1 1.4 4.1 1.3 − 2.3 − 0.7 0.6 − 1.0 6.6 1.6 3.7
         Q2 ... ... p 0.5 − 2.0 ... 0.4 p 4.9 ... 0.0 4.4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2013 78.4 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 71.6 72.0
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2015          Q2 81.2 79.8 84.4 70.7 79.1 82.7 67.7 − 76.1 72.2
         Q3 81.2 80.0 84.0 72.7 79.0 82.9 63.5 − 75.5 71.4
         Q4 81.6 79.2 84.6 71.0 80.1 83.4 64.2 − 75.9 71.0
2016          Q1 81.9 80.0 85.0 72.5 79.5 82.6 65.5 − 77.1 72.3
         Q2 81.5 79.3 84.6 73.8 78.0 82.8 67.8 − 76.5 73.0
         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.7 67.8 − 76.0 71.8
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.9
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.9
2016          Jan 10.4 8.4 4.2 6.3 9.2 10.1 24.3 8.6 11.7 10.1
         Feb 10.3 8.2 4.3 6.1 9.1 10.2 24.0 8.3 11.7 9.8
         Mar 10.2 8.1 4.3 6.6 9.1 10.1 23.7 8.1 11.5 9.7
         Apr 10.2 8.3 4.2 6.5 9.0 9.9 23.3 7.9 11.6 9.6
         May 10.1 8.4 4.3 6.7 9.0 9.9 ... 7.8 11.5 9.7
         June 10.1 8.5 4.2 ... 9.0 9.9 ... 7.8 11.6 9.9
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.2 0.0
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016          Feb − 0.2 1.1 − 0.2 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.6
         Mar 0.0 1.6 0.1 0.5 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.6
         Apr − 0.2 1.5 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7
         May − 0.1 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.8
         June 0.1 1.8 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.6
         July e 0.2 ... e 0.4 ... ... ... 0.2 ... e − 0.1 ...
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2013 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 13.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 0.9
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.8 − 3.2 − 4.0 − 3.6 − 3.8 − 3.0 − 1.6
2015 − 2.1 − 2.6 0.6 0.4 − 2.7 − 3.5 − 7.2 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.3
 
General government debt 8
 
2013 91.1 105.2 77.2 9.9 55.5 92.4 177.7 120.0 129.0 39.1
2014 92.0 106.5 74.7 10.4 59.3 95.4 180.1 107.5 132.5 40.8
2015 90.7 106.0 71.2 9.7 63.1 95.8 176.9 93.8 132.7 36.4
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. tions. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January,
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual April, July and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
justed data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day varia- calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.6 4.3 4.3 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 1.4 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 5.9 2013
3.0 4.1 3.5 1.4 0.6 0.9 2.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.5 20141.6 4.8 6.4 2.0 1.0 1.4 3.6 2.9 3.2 1.6 2015
1.2 5.2 6.3 2.6 0.8 1.6 2.9 2.8 2.7 0.2 2015          Q1
1.4 5.4 6.8 1.9 0.5 1.5 3.4 2.7 3.3 1.4          Q2
1.7 5.4 6.5 2.0 1.4 1.5 3.7 2.6 3.5 2.3          Q3
2.0 3.5 6.2 1.4 1.1 1.1 4.3 3.3 3.3 2.4          Q4
2.4 4.5 5.2 1.5 1.7 0.7 3.5 2.5 3.5 2.6 2016          Q1
1.8 ... ... ... 1.2 ... ... ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
3.2 − 3.1 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 3.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 20130.3 4.3 − 5.7 − 2.9 0.9 1.8 8.7 1.7 1.3 − 0.9 20144.5 1.5 6.3 − 3.4 1.9 1.7 6.9 5.4 3.4 3.6 2015
4.2 1.1 4.6 0.8 1.7 0.3 12.4 6.9 1.6 0.2 2015          Q1
4.5 1.9 8.3 − 4.8 0.7 1.9 4.8 5.6 3.2 3.1          Q2
4.0 1.1 7.3 − 5.4 2.8 2.4 6.0 5.4 4.2 4.4          Q3
5.3 1.8 5.0 − 4.5 2.3 2.2 5.0 3.7 4.8 6.4          Q4
5.7 1.4 − 5.1 − 2.5 1.4 0.9 2.1 5.6 2.9 10.0 2016          Q1
− 1.1 ...
p − 5.5 p 2.2 ... 0.6 ... ... 1.4 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
73.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 76.3 77.1 78.3 73.3 49.3 201374.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 201474.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 2015
74.4 65.6 78.7 82.3 84.2 80.4 79.1 83.4 77.2 60.3 2015          Q2
73.6 69.0 77.2 82.2 84.4 80.1 86.2 83.6 77.6 56.4          Q3
74.3 72.2 77.9 82.2 83.4 80.4 83.4 82.3 78.1 61.1          Q4
75.9 72.4 77.8 81.4 85.0 80.0 85.4 83.2 79.0 56.9 2016          Q1
76.1 76.1 78.9 81.7 84.0 80.8 83.0 83.1 77.8 63.9          Q2
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
11.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 201310.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.4 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 2015
8.6 6.3 5.2 6.5 6.1 12.1 10.4 8.3 20.6 13.1 2016          Jan 
8.5 6.3 5.0 6.5 6.1 12.2 10.2 8.3 20.5 12.9          Feb 
8.4 6.3 4.5 6.4 5.9 12.0 10.1 8.3 20.3 12.7          Mar 
8.2 6.3 4.3 6.4 5.9 11.6 10.0 8.1 20.3 12.2          Apr 
8.0 6.2 4.0 6.3 6.1 11.2 9.9 8.1 20.1 11.9          May
7.7 6.2 4.0 6.1 6.2 11.2 9.8 8.0 19.9 11.7          June
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
1.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.5 − 0.3 1.0 0.3 1.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 2.2 2016          Feb 0.8 − 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 2.2          Mar 
0.8 − 0.6 0.8 − 0.2 0.6 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 2.1          Apr 
0.2 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.2 0.6 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9          May
0.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.2 0.6 0.7 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.0          June
0.0 − 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... − 0.1 ... ...          July
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 2.6 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 15.0 − 6.9 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 1.7 − 2.0 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.0 − 5.9 − 8.9 2014− 0.2 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 5.1 − 1.0 2015
 
General government debt 8
 
38.8 23.3 68.6 67.9 80.8 129.0 55.0 71.0 93.7 102.5 201340.7 22.9 67.1 68.2 84.3 130.2 53.9 81.0 99.3 108.2 201442.7 21.4 63.9 65.1 86.2 129.0 52.9 83.2 99.2 108.9 2015
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. latest data publication under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat).
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro-area aggregate: Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank
European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          Nov 33.7 25.6 5.5 8.1 5.2 60.2 76.5 16.3 − 13.3 1.1 − 0.4 − 13.1 − 0.9
         Dec − 45.0 − 9.1 − 12.2 − 35.9 − 43.7 − 10.0 − 115.3 − 105.4 − 29.4 − 2.9 2.3 − 30.9 2.2
2015          Jan 73.1 − 2.1 3.3 75.2 53.0 − 15.0 197.7 212.7 − 1.9 − 12.3 0.5 − 9.1 18.9
         Feb 11.3 21.5 2.1 − 10.2 − 0.3 − 23.3 − 18.1 5.2 − 14.6 − 8.8 − 1.4 − 9.8 5.3
         Mar 75.4 43.1 1.0 32.3 29.1 10.6 − 30.2 − 40.9 − 20.5 − 12.4 − 1.3 − 26.2 19.4
         Apr 54.4 17.6 16.8 36.8 32.5 − 57.5 38.5 95.9 − 47.4 − 18.8 − 2.1 − 15.5 − 10.9
         May 27.4 10.9 − 0.8 16.5 31.2 25.2 − 55.0 − 80.2 − 21.3 − 8.3 − 1.7 − 23.5 12.2
         June 6.6 − 16.5 − 28.1 23.1 24.5 55.9 − 87.8 − 143.7 − 21.5 − 13.8 − 1.2 − 12.9 6.4
         July 61.8 58.0 50.8 3.7 4.0 − 65.0 − 0.3 64.7 − 5.3 10.4 − 0.9 − 21.4 6.6
         Aug 15.3 − 23.6 7.0 38.8 47.7 − 23.3 10.5 33.8 − 10.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 8.5 2.4
         Sep 26.4 − 13.0 − 8.7 39.4 45.8 − 7.7 − 94.8 − 87.0 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 26.1 9.3
         Oct 24.8 2.7 − 15.4 22.2 18.6 9.5 22.6 13.1 − 39.7 − 25.3 − 1.1 − 17.1 3.8
         Nov 87.2 48.1 2.0 39.1 47.1 3.5 − 15.3 − 18.9 − 6.5 − 13.5 − 1.7 − 4.8 13.5
         Dec − 113.9 − 75.0 − 2.2 − 38.9 − 33.8 − 10.5 − 196.1 − 185.6 − 9.0 4.1 − 0.6 − 26.5 14.02016          Jan 156.9 46.6 5.3 110.2 95.2 − 39.8 127.3 167.2 − 28.2 − 8.8 − 0.4 − 19.1 0.1
         Feb 88.9 47.6 − 0.0 41.2 50.1 − 81.5 32.0 113.5 − 15.4 12.1 − 1.2 − 24.7 − 1.5
         Mar 60.3 24.2 − 3.1 36.0 39.5 21.3 − 86.0 − 107.3 − 16.8 − 6.5 − 0.9 0.1 − 9.5
         Apr 92.1 41.4 25.2 50.7 42.9 − 61.2 118.7 179.9 − 4.4 − 4.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 2.4
         May 68.9 21.8 12.3 47.2 53.4 0.7 63.6 62.9 0.4 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 6.4
         June 52.2 2.0 − 5.0 50.2 61.9 21.1 − 30.8 − 52.0 − 14.8 − 21.9 − 0.8 − 10.6 18.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8
         Dec − 15.5 1.5 5.4 − 17.1 − 10.0 − 5.7 − 33.1 − 27.4 − 17.5 − 7.3 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.22015          Jan 28.5 13.0 7.0 15.4 6.5 − 57.6 52.2 109.8 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.0 1.8 0.8
         Feb 9.4 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.9 − 11.1 − 13.9 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.3 2.3
         Mar 15.2 9.7 8.4 5.6 7.2 − 12.1 − 19.0 − 6.9 − 15.3 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 9.1 − 0.1
         Apr 17.3 3.3 0.7 14.0 4.9 7.7 33.9 26.2 − 13.2 − 10.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4
         May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4
         June − 0.9 − 2.7 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.2 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 1.8 3.7
         July 31.5 22.9 21.3 8.6 6.4 − 27.6 − 8.7 19.0 12.5 16.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 20.7 − 0.9 19.9 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0
         Sep 11.5 4.1 − 2.6 7.3 8.7 15.9 − 2.0 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.4 − 0.4
         Oct 3.4 − 3.8 − 9.4 7.1 3.5 − 8.5 − 13.1 − 4.6 − 10.7 − 9.0 − 1.3 0.7 − 1.1
         Nov 27.3 21.3 7.8 6.0 10.6 − 13.0 − 35.7 − 22.7 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 4.1
         Dec − 19.9 − 11.6 − 5.8 − 8.2 − 2.8 5.2 − 52.1 − 57.3 − 24.0 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.1 2.92016          Jan 19.7 5.7 − 3.0 14.0 10.4 − 21.1 24.7 45.8 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.8 − 1.2
         Feb 15.6 10.9 − 4.2 4.7 4.8 − 29.2 7.3 36.5 − 11.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 7.7 − 1.0
         Mar 12.3 4.4 0.6 7.8 8.2 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 0.4
         Apr 22.8 12.3 0.7 10.6 5.9 − 40.1 13.5 53.7 − 2.3 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.7 0.4
         May 22.0 16.2 4.9 5.8 9.1 1.7 1.2 − 0.5 4.8 0.8 − 1.0 5.0 − 0.0
         June 2.5 1.7 0.5 0.8 6.5 − 3.3 23.6 26.9 − 5.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.1 3.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
25.9 − 11.4 − 92.7 90.5 100.6 6.2 94.4 − 14.5 4.4 − 2.7 5.6 0.6 2014          Nov 
− 50.1 − 0.1 − 24.6 36.3 52.7 23.8 28.9 − 12.7 − 3.7 − 13.4 − 17.7 19.5          Dec 
80.8 − 43.5 − 22.7 5.5 34.9 − 2.7 37.5 − 37.0 7.7 23.7 20.2 − 5.9 2015          Jan 
− 28.6 − 15.4 − 46.5 21.8 28.7 4.1 24.6 − 8.5 1.6 38.1 8.7 2.6          Feb 
22.6 53.2 − 30.8 53.7 51.2 7.7 43.4 − 5.4 7.9 1.7 − 10.0 − 6.0          Mar 
− 43.3 − 25.4 − 113.0 77.8 91.5 8.8 82.7 − 15.5 1.8 − 17.5 21.9 6.3          Apr 
44.1 − 0.4 − 30.2 64.2 94.6 6.7 88.0 − 35.2 4.8 − 5.9 − 9.1 − 6.8          May
14.0 64.9 − 5.2 38.3 63.8 10.7 53.1 − 25.5 0.0 − 20.1 − 17.1 8.2          June
− 42.3 − 29.4 − 73.8 42.7 41.8 14.2 27.6 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 24.4 − 12.2          July− 14.8 − 0.6 − 17.4 11.5 13.3 − 1.9 15.2 − 5.4 3.6 0.7 11.0 − 4.5          Aug 
28.7 31.7 − − 20.9 6.3 23.1 − 2.8 25.9 − 8.4 − 8.5 − 7.7 − 15.7 − 0.8          Sep 
33.0 − 60.9 − 101.9 67.9 82.8 2.2 80.6 − 10.1 − 4.8 − 6.1 21.8 0.9          Oct 
− 17.2 61.1 − 53.4 54.6 58.7 5.7 53.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 4.0 15.1 1.0          Nov 
− 72.3 − 42.9 − − 0.2 53.9 45.3 14.4 30.8 7.8 0.9 − 31.1 − 23.9 − 10.8          Dec 
87.7 − 18.8 − 76.4 37.3 36.2 − 11.4 47.6 − 9.3 10.4 22.5 17.6 8.0 2016          Jan 
− 14.1 5.7 − 31.1 14.5 21.2 1.3 19.9 − 11.9 5.2 43.2 − 1.2 6.2          Feb 
31.8 28.3 − 38.2 55.0 43.0 3.5 39.5 9.7 2.3 − 5.6 − 12.2 1.7          Mar 
− 35.9 − 29.9 − 101.1 74.8 92.3 4.7 87.6 − 17.1 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 3.5          Apr 
20.1 16.6 − 32.6 34.1 47.5 2.3 45.2 − 21.2 7.9 − 9.5 0.7 − 2.9          May60.4 9.0 − 18.7 29.6 34.2 8.6 25.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 2.5 − 8.5 6.2          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8 2014          Nov 
− 1.3 12.2 3.6 5.0 − 14.6 − 18.1 8.2 2.2 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.6          Dec 
6.3 − 59.5 2.4 − 0.8 24.9 26.3 − 5.1 − 1.1 3.4 0.0 1.4 2015          Jan 
− 6.7 − 11.4 2.1 0.8 28.6 23.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.0 2.3          Feb 
2.9 10.3 2.3 2.2 5.2 5.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.8          Mar 
− 2.7 5.0 2.2 1.8 35.9 29.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 3.8 − 0.1 4.1          Apr 
1.4 − 4.8 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1          May2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
− 3.2 − 18.6 4.7 3.3 13.1 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 1.2 0.0 − 0.6          July− 0.3 − 13.1 2.4 − 0.5 12.1 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2          Aug 
1.8 16.8 2.8 − 0.8 20.5 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.8          Sep 
− 0.6 − 25.3 3.0 − 0.3 31.4 30.7 − 3.8 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 3.7          Oct − 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1          Nov 
10.3 15.2 2.6 2.3 − 16.2 − 21.3 6.3 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.8 − 24.2 − 0.7 − 1.9 24.7 27.8 − 5.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.9 2016          Jan 
7.1 − 24.1 0.6 0.4 15.3 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.6 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.6 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 8.5 4.2 1.5 0.3 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.5          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          May 25,173.8 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.8 4,186.0
         June 25,131.3 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,751.1 4,170.9
         July 25,303.6 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,853.0 4,274.6
         Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,873.2 16,227.8 12,671.7 10,633.1 1,271.8 766.8 3,556.1 1,132.4 2,423.6 4,972.7 4,672.7
2015          Jan 26,939.0 16,401.5 12,757.5 10,707.2 1,274.4 775.9 3,644.0 1,159.0 2,485.0 5,407.2 5,130.2
         Feb 26,880.5 16,426.5 12,787.1 10,726.6 1,276.5 784.0 3,639.5 1,144.2 2,495.2 5,402.2 5,051.8
         Mar 27,260.2 16,520.0 12,840.1 10,772.7 1,275.9 791.4 3,679.9 1,148.8 2,531.1 5,476.5 5,263.8
         Apr 26,929.6 16,545.2 12,839.5 10,757.3 1,274.8 807.3 3,705.7 1,152.9 2,552.8 5,415.2 4,969.2
         May 26,769.3 16,559.3 12,850.1 10,769.0 1,276.3 804.8 3,709.2 1,138.5 2,570.8 5,410.4 4,799.6
         June 26,207.9 16,518.1 12,811.3 10,766.8 1,254.0 790.5 3,706.8 1,136.8 2,570.0 5,269.8 4,420.1
         July 26,434.1 16,604.5 12,875.5 10,773.6 1,300.2 801.7 3,729.0 1,135.4 2,593.7 5,290.5 4,539.1
         Aug 26,280.8 16,580.5 12,822.1 10,732.5 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,241.9 4,458.4
         Sep 26,222.5 16,606.0 12,794.3 10,719.8 1,303.1 771.4 3,811.7 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,158.7 4,457.8
         Oct 26,416.5 16,658.0 12,814.5 10,743.8 1,288.2 782.6 3,843.5 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,245.2 4,513.3
         Nov 26,732.3 16,772.7 12,884.4 10,797.5 1,295.5 791.3 3,888.2 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,308.0 4,651.7
         Dec 25,927.1 16,619.0 12,780.6 10,705.3 1,296.1 779.3 3,838.3 1,110.2 2,728.1 5,023.5 4,284.6
2016          Jan 26,490.8 16,767.8 12,809.4 10,735.9 1,306.1 767.5 3,958.4 1,127.2 2,831.2 5,137.0 4,586.0
         Feb 26,826.4 16,855.5 12,852.2 10,781.8 1,312.6 757.8 4,003.2 1,118.8 2,884.5 5,215.5 4,755.3
         Mar 26,482.1 16,903.9 12,859.3 10,790.7 1,314.3 754.4 4,044.6 1,115.3 2,929.3 5,018.7 4,559.6
         Apr 26,626.7 16,981.0 12,887.8 10,793.7 1,325.5 768.6 4,093.3 1,128.1 2,965.2 5,161.8 4,483.8
         May 26,878.2 17,066.5 12,915.4 10,807.5 1,340.2 767.7 4,151.1 1,121.9 3,029.2 5,259.2 4,552.5
         June 27,139.4 17,115.4 12,903.7 10,804.9 1,346.2 752.7 4,211.8 1,110.3 3,101.4 5,261.4 4,762.5
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.4 3,696.4 2,931.4 2,527.7 143.6 260.1 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.3 3,728.3 2,948.0 2,536.5 142.2 269.2 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.3 3,739.4 2,953.8 2,542.4 142.3 269.1 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.2 3,758.2 2,967.1 2,546.4 144.1 276.5 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,202.9 3,772.6 2,966.9 2,546.0 135.6 285.3 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.5 3,770.8 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.7 3,767.1 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.3 3,803.0 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.6 3,813.0 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 816.9 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,041.7 3,824.0 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 827.9 364.5 463.4 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.6 3,832.0 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.4 368.4 469.0 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.5 3,864.8 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.3 363.9 481.3 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,924.8 3,839.8 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.3 358.3 477.9 1,166.4 918.6
2016          Jan 6,057.5 3,858.0 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.1 362.0 491.2 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.1 3,874.6 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.6 362.0 498.6 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.3 3,885.2 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.6 361.6 508.0 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,049.9 3,908.1 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 881.8 366.1 515.7 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,090.9 3,934.4 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.4 362.8 528.6 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,220.9 3,939.4 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.0 357.3 539.7 1,221.3 1,060.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
928.9 11,020.7 10,387.2 10,425.8 4,414.7 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6 2014          May
935.3 11,050.7 10,387.6 10,424.2 4,447.5 1,104.4 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,022.8 10,378.1 10,420.0 4,448.9 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,155.3 10,549.3 10,627.7 4,728.8 1,089.3 399.5 2,217.4 2,105.6 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,312.2 10,597.4 10,701.8 4,827.2 1,073.8 389.0 2,213.3 2,109.9 88.4 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,295.5 10,605.0 10,704.1 4,847.7 1,039.2 389.0 2,230.9 2,110.1 87.2          Feb 
990.9 11,362.5 10,639.0 10,750.7 4,900.1 1,040.0 384.7 2,221.9 2,118.1 85.9          Mar 
999.8 11,356.7 10,684.2 10,784.8 4,972.1 1,030.6 378.6 2,200.2 2,119.3 83.9          Apr 
1,006.4 11,453.0 10,726.9 10,824.8 5,049.8 1,001.7 374.0 2,192.9 2,123.9 82.3          May
1,017.1 11,472.1 10,727.2 10,828.4 5,096.7 977.6 370.2 2,178.6 2,124.1 81.2          June
1,031.3 11,470.9 10,759.7 10,875.8 5,134.9 983.3 367.9 2,187.5 2,121.8 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,455.3 10,756.8 10,867.7 5,137.0 981.6 362.4 2,183.4 2,124.2 79.1          Aug 
1,026.5 11,489.3 10,772.2 10,875.0 5,162.4 977.2 358.8 2,179.5 2,118.7 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,577.7 10,817.5 10,927.6 5,244.4 973.5 356.8 2,161.0 2,114.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,602.0 10,851.3 10,947.8 5,288.4 971.2 350.3 2,150.5 2,111.6 75.7          Nov 
1,048.9 11,562.3 10,889.6 10,998.3 5,324.9 981.8 349.1 2,152.3 2,115.0 75.2          Dec 
1,037.4 11,686.0 10,926.9 11,027.4 5,364.3 973.3 348.8 2,142.8 2,123.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.7 11,695.3 10,946.3 11,050.3 5,383.7 968.1 344.9 2,154.3 2,126.1 73.1          Feb 
1,042.2 11,759.9 10,990.4 11,080.7 5,418.0 973.3 343.0 2,145.3 2,128.8 72.3          Mar 
1,046.9 11,787.7 11,050.4 11,144.9 5,502.9 963.9 339.9 2,139.2 2,128.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.2 11,837.6 11,077.0 11,163.3 5,543.6 945.4 334.0 2,134.4 2,136.0 70.0          May
1,057.8 11,896.5 11,068.3 11,156.8 5,562.6 944.8 331.7 2,113.5 2,135.0 69.3          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2 2014          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 
244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7
         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.9 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8
         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9
         Dec 216.7 310.9 138.0 100.5 11.5 39.5 16.4 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.2 2,479.0 1,820.8
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 134.9 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.8 5.4 321.6 311.4 434.3 2,505.0 1,797.9
         Feb 272.1 319.3 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.3 5.3 359.7 349.6 443.1 2,502.5 1,783.8
         Mar 294.7 317.1 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 20.1 5.3 361.8 355.6 433.1 2,493.0 1,762.7
         Apr 251.4 320.6 144.8 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.4 5.1 344.0 336.3 455.0 2,462.0 1,743.3
         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 338.3 331.7 445.9 2,443.7 1,719.2
         June 309.5 334.1 157.1 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 318.0 314.5 428.8 2,431.8 1,704.8
         July 267.3 327.8 148.2 100.3 13.4 38.8 22.3 4.9 316.3 313.1 453.2 2,404.1 1,681.3
         Aug 252.6 335.1 154.3 100.4 13.4 38.8 23.4 4.8 316.7 311.6 451.7 2,373.3 1,671.8
         Sep 281.7 332.7 152.4 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 309.0 301.4 445.9 2,342.9 1,659.8
         Oct 316.6 333.5 156.3 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 303.1 293.6 467.6 2,336.2 1,639.5
         Nov 299.4 354.9 167.1 108.5 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 307.5 302.3 482.7 2,365.7 1,645.2
         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 276.1 274.2 458.9 2,317.9 1,633.0
2016          Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 298.5 296.9 475.9 2,299.4 1,613.5
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 341.8 337.9 474.6 2,284.3 1,594.9
         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 335.7 332.5 462.8 2,263.8 1,588.8
         Apr 297.5 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.0 480.2 2,268.6 1,584.9
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.7 480.9 2,275.3 1,572.7
         June 378.2 361.4 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.3 4.8 321.2 317.9 472.7 2,271.9 1,566.2
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016          Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,477.3 2,426.9 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,556.5 9,362.8 9,970.8 7,313.8 105.4 2014          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,375.2 2,456.9 − 50.4 4,138.9 − 5,600.8 9,386.0 9,986.6 7,300.5 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,438.4 2,469.0 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,611.4 9,402.4 10,016.6 7,300.4 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
61.6 42.8 2,374.7 3,561.6 2,459.6 − 45.1 4,570.9 − 5,938.9 9,682.5 10,313.4 7,183.3 112.3          Dec 
58.8 42.3 2,403.9 3,918.8 2,555.0 − 99.2 5,012.3 − 6,030.9 9,754.1 10,405.7 7,305.9 110.6 2015          Jan 
59.4 43.3 2,399.8 3,946.4 2,547.9 − 115.4 4,917.5 − 6,061.3 9,752.3 10,427.6 7,311.1 109.1          Feb 
53.7 44.2 2,395.1 3,978.1 2,577.1 − 65.3 5,129.0 − 6,119.8 9,816.0 10,470.0 7,324.5 109.5          Mar 
57.2 45.8 2,359.0 4,005.8 2,544.3 − 72.9 4,835.0 − 6,203.6 9,883.9 10,571.6 7,232.1 107.6          Apr 
54.4 42.0 2,347.3 3,963.5 2,552.6 − 67.3 4,633.2 − 6,302.5 9,953.7 10,607.8 7,220.1 110.0          May
58.8 44.7 2,328.3 3,794.9 2,534.5 − 61.0 4,271.9 − 6,361.5 9,986.3 10,606.1 7,168.4 112.4          June
46.2 45.1 2,312.8 3,892.3 2,533.6 − 68.0 4,400.5 − 6,407.3 10,038.0 10,688.9 7,158.0 114.8          July
35.9 47.3 2,290.1 3,887.3 2,532.2 − 67.5 4,302.4 − 6,415.1 10,042.3 10,682.8 7,128.3 116.3          Aug 
32.9 46.4 2,263.6 3,812.6 2,536.2 − 53.3 4,313.2 − 6,437.1 10,049.4 10,669.5 7,101.9 117.3          Sep 
32.4 47.0 2,256.8 3,865.9 2,562.3 − 75.9 4,350.7 − 6,524.1 10,122.9 10,776.3 7,101.8 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,285.4 3,920.2 2,567.1 − 77.3 4,529.8 − 6,591.2 10,188.4 10,840.9 7,123.1 121.9          Nov 
22.8 47.8 2,247.2 3,669.0 2,551.0 − 48.0 4,091.0 − 6,630.6 10,234.9 10,834.3 7,070.1 123.0          Dec 
29.2 50.8 2,219.4 3,809.3 2,575.2 − 73.1 4,382.3 − 6,664.9 10,269.9 10,908.8 7,056.6 123.6 2016          Jan 
32.9 54.3 2,197.1 3,921.2 2,612.1 − 92.1 4,550.5 − 6,686.8 10,283.4 10,940.0 7,081.6 122.8          Feb 
37.1 51.6 2,175.1 3,739.0 2,594.6 − 90.4 4,374.6 − 6,720.4 10,326.8 10,966.7 7,033.0 121.3          Mar 
42.1 49.9 2,176.6 3,926.4 2,606.4 − 96.2 4,278.8 − 6,813.8 10,402.8 11,065.8 7,039.8 122.7          Apr 
39.6 49.0 2,186.7 4,032.5 2,603.4 − 77.1 4,357.7 − 6,865.8 10,443.4 11,104.5 7,042.3 126.6          May
49.6 47.3 2,175.0 3,954.9 2,662.8 − 53.8 4,555.4 − 6,899.3 10,472.8 11,125.4 7,069.2 128.2          June
 German contribution (€ billion) 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 − 2014          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May
23.7 11.9 487.4 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.4 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.1 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016          Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016          Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations.the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue ofsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
−
0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+
19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+
25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan − 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
−
1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+
8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+
6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
allocated
on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2015 Nov                27 2,706.7 348.9 292.1 78.7 213.4 38.2 20.5 20.5 −
         Dec                  4 2,718.7 348.9 294.5 78.7 215.8 36.3 19.8 19.8 −
                              11 2,731.9 348.9 296.2 78.7 217.5 33.9 19.6 19.6 −
                              18 2,759.3 348.9 295.4 79.0 216.4 35.4 19.7 19.7 −
                              25 2,767.8 348.9 298.2 79.1 219.1 32.2 20.5 20.5 −
2016 Jan                  1 2,781.1 338.7 307.1 80.4 226.7 31.1 20.2 20.2 −
                                8 2,766.9 338.7 308.8 80.4 228.4 29.2 19.9 19.9 −
                              15 2,778.3 338.7 308.4 80.4 228.0 29.9 21.5 21.5 −
                              22 2,794.5 338.7 308.0 80.4 227.6 31.8 21.6 21.6 −
                              29 2,808.3 338.7 305.5 80.5 225.0 33.3 22.4 22.4 −
         Feb                  5 2,811.9 338.7 304.8 79.3 225.5 31.9 22.7 22.7 −
                              12 2,827.6 338.7 304.5 78.6 225.9 32.0 22.3 22.3 −
                              19 2,837.6 338.7 305.1 78.1 227.0 31.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              26 2,850.3 338.7 307.3 79.7 227.6 31.5 21.6 21.6 −
         Mar                  4 2,859.8 338.7 306.9 79.7 227.2 32.6 21.8 21.8 −
                              11 2,872.3 338.7 306.9 79.7 227.3 32.2 22.1 22.1 −
                              18 2,886.2 338.7 307.9 79.7 228.2 29.5 21.4 21.4 −
                              25 2,897.7 338.7 309.2 79.7 229.5 27.9 21.8 21.8 −
         Apr                  1 2,941.8 377.3 297.5 77.4 220.1 29.2 20.9 20.9 −
                                8 2,953.1 377.3 296.1 77.4 218.6 30.5 19.4 19.4 −
                              15 2,966.1 377.3 295.5 77.4 218.0 31.7 18.5 18.5 −
                              22 2,983.2 377.3 294.8 77.4 217.4 31.9 18.2 18.2 −
                              29 3,000.8 377.3 296.5 77.2 219.4 32.3 18.0 18.0 −
2016 May                  6 3,017.8 377.3 298.2 77.0 221.1 29.0 17.5 17.5 −
                              13 3,032.8 377.3 298.7 77.0 221.8 29.7 17.6 17.6 −
                              20 3,054.1 377.3 297.6 76.8 220.8 30.9 18.0 18.0 −
                              27 3,067.5 377.3 299.0 76.8 222.2 30.4 18.4 18.4 −
         June                  3 3,078.6 377.3 300.6 76.8 223.7 30.1 18.6 18.6 −
                              10 3,093.9 377.3 300.0 76.6 223.4 30.3 18.8 18.8 −
                              17 3,109.6 377.3 298.0 76.6 221.4 31.1 17.8 17.8 −
                              24 3,131.1 377.3 299.6 76.6 223.1 30.1 18.3 18.3 −
         July                  1 3,232.6 413.1 309.0 77.6 231.3 33.2 18.3 18.3 −
                                8 3,237.9 413.1 307.8 77.6 230.1 34.7 18.4 18.4 −
                              15 3,249.2 413.1 305.9 77.6 228.3 33.9 17.9 17.9 −
                              22 3,265.8 413.1 308.6 77.6 231.0 30.6 17.3 17.3 −
                              29 3,284.3 413.1 307.6 77.4 230.1 33.2 17.5 17.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0.0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016          Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0.0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0.0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0.0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0.0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0.7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0.2−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
525.2 73.8 451.4 − − 0.1 − 129.0 1 111.2 752.2 359.0 25.2 216.5 2015 Nov                27
521.4 69.8 451.4 − − 0.2 − 127.5 1 129.0 770.7 358.2 25.2 216.2          Dec                  4
520.6 69.1 451.4 − − 0.2 − 124.1 1 145.4 786.3 359.1 25.2 218.0                               11
538.2 68.6 469.5 − − 0.1 − 122.5 1 157.2 798.6 358.7 25.2 216.7                               18
542.5 72.9 469.5 − − 0.0 − 111.8 1 163.3 805.3 358.1 25.2 225.3                               25
559.0 89.0 469.5 − − 0.5 − 107.9 1 161.2 803.1 358.0 25.1 230.8 2016 Jan                  1
540.2 70.6 469.5 − − 0.0 − 110.6 1 169.1 812.4 356.7 25.1 225.3                                 8
535.4 65.7 469.5 − − 0.1 − 111.8 1 185.4 829.7 355.7 25.1 221.9                               15
534.8 65.2 469.5 − − 0.0 − 114.7 1 202.1 846.7 355.4 25.1 217.7                               22
534.0 69.0 465.0 − − 0.1 − 114.1 1 218.1 864.3 353.8 25.1 217.0                               29
526.2 61.2 465.0 − − 0.0 − 113.2 1 231.6 878.9 352.8 27.1 215.7          Feb                  5
525.1 60.2 464.9 − − 0.0 − 115.9 1 246.1 893.9 352.2 27.1 216.0                               12
526.7 61.8 464.9 − − 0.1 − 114.2 1 260.0 907.6 352.3 27.1 213.4                               19
522.6 65.8 456.7 − − 0.1 − 114.7 1 272.8 921.4 351.3 27.1 214.0                               26
518.0 61.3 456.7 − − 0.0 − 114.4 1 288.2 936.8 351.4 27.1 212.2          Mar                  4
517.6 60.8 456.7 − − 0.0 − 113.5 1 301.5 951.0 350.5 27.1 212.8                               11
516.4 59.7 456.7 − − 0.0 − 114.2 1 315.4 965.2 350.2 27.1 215.6                               18
517.4 60.6 456.7 − − 0.1 − 112.1 1 327.8 977.7 350.1 27.1 215.7                               25
525.1 62.3 462.7 − − 0.0 − 111.2 1 336.9 986.2 350.7 27.0 216.7          Apr                  1
519.1 56.0 462.7 − − 0.3 − 111.3 1 356.3 1 006.1 350.2 27.0 216.2                                 8
519.0 55.7 462.7 − − 0.6 − 110.0 1 371.3 1 022.3 349.0 27.0 216.0                               15
516.8 54.0 462.7 − − 0.0 − 109.8 1 390.8 1 041.5 349.3 27.0 216.7                               22
514.9 56.3 458.5 − − 0.1 − 114.5 1 406.3 1 060.0 346.3 27.0 213.9                               29
512.4 53.5 458.5 − − 0.3 − 117.6 1 425.4 1 077.7 347.7 27.0 213.5 2016 May                  6
510.1 51.4 458.5 − − 0.1 − 114.4 1 443.0 1 096.0 347.0 27.0 215.2                               13
508.6 49.9 458.5 − − 0.1 − 117.3 1 460.7 1 113.8 346.9 27.0 216.8                               20
511.7 60.2 451.2 − − 0.3 − 108.1 1 480.9 1 133.7 347.1 27.0 214.8                               27
503.2 51.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 108.3 1 499.4 1 152.4 347.0 27.0 214.2          June                  3
502.1 50.8 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.4 1 517.3 1 171.3 346.1 27.0 213.7                               10
500.4 49.1 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.7 1 537.0 1 191.4 345.6 27.0 213.4                               17
501.2 49.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 103.5 1 559.0 1 212.9 346.1 27.0 215.1                               24
540.0 53.1 486.8 − − 0.2 − 96.5 1 573.4 1 225.6 347.8 26.5 222.5          July                  1
531.2 44.1 486.8 − − 0.3 − 95.3 1 589.0 1 243.7 345.3 26.5 221.9                                 8
529.3 42.5 486.8 − − 0.0 − 95.8 1 605.9 1 263.6 342.3 26.5 220.8                               15
530.6 43.6 486.8 − − 0.2 − 94.4 1 623.7 1 281.4 342.3 26.5 221.1                               22
533.6 49.6 484.0 − − 0.0 − 94.0 1 639.4 1 298.8 340.6 26.5 219.5                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6 2014          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 
49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May
47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2015 Dec                  4 2,718.7 1,066.2 697.9 520.4 177.3 − − 0.2 5.0 − 177.5 79.8 97.7
                              11 2,731.9 1,069.4 733.3 559.2 174.0 − − 0.1 5.2 − 155.3 69.4 85.9
                              18 2,759.3 1,074.7 739.5 550.5 188.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 172.3 86.9 85.4
                              25 2,767.8 1,083.4 757.1 579.9 177.1 − − 0.1 5.1 − 152.2 70.1 82.1
2016 Jan                  1 2,781.1 1,083.5 768.4 555.9 212.4 − − 0.1 5.2 − 141.8 59.3 82.5
                                8 2,766.9 1,073.9 773.7 563.4 210.1 − − 0.1 4.9 − 149.4 67.5 82.0
                              15 2,778.3 1,065.6 763.7 547.5 216.0 − − 0.2 4.9 − 178.4 95.4 83.0
                              22 2,794.5 1,061.5 757.2 549.6 207.4 − − 0.2 5.1 − 204.9 117.4 87.4
                              29 2,808.3 1,062.6 778.4 556.5 221.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 195.8 107.9 87.9
         Feb                  5 2,811.9 1,065.0 788.0 555.2 232.7 − − 0.1 5.0 − 180.8 90.0 90.8
                              12 2,827.6 1,064.1 782.1 562.3 219.7 − − 0.1 4.9 − 196.1 105.9 90.2
                              19 2,837.6 1,061.6 752.9 529.4 223.4 − − 0.1 4.8 − 243.7 153.0 90.7
                              26 2,850.3 1,062.6 786.1 563.6 222.4 − − 0.1 5.0 − 220.4 128.0 92.3
         Mar                  4 2,859.8 1,065.5 811.3 564.3 246.8 − − 0.1 4.9 − 199.4 102.8 96.7
                              11 2,872.3 1,066.1 818.5 556.2 262.2 − − 0.1 4.8 − 202.0 108.4 93.6
                              18 2,886.2 1,066.8 786.0 539.2 246.7 − − 0.1 4.8 − 243.7 151.7 92.0
                              25 2,897.7 1,073.3 768.4 543.2 225.1 − − 0.1 4.4 − 269.9 179.7 90.1
         Apr                  1 2,941.8 1,071.0 844.2 575.6 268.4 − − 0.3 4.2 − 220.5 129.7 90.9
                                8 2,953.1 1,069.7 883.6 593.4 290.0 − − 0.3 4.2 − 201.7 111.1 90.6
                              15 2,966.1 1,068.8 865.8 584.3 281.2 − − 0.2 4.1 − 231.1 138.4 92.6
                              22 2,983.2 1,068.6 854.8 579.0 274.9 − − 0.9 4.1 − 255.9 162.2 93.7
                              29 3,000.8 1,073.6 899.3 594.5 304.6 − − 0.2 3.8 − 210.9 115.8 95.1
2016 May                  6 3,017.8 1,077.7 949.2 633.4 315.6 − − 0.2 3.8 − 182.0 85.1 96.9
                              13 3,032.8 1,078.0 944.8 635.4 309.2 − − 0.2 4.0 − 200.0 102.7 97.3
                              20 3,054.1 1,075.5 911.9 604.1 307.6 − − 0.2 4.2 − 247.5 150.8 96.7
                              27 3,067.5 1,076.4 920.8 611.8 308.8 − − 0.2 4.2 − 262.7 167.6 95.1
         June                  3 3,078.6 1,081.3 968.5 620.8 347.5 − − 0.3 3.9 − 223.3 122.6 100.7
                              10 3,093.9 1,081.8 984.3 643.8 340.3 − − 0.2 3.9 − 220.9 117.9 103.1
                              17 3,109.6 1,081.7 932.6 611.2 321.2 − − 0.2 4.0 − 287.4 183.7 103.7
                              24 3,131.1 1,082.2 911.0 613.1 297.6 − − 0.3 3.8 − 332.3 233.0 99.3
         July                  1 3,232.6 1,088.5 1,023.4 693.0 330.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 251.2 154.2 97.0
                                8 3,237.9 1,092.1 1,030.7 688.5 342.1 − − 0.1 3.6 − 237.1 140.9 96.3
                              15 3,249.2 1,093.8 1,008.0 674.6 333.3 − − 0.0 3.6 − 275.2 177.8 97.4
                              22 3,265.8 1,093.5 985.5 664.9 320.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 309.5 213.3 96.2
                              29 3,284.3 1,097.0 1,029.7 698.4 331.2 − − 0.0 3.6 − 277.0 179.4 97.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016          Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5
         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
41.0 2.2 5.1 5.1 − 59.2 219.0 − 350.7 97.2 2015 Nov                27
39.4 2.1 5.3 5.3 − 59.2 218.0 − 350.7 97.2          Dec                  4
37.1 2.0 4.8 4.8 − 59.2 217.7 − 350.7 97.2                               11
37.2 2.0 4.3 4.3 − 59.2 217.1 − 350.7 97.2                               18
40.8 2.8 4.1 4.1 − 58.2 216.2 − 350.7 97.2                               25
54.5 2.8 3.7 3.7 − 59.2 218.6 − 346.2 97.2 2016 Jan                  1
38.9 2.8 5.1 5.1 − 59.2 215.6 − 346.2 97.2                                 8
38.2 4.5 4.2 4.2 − 59.2 215.9 − 346.2 97.6                               15
39.1 6.3 3.7 3.7 − 59.2 213.9 − 346.2 97.6                               22
40.5 5.8 3.1 3.1 − 59.2 214.1 − 346.2 97.6                               29
46.5 4.8 3.8 3.8 − 59.2 214.9 − 346.2 97.7          Feb                  5
52.3 3.6 4.3 4.3 − 59.2 216.7 − 346.2 98.2                               12
49.9 3.9 4.5 4.5 − 59.2 212.8 − 346.2 98.2                               19
52.3 5.3 5.0 5.0 − 59.2 210.2 − 346.2 98.2                               26
54.5 7.2 4.1 4.1 − 59.2 209.4 − 346.2 98.2          Mar                  4
55.7 6.8 4.6 4.6 − 59.2 210.4 − 346.2 98.2                               11
58.7 5.7 4.9 4.9 − 59.2 212.1 − 346.2 98.2                               18
56.7 4.6 4.7 4.7 − 59.2 211.9 − 346.2 98.5                               25
53.2 4.5 3.6 3.6 − 57.5 208.4 − 376.0 98.7          Apr                  1
47.6 4.3 4.0 4.0 − 57.5 205.9 − 376.0 98.7                                 8
51.9 3.8 4.0 4.0 − 57.5 204.4 − 376.0 98.7                               15
55.0 3.2 4.2 4.2 − 57.5 205.2 − 376.0 98.7                               22
67.4 4.0 4.3 4.3 − 57.5 205.2 − 376.0 98.7                               29
57.0 2.8 4.2 4.2 − 57.5 208.5 − 376.0 99.0 2016 May                  6
59.0 2.8 4.9 4.9 − 57.5 206.7 − 376.0 99.1                               13
62.2 3.3 5.1 5.1 − 57.5 211.9 − 376.0 99.0                               20
58.5 2.9 5.7 5.7 − 57.5 203.9 − 376.0 99.0                               27
56.1 3.2 6.3 6.3 − 57.5 203.5 − 376.0 99.0          June                  3
58.2 3.3 6.0 6.0 − 57.5 202.9 − 376.0 99.0                               10
59.7 2.9 5.0 5.0 − 57.5 203.8 − 376.0 99.0                               17
56.6 3.1 4.5 4.5 − 57.5 203.3 − 376.0 100.8                               24
70.9 3.0 5.2 5.2 − 58.5 206.3 − 420.9 100.8          July                  1
79.2 3.4 5.5 5.5 − 58.5 206.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 8
72.8 3.5 6.2 6.2 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               15
79.0 3.0 6.4 6.4 − 58.5 205.0 − 420.9 100.8                               22
83.0 3.1 7.4 7.4 − 58.5 203.3 − 420.9 100.8                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0 2014          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 
30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May
47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2014          Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.6 15.4 2,107.0 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 524.6 363.3 161.3 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.4 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.5 15.4 2,096.3 1,578.2 1,195.7 382.4 518.2 362.5 155.7 3,698.4 3,275.9 2,680.8 2,397.4         Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.5 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.1 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,693.9 2,407.4         June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,691.9 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.2 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,716.9 2,421.1
         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016          Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.9 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.5 3,745.8 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
 Changes 3
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 179.5 0.3 − 16.0 − 11.0 66.8 − 77.8 − 5.0 7.7 − 12.7 66.4 64.9 68.8 57.3
2014          Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 54.1 3.6 − 53.3 − 33.9 − 28.0 − 6.0 − 19.4 − 18.4 − 1.0 − 15.5 − 12.7 2.9 − 0.8
2015          Jan 278.4 − 3.8 75.6 46.7 46.9 − 0.2 28.9 26.3 2.6 28.5 21.9 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 11.8 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 10.6 12.1 5.8 8.3
         Mar 86.5 0.1 23.5 28.4 27.5 0.9 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 6.1 4.4 6.9 1.0
         Apr − 63.9 0.6 − 14.1 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 11.3 11.9 3.2 − 0.2
         May − 92.5 0.3 − 9.5 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.4 2.7 9.0         June − 191.7 − 1.1 − 55.0 − 20.9 − 11.2 − 9.8 − 34.0 − 31.0 − 3.0 − 7.8 − 5.9 − 0.8 6.7
         July 57.5 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 24.8 26.9 22.3 0.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 13.0 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 7.3 0.3 − 17.3 − 26.7 − 20.8 − 5.9 9.3 8.8 0.6 4.0 1.1 2.3 6.7
         Oct 25.1 0.7 39.8 36.4 40.4 − 4.0 3.4 3.3 0.1 − 2.1 0.4 − 0.9 6.1
         Nov 59.7 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 252.6 3.6 − 88.8 − 87.4 − 56.1 − 31.3 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 26.5 − 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.52016          Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.6 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4
         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.1 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.3 1.5 8.5 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.5 9.9
         June 107.0 0.7 3.4 5.3 8.3 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 4.3 2.4 − 10.6 − 11.2 − 1.6 − 1.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6 2014          Sep 270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8          Dec 
285.2 588.8 336.7 252.1 423.2 273.3 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,136.5 885.6 1,180.2 2015          Jan 
283.4 595.1 339.8 255.3 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,128.8 880.6 1,122.6          Feb 290.5 593.0 339.0 253.9 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.2 872.6 1,196.3          Mar 
293.3 601.3 347.6 253.7 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.6 585.3 336.3 249.0 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May278.9 579.9 332.5 247.4 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
300.7 583.5 333.2 250.3 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
295.8 584.7 330.3 254.4 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
Changes 3
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 1.4 5.1 2.4 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 2.7 − 80.1 − 93.5 − 150.1 2015
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8 2014          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 
3.7 − 15.6 − 7.2 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 − 30.9 − 33.1 42.1          Dec 
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 1.0 2.5 5.5 0.6 4.9 53.7 49.4 124.4 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.2 − 7.8 − 57.6          Feb 
5.8 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 1.5 1.6 2.8 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 17.0 − 24.3 73.7          Mar 3.4 8.7 8.7 0.0 − 0.6 0.0 2.8 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.1 32.6 34.1 − 94.4          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.7 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 25.1 − 28.1 − 102.8          June
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 2.1 0.6 0.8 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 3.9 32.0          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.6 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 2.9 1.8 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 7.2          Sep 
− 7.1 1.4 2.9 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 7.9 − 8.4          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.5 − 35.3 50.6          Nov 
0.9 − 10.1 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 12.8 − 8.0 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 4.2 − 55.6 − 55.3 − 85.4          Dec 
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.8 90.5 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.0 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 1.0 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.6 − 5.7 − 3.9 0.6 1.6 2.1 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.1 24.1 24.8 89.6          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2014          Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.6 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,114.1 1,530.7 976.8 292.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.5 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.3 3,220.8 3,126.5 1,543.4 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016          Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
 Changes 4
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 179.5 − 61.1 − 49.6 − 11.5 104.9 105.5 153.7 − 36.9 − 10.0 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
2014          Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 54.1 − 25.6 − 5.4 − 20.2 − 1.3 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 7.3 2.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
2015          Jan 278.4 54.3 23.1 31.3 13.8 5.2 14.5 − 8.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.1 2.2 2.5
         Feb − 70.0 − 14.9 − 4.3 − 10.7 5.9 12.1 12.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7
         Mar 86.5 10.9 − 1.2 12.0 − 4.6 − 8.0 − 1.9 − 4.0 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.2 1.8
         Apr − 63.9 − 11.7 − 15.3 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.5 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.8 18.8 25.9 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.7         June − 191.7 − 39.1 − 12.4 − 26.7 − 5.2 − 7.8 2.9 − 9.0 − 5.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.9 1.2
         July 57.5 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3
         Sep − 7.3 0.8 3.6 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.7 − 0.4 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
         Oct 25.1 13.7 20.6 − 7.0 9.5 13.5 25.6 − 12.2 − 4.3 0.1 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.5
         Nov 59.7 14.4 10.3 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 252.6 − 42.5 − 41.5 − 1.0 1.0 0.9 − 1.4 0.1 4.5 2.2 3.0 − 1.8 − 4.12016          Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.8 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.5 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0
         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
         June 107.0 13.1 12.5 0.6 2.0 − 3.1 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 3.8 3.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 201538.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6 2014          Sep 40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 18.0 12.7 6.8 3.5 1,103.7 44.2 614.3 543.2 1,256.2 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,104.3 44.7 610.1 557.4 1,188.7          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.4 1,263.6          Mar 
41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.8 50.0 618.1 587.4 1,093.4          June
Changes 4
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 80.5 9.3 − 26.6 28.0 − 143.3 2015
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3 2014          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 13.5 − 1.9 − 31.8 − 6.2 30.6          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.4 1.2 3.4 0.0 8.1 4.0 63.5 3.9 131.3 2015          Jan − 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 7.0 − 3.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 5.7 13.6 − 68.4          Feb − 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 6.5 1.2 6.4 5.4 75.3          Mar 
0.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.8 0.6 − 98.3          Apr 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.7 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 36.0 − 1.8 − 100.8          June
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 17.4 − 0.7 26.6          July− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.0 9.7 − 23.6          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.2 7.3 − 27.9 4.0 19.9          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 0.0 10.8 5.9 2.3 0.0 − 10.7          Oct − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 2.3 − 16.8 − 6.7 51.2          Nov 
2.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 50.1 − 2.1 − 67.8 − 2.8 − 86.4          Dec 
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.1 1.6 11.6 13.2 65.7          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.2 7.2 − 48.8          Apr − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.7 0.9 4.3 12.4          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 7.7 4.0 87.4          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2016          Jan 1,773 7,866.1 198.6 2,449.2 1,930.9 514.3 4,005.4 358.8 2,852.0 0.7 784.2 119.9 1,093.0
         Feb 1,772 7,955.7 192.3 2,475.1 1,952.8 517.5 4,013.8 366.8 2,859.7 0.7 775.0 119.1 1,155.3
         Mar 1,771 7,826.0 194.6 2,415.9 1,892.9 518.0 4,001.6 357.4 2,855.3 0.7 777.9 119.4 1,094.5
         Apr 1,769 7,849.5 207.7 2,456.6 1,934.4 516.7 4,023.1 371.9 2,866.1 0.7 773.7 119.0 1,043.1
         May 1,769 7,860.5 226.7 2,431.2 1,912.1 513.8 4,031.1 368.5 2,876.2 0.6 775.5 119.1 1,052.4
         June 1,764 7,963.8 243.4 2,447.8 1,929.9 512.6 4,010.8 355.8 2,876.7 0.6 769.7 119.4 1,142.4
Commercial banks 6
2016          May 270 3,158.6 139.3 991.2 904.1 87.0 1,195.5 193.5 747.4 0.3 246.8 56.7 775.9
         June 268 3,244.4 144.0 1,006.8 918.4 88.2 1,179.3 181.9 749.9 0.3 242.4 56.8 857.4
   Big banks 7
2016          May 4 1,912.5 59.7 549.2 508.6 40.5 512.2 108.3 277.4 0.2 119.7 50.4 741.0
         June 4 1,983.8 45.0 566.7 527.2 39.4 499.3 100.8 276.6 0.1 117.7 50.2 822.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2016          May 161 908.8 42.4 227.5 185.5 41.9 605.1 61.4 429.1 0.2 114.0 5.4 28.4
         June 159 926.3 57.7 229.4 185.1 44.2 605.0 58.7 431.8 0.2 113.9 5.7 28.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2016          May 105 337.3 37.2 214.6 210.0 4.6 78.1 23.8 40.9 − 13.2 0.9 6.4
         June 105 334.2 41.2 210.7 206.1 4.6 75.1 22.4 41.6 − 10.8 0.9 6.3
Landesbanken
2016          May 9 939.9 10.8 279.2 204.4 74.3 517.4 56.1 364.9 0.1 95.0 11.0 121.5
         June 9 944.5 14.1 283.0 209.3 73.3 508.8 53.3 359.8 0.1 94.3 11.0 127.7
Savings banks
2016          May 412 1,150.2 21.2 189.8 69.1 120.3 909.2 49.3 705.3 0.1 154.4 14.4 15.5
         June 412 1,150.3 21.2 187.4 67.7 119.3 911.7 50.3 706.7 0.1 154.4 14.5 15.5
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2016          May 2 296.5 2.7 168.2 140.2 28.0 65.4 12.8 23.3 0.0 29.3 13.2 47.0
         June 2 299.8 2.6 168.6 140.8 27.8 64.1 12.1 23.2 0.0 28.6 13.3 51.3
Credit cooperatives
2016          May 1,021 826.7 12.1 168.6 61.4 106.6 612.8 32.3 480.6 0.0 99.8 15.0 18.3
         June 1,018 829.6 13.1 166.5 58.9 107.0 616.1 33.0 482.5 0.0 100.5 15.5 18.4
Mortgage banks
2016          May 15 289.5 2.5 54.5 37.7 16.4 223.2 4.7 176.7 − 41.8 0.2 9.2
         June 15 288.9 1.5 54.7 38.2 16.3 222.9 4.7 176.8 − 41.4 0.2 9.5
Building and loan associations
2016          May 21 212.5 0.1 58.2 40.7 17.5 149.7 1.3 126.1 . 22.3 0.3 4.2
         June 21 213.6 0.3 57.9 40.6 17.2 150.8 1.4 126.8 . 22.7 0.3 4.2
Special purpose banks
2016          May 19 986.6 38.1 521.5 454.4 63.7 357.9 18.5 252.0 − 86.1 8.2 60.8
         June 19 992.8 46.6 522.9 456.0 63.5 357.1 19.1 250.9 − 85.5 7.8 58.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2016          May 139 1,013.2 62.3 394.6 353.6 40.9 455.4 66.8 273.8 0.2 111.9 4.2 96.8
         June 139 1,032.8 79.8 391.7 348.1 43.6 452.2 63.1 276.8 0.2 109.7 4.4 104.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2016          May 34 675.9 25.1 180.0 143.7 36.2 377.2 43.0 232.9 0.2 98.7 3.3 90.3
         June 34 698.5 38.6 180.9 141.9 39.0 377.1 40.7 235.2 0.2 98.9 3.5 98.4
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,704.0 497.2 1,206.7 3,471.5 1,818.7 289.2 695.2 59.3 605.0 542.9 63.5 1,108.6 478.5 1,103.5 2016          Jan 
1,706.1 509.6 1,196.5 3,482.7 1,834.6 286.3 693.3 62.6 605.2 544.4 63.3 1,120.6 478.6 1,167.7          Feb 1,682.0 497.5 1,184.5 3,450.0 1,807.2 281.8 694.8 40.4 603.2 543.6 63.0 1,110.4 480.2 1,103.3          Mar 
1,718.2 493.9 1,224.2 3,483.4 1,836.5 290.4 692.7 60.3 601.4 542.9 62.4 1,119.0 483.5 1,045.4          Apr 
1,691.4 531.5 1,159.8 3,502.4 1,852.5 294.6 693.4 58.2 599.8 542.3 62.2 1,132.7 480.6 1,053.4          May1,717.7 550.2 1,167.4 3,495.4 1,855.4 285.8 694.0 48.7 598.6 541.8 61.7 1,125.6 485.3 1,139.9          June
Commercial banks 6
767.0 367.7 399.3 1,338.0 810.5 161.0 237.1 43.3 104.9 96.7 24.6 157.4 164.9 731.4 2016          May785.4 375.1 410.3 1,326.9 806.5 153.7 237.6 28.5 104.4 96.4 24.7 155.5 163.3 813.3          June
Big banks 7
433.7 206.9 226.8 580.3 333.8 90.4 85.3 43.2 65.0 63.6 5.8 122.3 98.5 677.7 2016          May441.0 213.4 227.6 564.1 323.9 84.1 85.6 28.5 64.7 63.3 5.8 120.8 97.2 760.8          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
160.8 51.3 109.5 609.6 380.1 48.2 124.3 0.1 39.4 32.8 17.6 34.6 58.0 45.9 2016          May174.4 66.7 107.7 614.5 386.0 47.0 124.5 0.0 39.3 32.8 17.7 34.2 57.9 45.3          June
Branches of foreign banks
172.6 109.5 63.0 148.1 96.7 22.4 27.5 − 0.5 0.2 1.2 0.5 8.3 7.8 2016          May169.9 94.9 75.0 148.4 96.6 22.6 27.5 − 0.4 0.2 1.2 0.5 8.3 7.2          June
Landesbanken
258.5 48.1 210.5 299.8 127.5 63.6 95.0 11.2 13.6 10.6 0.0 207.0 55.5 119.1 2016          May262.6 53.8 208.9 300.7 128.7 63.0 95.4 15.8 13.6 10.5 0.1 202.9 55.3 122.9          June
Savings banks
134.8 10.9 123.9 862.2 506.5 17.7 15.2 − 294.8 263.2 27.9 13.9 96.8 42.6 2016          May134.6 11.2 123.5 861.4 507.5 17.0 15.3 − 294.2 263.0 27.4 13.8 100.4 40.1          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
159.0 50.9 108.1 28.6 13.0 5.5 8.5 2.4 − − 1.5 49.0 15.2 44.8 2016          May157.9 50.8 107.1 27.8 13.2 4.5 8.6 2.2 − − 1.5 49.2 15.2 49.8          June
Credit cooperatives
104.5 3.0 101.4 615.7 371.5 33.6 16.7 − 185.9 171.3 7.9 8.3 66.1 32.1 2016          May105.8 3.5 102.3 616.2 373.2 32.7 16.6 − 185.9 171.5 7.8 8.6 68.4 30.6          June
Mortgage banks
54.6 5.7 48.9 120.6 8.2 9.5 102.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 94.5 9.8 9.9 2016          May54.8 6.9 48.0 120.4 8.2 9.9 102.2 − 0.1 0.1 . 94.1 9.7 9.9          June
Building and loan associations
20.3 2.6 17.7 166.0 0.8 0.9 163.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.2 2.4 10.1 13.6 2016          May20.6 3.2 17.5 166.3 1.0 0.9 163.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.2 2.5 10.2 14.0          June
Special purpose banks
192.6 42.6 150.1 71.7 14.3 2.9 54.4 1.3 − − . 600.1 62.3 59.9 2016          May195.9 45.9 150.0 75.7 17.2 4.1 54.4 2.1 − − . 599.1 62.8 59.3          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
325.2 168.9 156.2 515.3 355.1 50.8 79.4 9.9 21.5 21.0 8.5 23.6 50.6 98.6 2016          May341.2 171.7 169.5 516.1 354.9 52.1 79.1 8.6 21.4 20.9 8.6 21.3 50.4 103.8          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
152.6 59.4 93.2 367.2 258.4 28.5 51.9 9.9 21.0 20.7 7.4 23.1 42.3 90.8 2016          May171.3 76.8 94.5 367.6 258.3 29.4 51.6 8.6 21.0 20.7 7.4 20.8 42.2 96.6          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2015          Jan 15.2 69.3 1,490.7 1,128.5 0.0 2.7 359.4 1.7 3,191.5 2,725.6 0.4 1.1 464.5
         Feb 15.2 69.7 1,486.0 1,125.7 0.0 3.1 357.2 1.6 3,205.1 2,736.8 0.4 1.3 466.6
         Mar 15.2 97.5 1,488.9 1,127.0 0.0 3.2 358.6 1.6 3,212.0 2,738.7 0.3 1.5 471.5
         Apr 15.9 91.7 1,473.6 1,117.3 0.0 3.4 352.8 1.6 3,221.1 2,745.0 0.4 1.5 474.2
         May 16.1 95.0 1,466.4 1,114.3 0.0 3.5 348.6 1.6 3,207.9 2,743.3 0.3 1.7 462.5
         June 15.1 115.4 1,424.2 1,082.1 0.0 3.3 338.8 1.6 3,200.4 2,745.2 0.3 2.4 452.5
         July 15.4 116.6 1,429.7 1,091.8 0.0 2.7 335.2 1.6 3,228.7 2,748.4 0.3 2.4 477.6
         Aug 15.2 133.6 1,418.0 1,086.8 0.0 2.1 329.1 1.6 3,230.9 2,751.1 0.3 1.9 477.5
         Sep 15.6 139.8 1,384.6 1,059.7 0.0 2.3 322.7 1.6 3,230.8 2,756.1 0.3 1.7 472.8
         Oct 16.2 140.0 1,421.3 1,100.0 0.0 2.1 319.1 1.6 3,232.0 2,764.6 0.3 1.5 465.6
         Nov 15.7 152.2 1,438.4 1,122.6 0.0 2.6 313.2 1.6 3,249.0 2,775.2 0.3 1.0 472.5
         Dec 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016          Jan 16.2 170.9 1,368.7 1,086.0 0.0 2.0 280.8 1.6 3,238.7 2,771.0 0.4 0.7 466.5
         Feb 15.9 164.3 1,379.8 1,098.3 0.0 1.8 279.7 1.6 3,248.0 2,781.4 0.4 1.5 464.7
         Mar 17.2 166.6 1,358.5 1,076.3 0.0 2.0 280.2 1.6 3,247.2 2,785.9 0.3 1.2 459.7
         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8
         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
Changes *
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2015          Jan − 3.8 − 12.0 + 63.8 + 62.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 26.4 + 15.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 10.5
         Feb − 0.0 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 11.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.1         Mar + 0.1 + 27.8 + 3.0 + 1.4 − + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.9
         Apr + 0.6 − 5.7 − 15.3 − 9.7 − + 0.2 − 5.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8
         May + 0.3 + 3.3 − 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 13.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 11.7         June − 1.1 + 20.4 − 42.1 − 32.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.1
         July + 0.3 + 1.2 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 28.3 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.1
         Aug − 0.1 + 17.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         Sep + 0.3 + 6.3 − 33.3 − 27.1 − + 0.2 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.1 + 36.6 + 40.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.2         Nov − 0.6 + 12.3 + 17.3 + 22.7 − + 0.5 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.9
         Dec + 3.6 + 2.8 − 91.8 − 59.9 − − 0.9 − 31.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5
2016          Jan − 3.1 + 15.9 + 22.2 + 23.4 − + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 6.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.4
         Feb − 0.3 − 6.5 + 11.9 + 13.1 − − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.7
         Mar + 1.3 + 2.3 − 21.3 − 22.1 − + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.0
         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 26.1 93.1 1,137.9 174.9 963.1 0.0 11.3 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 606.6 64.7 30.8 2015          Jan 
− 26.2 92.3 1,133.5 169.2 964.3 0.0 11.3 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 606.1 63.8 30.8          Feb − 25.9 92.3 1,134.4 178.0 956.4 0.0 11.2 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 603.9 63.0 30.7          Mar 
− 25.8 92.5 1,117.5 163.4 954.0 0.0 11.2 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 601.5 61.9 30.2          Apr 
− 25.7 92.8 1,103.0 164.4 938.6 0.0 11.1 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 600.0 61.0 30.2          May− 25.3 92.5 1,090.2 161.7 928.4 0.0 11.1 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 598.3 60.4 29.6          June
− 25.0 92.4 1,079.0 152.5 926.5 0.0 10.8 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 596.4 59.5 29.5          July
− 25.0 92.1 1,072.5 149.0 923.4 0.0 10.8 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 595.2 58.8 29.5          Aug − 24.9 92.0 1,076.0 153.1 922.9 0.0 10.8 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 594.6 58.1 29.5          Sep 
− 24.7 91.9 1,096.4 150.5 945.8 0.0 10.6 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 594.6 57.5 29.5          Oct 
− 24.5 92.0 1,108.0 158.2 949.7 0.0 10.5 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 594.3 56.8 29.5          Nov − 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3          Dec 
− 20.3 90.0 1,066.1 145.0 921.1 0.0 6.0 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 596.1 54.8 29.3 2016          Jan 
− 20.2 89.8 1,061.7 151.8 909.9 0.0 5.9 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 596.4 54.6 29.3          Feb − 19.9 90.3 1,058.6 147.9 910.7 0.0 5.9 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 594.5 54.4 29.1          Mar 
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
Changes *
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 0.4 − 1.2 + 26.1 + 47.1 − 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 2015          Jan 
− + 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.4 − 5.6 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 8.8 − 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 17.0 − 14.6 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.3 − 14.4 + 1.0 − 15.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5          June
− − 0.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 9.2 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 − 2.6 + 22.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 11.6 + 7.7 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 − 2.0 − 42.4 − 27.1 − 15.2 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 13.9 − 13.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 2016          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.1 + 7.0 − 10.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.2 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2015          Jan 0.2 1,213.2 966.6 684.2 282.4 10.9 235.7 1.1 770.7 445.3 117.5 327.8 7.0 318.4
         Feb 0.2 1,198.1 956.6 687.3 269.3 9.3 232.2 1.1 766.7 444.5 115.7 328.9 6.6 315.5
         Mar 0.3 1,186.6 944.4 654.9 289.5 10.9 231.4 1.1 777.0 447.4 113.2 334.2 7.2 322.4
         Apr 0.2 1,199.9 958.7 675.5 283.1 10.0 231.3 1.1 780.2 455.7 124.6 331.1 6.1 318.4
         May 0.3 1,189.7 948.9 665.0 284.0 9.1 231.7 1.1 787.3 459.0 127.1 331.8 6.3 322.0
         June 0.3 1,142.5 903.1 617.1 286.0 8.1 231.3 1.1 765.7 435.1 104.4 330.7 7.5 323.1
         July 0.3 1,149.0 911.5 625.0 286.5 6.6 230.9 1.1 760.0 433.4 103.3 330.1 5.0 321.6
         Aug 0.3 1,140.9 904.7 619.3 285.3 6.1 230.2 1.1 761.5 435.8 106.9 328.8 5.8 319.9
         Sep 0.3 1,152.8 914.7 627.4 287.4 4.4 233.7 1.1 760.7 434.9 106.6 328.3 6.0 319.8
         Oct 0.3 1,138.7 900.4 617.1 283.4 2.9 235.3 1.1 772.2 446.5 116.4 330.1 6.1 319.6
         Nov 0.3 1,112.9 873.2 598.4 274.8 2.8 237.0 1.1 784.8 450.0 103.7 346.4 6.9 327.9
         Dec 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016          Jan 0.3 1,080.5 844.9 570.2 274.8 1.9 233.6 1.0 766.7 440.2 101.3 338.8 8.9 317.6
         Feb 0.3 1,095.3 854.5 580.2 274.3 3.1 237.8 1.0 765.9 445.3 102.6 342.7 10.2 310.3
         Mar 0.3 1,057.4 816.6 551.7 264.9 3.0 237.8 1.0 754.4 427.1 87.9 339.2 9.1 318.2
         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7
         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
Changes *
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2015          Jan + 0.0 + 62.4 + 57.8 + 50.3 + 7.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 20.6 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 17.1 − 12.0 + 2.2 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 3.6 − − 5.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.2
         Mar + 0.0 − 24.0 − 24.5 − 39.9 + 15.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.1
         Apr − 0.0 + 25.3 + 26.1 + 27.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 14.3 + 12.7 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.9
         May + 0.0 − 17.8 − 17.3 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.9         June + 0.0 − 41.3 − 40.1 − 44.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 20.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.7
         July + 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − − 9.1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 2.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.7
         Sep + 0.0 + 14.0 + 12.2 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct + 0.0 − 20.2 − 20.2 − 13.9 − 6.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 7.7 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9
         Nov + 0.0 − 38.2 − 39.4 − 25.9 − 13.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 2.7 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Dec − 0.0 − 36.7 − 33.4 − 37.5 + 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 20.7 − 18.9 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 7.2
2016          Jan − 0.0 + 16.1 + 16.8 + 15.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 18.2 + 18.2 + 18.6 − 0.4 + 1.3 − 1.3
         Feb + 0.0 + 14.9 + 9.6 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 1.1 − 7.1
         Mar − 0.0 − 26.3 − 26.5 − 22.8 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 13.6 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 9.3
         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
14.0 35.8 691.4 338.7 352.6 260.2 92.5 0.1 260.9 141.4 119.5 59.2 60.3 0.7 2015          Jan 
14.0 35.7 672.5 310.8 361.7 269.4 92.3 0.1 263.7 143.1 120.7 61.8 58.9 0.8          Feb 14.1 36.1 712.5 369.6 342.9 256.1 86.9 0.1 253.6 131.2 122.4 64.7 57.7 0.9          Mar 
13.8 36.0 729.9 348.1 381.8 297.3 84.5 0.1 265.1 146.9 118.2 62.3 55.9 0.9          Apr 
13.8 36.8 714.0 357.6 356.4 270.8 85.7 0.1 265.4 142.7 122.7 70.8 51.9 0.9          May13.6 36.4 671.4 331.2 340.2 256.3 83.9 0.1 240.5 127.7 112.8 61.6 51.2 0.9          June
13.6 35.3 690.6 342.8 347.7 266.7 81.0 0.1 244.4 131.9 112.5 62.0 50.5 0.9          July
13.7 35.2 681.5 334.5 347.0 264.5 82.5 0.1 253.6 135.3 118.3 65.9 52.4 0.9          Aug 13.7 35.2 672.0 346.4 325.5 244.3 81.2 0.1 234.5 128.3 106.3 53.2 53.1 0.9          Sep 
13.5 35.2 656.9 362.9 294.0 212.7 81.3 0.1 243.4 134.6 108.8 56.6 52.3 0.8          Oct 
13.6 34.8 649.0 373.8 275.2 190.5 84.6 0.1 243.2 136.3 106.9 55.7 51.2 0.8          Nov 13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7          Dec 
13.2 29.6 637.8 352.2 285.7 201.3 84.3 0.1 237.7 129.1 108.6 60.5 48.2 0.8 2016          Jan 
13.2 29.0 644.4 357.8 286.6 201.8 84.8 0.1 246.4 137.2 109.2 61.8 47.5 0.8          Feb 13.3 28.9 623.4 349.6 273.8 192.0 81.8 0.0 218.8 119.8 99.0 52.9 46.1 0.8          Mar 
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
Changes *
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 68.7 + 56.0 + 12.8 + 11.5 + 1.3 − + 35.9 + 26.3 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 2015          Jan 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 20.1 − 28.2 + 8.1 + 8.6 − 0.5 − + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 + 32.7 + 56.4 − 23.8 − 17.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 12.6 − 13.0 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 2.0 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.0 + 25.2 − 17.7 + 42.9 + 44.3 − 1.3 − + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 20.1 + 8.0 − 28.1 − 28.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 4.8 + 3.9 + 8.2 − 4.3 − 0.0          May− 0.2 − 0.3 − 39.2 − 25.0 − 14.1 − 12.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 23.9 − 14.5 − 9.3 − 8.9 − 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 − 1.2 + 16.0 + 10.6 + 5.4 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 4.3 + 2.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.5 + 12.0 − 21.5 − 20.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 18.9 − 7.0 − 11.9 − 12.6 + 0.7 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 18.2 + 15.2 − 33.4 − 33.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.0 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.2          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 − 14.3 + 8.4 − 22.7 − 25.2 + 2.5 − − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 4.3 − 32.0 − 48.3 + 16.4 + 15.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.6 − 7.9 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.9 + 27.6 + 29.5 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.2 − + 36.9 + 26.4 + 10.6 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 2016          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.0 − 5.4 − 8.6 − 6.7 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 25.6 − 16.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 1.2 + 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2015          Jan 3,191.5 2,726.0 267.9 214.7 214.0 0.7 53.1 52.8 0.4 2,923.7 2,388.4
         Feb 3,205.1 2,737.1 275.8 218.9 217.8 1.0 57.0 56.7 0.2 2,929.2 2,391.5
         Mar 3,212.0 2,739.0 278.1 220.4 219.4 1.0 57.7 57.1 0.6 2,933.9 2,399.1
         Apr 3,221.1 2,745.4 284.0 216.6 215.7 1.0 67.3 66.8 0.5 2,937.1 2,403.4
         May 3,207.9 2,743.6 272.4 215.8 214.7 1.1 56.6 55.9 0.7 2,935.5 2,407.1
         June 3,200.4 2,745.5 279.2 223.8 222.5 1.3 55.4 54.3 1.1 2,921.2 2,397.0
         July 3,228.7 2,748.7 273.0 215.4 214.0 1.3 57.6 56.5 1.1 2,955.7 2,430.2
         Aug 3,230.9 2,751.4 269.4 214.0 212.9 1.1 55.5 54.6 0.9 2,961.4 2,432.5
         Sep 3,230.8 2,756.4 271.8 218.5 217.6 0.9 53.3 52.5 0.8 2,959.0 2,428.4
         Oct 3,232.0 2,764.9 268.0 212.4 211.7 0.7 55.6 54.8 0.8 2,964.0 2,433.8
         Nov 3,249.0 2,775.5 264.2 212.9 212.3 0.6 51.3 50.9 0.4 2,984.8 2,451.1
         Dec 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016          Jan 3,238.7 2,771.4 259.0 208.1 207.7 0.4 50.9 50.5 0.3 2,979.7 2,452.5
         Feb 3,248.0 2,781.8 266.3 214.3 213.6 0.7 52.0 51.2 0.8 2,981.7 2,456.1
         Mar 3,247.2 2,786.3 271.4 218.7 217.9 0.8 52.6 52.2 0.4 2,975.9 2,454.1
         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7
         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.7 217.7 216.6 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.4 2,472.9
Changes *
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2015          Jan + 26.4 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.9
         Feb + 13.5 + 11.2 + 8.0 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 3.1
         Mar + 7.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 7.6
         Apr + 9.1 + 6.4 + 5.9 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.3
         May − 13.1 − 1.6 − 11.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 3.8
         June − 7.5 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 14.3 − 10.1
         July + 28.3 + 3.1 − 6.2 − 8.4 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 34.4 + 31.9
         Aug + 2.3 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 2.6
         Sep − 0.1 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4
         Oct + 1.2 + 8.6 − 3.8 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 5.7
         Nov + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.9 − 0.4 + 17.6 + 14.1
         Dec − 15.1 − 11.0 − 8.6 − 5.1 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 6.5 + 0.3
2016          Jan + 4.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1
         Feb + 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.6 + 6.4 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6
         Mar − 0.8 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 6.0 − 2.2
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7
         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.3 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,175.2 252.5 1,922.7 213.2 24.0 535.3 284.0 32.7 251.3 251.3 − 2.1 2015          Jan 
2,179.6 251.4 1,928.1 212.0 24.1 537.7 283.1 32.7 250.4 254.6 − 2.1          Feb 
2,180.6 251.7 1,928.9 218.6 23.8 534.8 281.9 32.3 249.5 252.9 − 2.1          Mar 
2,182.1 250.5 1,931.7 221.3 23.7 533.7 280.8 29.5 251.3 252.9 − 2.1          Apr 
2,192.6 253.2 1,939.4 214.5 23.6 528.4 280.4 29.5 250.9 248.0 − 2.1          May2,190.5 251.5 1,939.0 206.5 23.3 524.2 278.3 28.7 249.5 246.0 − 2.0          June
2,201.5 250.8 1,950.6 228.7 23.0 525.5 276.6 28.5 248.2 248.9 − 2.0          July
2,208.2 251.0 1,957.2 224.4 22.9 528.9 275.7 28.2 247.6 253.1 − 2.0          Aug 2,208.7 251.2 1,957.4 219.7 22.9 530.6 277.5 29.3 248.2 253.1 − 2.0          Sep 
2,220.0 253.2 1,966.8 213.8 22.7 530.2 278.5 29.3 249.2 251.8 − 2.0          Oct 
2,233.7 256.1 1,977.6 217.4 22.5 533.8 278.6 28.1 250.5 255.1 − 2.0          Nov 2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1          Dec 
2,235.3 257.1 1,978.3 217.2 18.2 527.2 277.8 27.7 250.1 249.4 − 2.1 2016          Jan 
2,240.2 257.4 1,982.8 215.9 18.0 525.6 276.8 27.7 249.1 248.8 − 2.1          Feb 2,240.5 257.3 1,983.2 213.5 17.9 521.8 275.6 27.5 248.1 246.2 − 2.0          Mar 
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May2,257.0 258.7 1,998.3 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
Changes *
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 4.8 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2015          Jan 
+ 4.4 − 1.1 + 5.4 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.4 − −          Feb 
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.6 − 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 10.6 + 2.8 + 7.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.9 − − 0.0          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.0 − − 0.1          June
+ 9.7 − 0.7 + 10.4 + 22.2 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 6.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 11.6 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 10.5 + 2.0 + 8.6 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − −          Nov 
− 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 6.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 3.0 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2016          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 1.0 + 3.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6 − − 0.1          Mar 
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May
+ 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2014 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          June 2,413.0 1,234.8 1,205.1 992.0 213.1 1,309.4 334.8 128.1 99.4 61.4 123.2 49.1 67.1 130.2
         Sep 2,426.3 1,244.5 1,218.5 1,001.2 217.3 1,309.0 336.5 127.5 100.6 61.7 125.3 50.0 65.6 129.5         Dec 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016          Mar 2,458.5 1,227.2 1,235.2 987.0 248.2 1,328.6 342.5 133.3 101.9 62.2 126.6 50.1 62.6 131.6
         June 2,473.6 1,235.1 1,248.0 996.2 251.8 1,332.0 345.8 131.5 101.7 62.7 125.4 50.9 59.0 133.7
 Short-term lending
2014 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          June 222.5 − 8.3 − 8.3 188.3 4.2 35.5 5.5 12.9 41.4 4.3 6.0 27.7
         Sep 217.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 183.3 4.3 34.6 5.3 12.8 43.5 4.4 5.2 26.6
         Dec 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2016          Mar 218.0 − 7.7 − 7.7 185.1 4.1 39.4 4.9 13.0 43.6 4.0 5.3 24.6
         June 216.7 − 7.9 − 7.9 184.6 4.3 37.0 4.7 13.1 42.1 4.2 5.1 27.2
 Medium-term lending
2014 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          June 251.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 177.9 13.6 24.3 5.2 10.2 16.1 4.3 11.5 39.3
         Sep 251.2 − 35.5 − 35.5 176.8 13.4 24.0 5.1 10.3 15.8 4.4 11.3 39.3
         Dec 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2016          Mar 257.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 181.8 13.2 23.9 5.1 10.4 16.2 4.5 11.5 41.2
         June 258.7 − 34.7 − 34.7 182.1 13.2 23.7 5.1 10.5 16.6 4.5 11.1 40.4
 Long-term lending
2014 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          June 1,939.0 1,234.8 1,161.1 992.0 169.1 943.3 317.0 68.3 88.8 38.3 65.7 40.5 49.7 63.2         Sep 1,957.4 1,244.5 1,174.5 1,001.2 173.3 948.9 318.8 68.8 90.2 38.5 66.0 41.2 49.0 63.6         Dec 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2016          Mar 1,983.2 1,227.2 1,192.7 987.0 205.7 961.7 325.3 70.1 91.9 38.8 66.8 41.7 45.8 65.8
         June 1,998.2 1,235.1 1,205.5 996.2 209.3 965.4 328.3 70.8 91.9 39.1 66.8 42.1 42.8 66.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2015          Q2 + 13.3 + 4.7 + 12.6 + 7.5 + 5.2 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 1.8         Q3 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6         Q4 + 13.7 + 9.0 + 11.4 + 9.0 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
2016          Q1 + 18.5 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 14.1 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0
         Q2 + 17.4 + 6.9 + 12.8 + 8.8 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 3.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 3.3
 Short-term lending
2015          Q2 + 3.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.9 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 2.1         Q3 − 4.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2         Q4 − 7.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.2
2016          Q1 + 10.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 11.4 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Q2 − 0.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.6
 Medium-term lending
2015          Q2 − 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 − 0.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Q4 + 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6
2016          Q1 + 1.4 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3
 Long-term lending
2015          Q2 + 10.2 + 4.7 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 4.1 + 1.3 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2         Q3 + 17.9 + 9.8 + 13.7 + 9.3 + 4.4 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 17.0 + 9.0 + 11.7 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.8
2016          Q1 + 6.5 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.6
         Q2 + 15.2 + 6.9 + 12.8 + 8.8 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 0.4
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8 2014
650.7 190.9 34.8 174.6 393.1 48.1 1,089.6 866.8 222.8 151.6 11.0 14.1 3.5 2015          June
649.0 191.5 32.0 175.9 394.7 47.7 1,103.0 878.4 224.6 153.6 11.0 14.2 3.6          Sep 654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5          Dec 
660.2 194.8 34.4 177.4 397.2 47.1 1,115.9 889.2 226.6 156.8 10.3 14.1 3.4 2016          Mar 
667.2 198.4 34.6 178.1 399.4 46.9 1,127.6 898.7 228.9 159.6 9.8 14.0 3.5          June
Short-term lending
52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0 2014
54.9 8.6 6.9 10.9 27.0 6.6 33.7 4.1 29.5 1.9 11.0 0.6 0.0 2015          June
51.0 8.6 6.2 10.4 26.1 6.3 33.8 4.2 29.6 1.7 11.0 0.6 0.0          Sep 48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0          Dec 
50.3 8.1 6.5 10.5 25.6 6.2 32.4 3.7 28.7 1.8 10.3 0.5 0.0 2016          Mar 
51.2 8.6 6.1 10.7 25.5 5.9 31.6 3.6 28.1 1.8 9.8 0.5 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0 2014
66.9 9.9 7.0 19.4 32.1 3.6 73.2 22.0 51.2 46.2 − 0.5 0.0 2015          June
66.5 9.9 7.0 19.5 32.3 3.5 73.9 22.1 51.9 46.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
69.1 10.1 7.2 19.4 32.7 3.5 74.9 21.5 53.3 48.1 − 0.6 0.0 2016          Mar 
70.1 10.6 7.3 19.0 33.0 3.6 76.0 21.4 54.6 49.3 − 0.6 0.0          June
Long-term lending
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7 2014
528.8 172.4 20.8 144.3 333.9 37.9 982.7 840.6 142.1 103.6 − 13.0 3.5 2015          June
531.5 173.0 18.8 146.0 336.3 37.9 995.3 852.1 143.2 105.0 − 13.2 3.6          Sep 
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5          Dec 
540.8 176.7 20.7 147.6 338.9 37.4 1,008.6 864.0 144.6 106.9 − 13.0 3.4 2016          Mar 
545.9 179.2 21.2 148.5 340.9 37.4 1,019.9 873.7 146.2 108.6 − 13.0 3.4          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 4.9 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.6 + 8.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 2015          Q2− 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 11.5 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3+ 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q4
+ 6.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 7.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 11.8 + 9.4 + 2.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 2015          Q2− 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.1 − 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 −          Q2
Medium-term lending
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2015          Q2− 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 − − − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.2 − 0.3 2015          Q2
+ 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 12.7 + 11.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3
+ 5.0 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 8.6 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 5.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 11.4 + 9.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2015          July 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 241.8 668.6 33.6 635.1 596.4 59.5 29.5 22.8 1.7
         Aug 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 241.4 667.7 33.5 634.2 595.2 58.8 29.5 22.7 2.7
         Sep 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 238.9 664.6 33.2 631.4 594.6 58.1 29.5 22.7 2.6
         Oct 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 231.6 658.6 34.7 623.9 594.6 57.5 29.5 22.7 1.9
         Nov 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 239.6 657.1 35.1 622.0 594.3 56.8 29.5 22.5 2.0
         Dec 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016          Jan 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 236.2 657.1 39.0 618.1 596.1 54.8 29.3 20.1 0.5
         Feb 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 232.0 655.9 39.5 616.4 596.4 54.6 29.3 19.9 0.8
         Mar 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 236.4 658.5 41.4 617.1 594.5 54.4 29.1 19.8 1.6
         Apr 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 235.9 657.7 42.2 615.5 592.7 54.0 29.0 19.7 1.7
         May 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 237.7 658.3 41.9 616.5 591.2 53.7 29.0 19.6 1.5
         June 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 235.9 658.2 42.8 615.4 590.0 53.1 28.7 19.5 1.5
Changes*
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2015          July + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 0.8 + 18.5 + 0.7 + 17.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Aug + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.1         Sep − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 − 7.2 − 6.0 + 1.5 − 7.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Nov + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Dec − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 3.4 − 1.7 + 2.2 − 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.5
2016          Jan + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 7.2 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Mar − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.8
         Apr + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
Domestic government End of year or month*
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2015          July 189.2 54.0 128.1 84.2 43.9 9.7 34.2 3.7 3.4 28.2 2.8 1.3
         Aug 197.1 60.8 129.2 85.3 43.8 9.7 34.1 3.7 3.5 28.2 2.8 1.9
         Sep 197.4 59.8 130.4 86.4 44.0 9.7 34.3 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 2.1
         Oct 191.6 58.7 125.6 81.3 44.3 9.8 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 1.6
         Nov 200.5 58.4 134.7 90.7 44.0 9.5 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.8 1.6
         Dec 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016          Jan 193.0 56.6 129.2 83.9 45.3 10.6 34.7 3.7 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.1
         Feb 194.5 61.4 125.9 80.4 45.6 10.6 34.9 3.6 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.5
         Mar 198.3 60.5 130.5 84.1 46.4 10.9 35.5 3.6 3.7 27.7 2.7 1.2
         Apr 196.0 60.8 127.7 79.9 47.8 11.0 36.9 3.7 3.7 27.6 2.6 1.3
         May 204.3 63.5 133.0 84.4 48.6 11.2 37.4 3.8 4.0 27.6 2.6 1.1
         June 204.0 62.1 134.0 84.6 49.4 11.6 37.8 3.9 4.0 27.3 2.6 0.2
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2015          July − 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2         Aug + 7.9 + 6.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 0.6
         Sep + 0.2 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Oct − 6.2 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5
         Nov + 8.8 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 9.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         Dec − 3.0 − 0.9 − 2.1 − 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.0
2016          Jan − 4.5 − 1.0 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.0 + 4.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4         Mar + 3.8 − 0.9 + 4.6 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Apr − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 4.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         June − 0.3 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.22015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2015          July 2,990.1 1,558.9 782.3 157.6 624.7 23.8 600.9 592.7 56.1 1.4 20.0 0.4
         Aug 2,996.7 1,569.9 780.0 156.1 623.9 23.8 600.1 591.5 55.3 1.4 19.9 0.8         Sep 2,989.4 1,570.9 773.0 152.4 620.6 23.5 597.1 590.9 54.6 1.4 19.8 0.5
         Oct 3,006.2 1,596.7 764.6 150.3 614.3 24.9 589.4 590.9 53.9 1.3 19.8 0.3
         Nov 3,024.3 1,618.5 762.0 149.0 613.0 25.6 587.5 590.5 53.3 1.4 19.7 0.4         Dec 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2016          Jan 3,040.8 1,633.0 764.1 152.3 611.8 28.4 583.5 592.4 51.3 1.4 17.4 0.4
         Feb 3,041.7 1,636.1 761.9 151.6 610.3 28.8 581.5 592.7 51.0 1.4 17.2 0.3         Mar 3,032.9 1,626.9 764.4 152.2 612.2 30.5 581.6 590.9 50.7 1.4 17.2 0.3
         Apr 3,053.8 1,648.8 765.8 156.0 609.8 31.2 578.6 589.0 50.3 1.4 17.1 0.3
         May 3,058.5 1,658.3 763.1 153.3 609.7 30.7 579.0 587.4 49.7 1.4 17.0 0.4         June 3,056.0 1,660.5 760.1 151.3 608.8 31.2 577.6 586.2 49.1 1.4 16.9 1.2
Changes*
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.2
2015          July + 32.2 + 16.6 + 18.8 − 0.1 + 18.9 + 0.7 + 18.2 − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4
         Aug + 6.6 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 7.1 + 0.9 − 6.7 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3
         Oct + 17.2 + 25.9 − 8.1 − 1.8 − 6.3 + 1.4 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 18.2 + 21.8 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec + 3.0 − 2.3 + 3.9 + 6.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 − 4.0 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.4
2016          Jan + 13.6 + 16.8 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4
         Feb + 1.8 + 3.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 8.8 − 9.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Apr + 20.9 + 21.8 + 1.4 + 3.8 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         May + 4.8 + 9.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         June − 2.2 + 2.3 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2015          July 1,025.2 483.1 521.0 97.1 423.9 12.2 411.7 7.1 14.0 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Aug 1,029.4 488.2 520.1 97.0 423.1 12.1 411.0 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.8
         Sep 1,024.3 489.3 514.0 94.5 419.5 11.8 407.7 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.5
         Oct 1,031.8 504.5 506.3 93.2 413.1 12.9 400.2 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.3
         Nov 1,033.9 508.8 504.3 92.7 411.6 13.4 398.2 7.0 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Dec 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016          Jan 1,037.6 512.8 504.2 97.4 406.9 15.3 391.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         Feb 1,033.9 510.7 502.8 97.4 405.3 15.7 389.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Mar 1,029.9 504.8 504.6 98.0 406.7 17.2 389.5 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Apr 1,032.3 506.7 505.1 101.3 403.8 17.5 386.4 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         May 1,035.5 513.4 501.5 98.2 403.3 17.0 386.3 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         June 1,027.4 508.9 498.0 95.8 402.2 17.6 384.7 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 1.2
Changes*
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.2
2015          July + 27.5 + 6.2 + 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 + 0.5 + 19.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 5.0 + 1.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3
         Oct + 8.0 + 15.3 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 6.4 + 1.1 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 2.1 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1         Dec − 4.1 − 5.9 + 2.2 + 7.2 − 4.9 + 1.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.4
2016          Jan + 7.9 + 10.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Feb − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 4.1 − 5.9 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 3.3 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0         June − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016          Jan 2,003.3 1,120.2 1,087.7 192.1 751.6 144.1 32.5 259.9 247.0 25.2 180.4 41.4
         Feb 2,007.8 1,125.4 1,091.4 192.6 754.6 144.1 34.0 259.1 246.6 24.8 180.2 41.6
         Mar 2,003.0 1,122.1 1,088.6 188.6 756.1 143.9 33.5 259.7 247.0 24.8 180.6 41.7
         Apr 2,021.5 1,142.1 1,108.3 193.2 769.7 145.5 33.8 260.7 247.7 25.1 180.7 41.9
         May 2,023.0 1,144.9 1,110.3 193.7 771.7 144.9 34.7 261.5 248.5 25.3 181.2 42.0
         June 2,028.5 1,151.7 1,116.7 191.3 779.9 145.5 34.9 262.1 248.8 25.5 181.3 42.0
Changes*
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2016          Jan + 5.7 + 6.7 + 6.3 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
         Feb + 4.7 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.2
         Mar − 4.8 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 4.0 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
         Apr + 18.5 + 20.0 + 19.7 + 4.6 + 13.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
         May + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2
         June + 5.6 + 6.7 + 6.5 − 2.4 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016          Jan 193.0 8.4 2.7 3.0 2.6 0.1 14.1 45.9 13.5 15.0 16.5 0.9 13.5
         Feb 194.5 8.5 2.8 2.9 2.7 0.1 14.1 46.9 15.0 14.7 16.3 0.9 13.5
         Mar 198.3 8.3 3.3 2.3 2.6 0.1 14.0 51.4 15.3 19.2 16.0 0.9 13.3
         Apr 196.0 7.9 3.2 2.0 2.6 0.1 14.0 49.3 14.5 16.9 17.0 0.9 13.2
         May 204.3 8.1 3.3 2.1 2.7 0.1 14.0 49.4 13.7 17.7 17.1 0.9 13.2
         June 204.0 8.8 3.9 2.2 2.6 0.1 13.8 51.7 14.7 19.0 17.1 0.9 13.1
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2016          Jan − 4.5 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Feb + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Mar + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 4.4 + 0.3 + 4.5 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 201413.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 2015
12.8 54.9 205.0 13.1 191.9 585.2 576.2 9.0 37.9 0.0 3.7 − 2016          Jan 
12.6 54.1 205.0 13.2 191.8 585.5 576.5 9.0 37.7 0.1 3.5 −          Feb 12.7 54.2 205.5 13.4 192.1 583.6 574.6 9.0 37.6 0.1 3.4 −          Mar 
13.0 54.7 206.0 13.8 192.2 581.8 572.7 9.0 37.1 0.1 3.4 −          Apr 
13.0 55.1 206.4 13.7 192.7 580.1 571.1 9.0 36.4 0.1 3.3 −          May
13.3 55.6 206.5 13.6 192.9 578.9 569.9 9.0 35.9 0.1 3.2 −          June
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015
− 0.3 − 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2016          Jan 
− 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Mar 
+ 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
+ 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 201452.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 2015
46.9 24.3 9.0 8.4 5.2 0.4 91.9 16.1 57.0 17.8 1.1 − 2016          Jan 
50.0 27.3 9.0 8.5 5.2 0.4 89.1 16.3 53.7 18.1 1.0 −          Feb 48.8 25.8 9.2 8.6 5.3 0.4 89.8 16.1 53.5 19.2 1.1 −          Mar 
49.0 26.1 9.0 8.7 5.3 0.4 89.8 17.1 52.0 19.6 1.1 −          Apr 
53.6 30.1 9.3 8.8 5.5 0.4 93.2 16.5 55.3 20.0 1.3 −          May
50.7 27.7 8.6 9.0 5.5 0.4 92.7 15.8 54.8 20.8 1.4 −          June
Changes*
+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014
+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015
− 5.5 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 0.6 + 4.0 − 3.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 2016          Jan 
+ 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 1.8 + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 0.0 −          Feb − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 −          Apr 
+ 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − + 3.3 − 0.6 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.2 −          May− 2.9 − 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016          Feb 605.2 596.4 537.1 377.5 59.3 45.5 8.8 7.4 0.2 63.3 54.6 39.7 8.7
         Mar 603.2 594.5 536.3 375.6 58.2 44.4 8.7 7.3 0.1 63.0 54.4 39.3 8.5
         Apr 601.4 592.7 535.6 373.4 57.1 43.3 8.6 7.3 0.1 62.4 54.0 38.9 8.4
         May 599.8 591.2 535.0 369.7 56.2 42.3 8.6 7.3 0.1 62.2 53.7 38.4 8.5
         June 598.6 590.0 534.6 369.2 55.5 41.6 8.5 7.2 0.1 61.7 53.1 38.0 8.5
Changes*
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2016          Feb + 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Mar − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2
         Apr − 1.8 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1
         May − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1
         June − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016          Feb 1,088.5 187.0 32.0 392.8 96.6 119.0 2.5 32.6 5.9 936.9 0.2 0.2 32.1 0.5
         Mar 1,077.6 178.4 30.8 378.0 92.2 113.7 2.4 31.1 5.7 932.9 0.3 0.2 32.8 0.5
         Apr 1,085.7 177.9 32.2 386.4 95.9 118.6 2.4 31.3 5.9 935.7 0.3 0.2 33.3 0.5
         May 1,098.6 177.9 32.6 403.2 98.4 120.3 2.7 32.4 6.0 946.0 0.2 0.2 34.0 0.5
         June 1,091.5 175.7 32.3 396.8 97.9 119.7 2.5 32.1 5.9 939.7 0.2 0.2 34.1 0.5
Changes*
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2016          Feb + 12.1 − 2.8 + 3.7 + 12.7 + 9.6 + 13.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Mar − 10.9 − 8.7 − 1.2 − 14.8 − 4.4 − 5.4 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −
         Apr + 7.8 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 8.4 + 3.6 + 4.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 −
         May + 13.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 16.8 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 −         June − 7.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016          Apr 21 213.1 41.3 0.0 17.8 15.4 94.3 17.6 22.2 2.1 19.4 160.1 5.3 2.4 10.1 7.5
         May 21 212.5 40.8 0.0 17.5 15.1 94.7 17.6 22.3 2.1 18.2 160.8 5.2 2.4 10.1 7.8         June 21 213.6 40.9 0.0 17.2 14.8 95.6 17.7 22.7 2.1 18.6 160.8 5.5 2.5 10.2 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Apr 12 147.3 25.2 − 9.5 11.4 73.4 15.0 9.3 1.4 16.4 105.3 5.0 2.4 6.6 4.9         May 12 146.6 24.8 − 9.1 11.2 73.7 15.1 9.3 1.4 15.5 105.6 4.9 2.4 6.6 4.8         June 12 147.5 24.9 − 9.0 11.0 74.4 15.2 9.5 1.4 15.7 105.7 5.1 2.5 6.6 4.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Apr 9 65.8 16.1 0.0 8.3 4.0 20.9 2.6 13.0 0.7 3.0 54.9 0.3 − 3.5 2.7         May 9 65.9 16.0 0.0 8.3 3.9 21.0 2.6 13.0 0.7 2.8 55.2 0.3 − 3.5 3.1         June 9 66.1 16.0 0.0 8.2 3.8 21.2 2.6 13.2 0.7 2.8 55.1 0.4 − 3.7 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016          Apr 2.4 0.0 0.6 4.6 3.1 4.0 1.7 0.6 0.7 0.6 1.5 16.1 8.4 0.7 0.0
         May 2.5 0.0 0.5 3.5 2.1 3.1 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.4 16.1 8.5 0.7 0.0
         June 2.3 0.0 0.8 4.2 2.3 3.7 1.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 16.1 8.3 0.7 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Apr 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.5 2.4 3.2 1.4 0.5 0.6 0.5 1.2 11.4 5.1 0.5 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.4 2.4 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.1 11.3 5.1 0.5 0.0         June 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.7 2.8 1.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.4 11.4 5.1 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Apr 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.3 0.2 0.0         May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.3 4.8 3.4 0.2 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2015          Aug 52 202 1,966.9 602.1 584.4 189.0 395.4 17.7 627.2 511.0 14.3 496.7 116.2 737.6 544.1
         Sep 51 199 1,977.3 586.4 568.5 180.7 387.8 17.9 624.9 507.9 13.9 494.0 117.0 766.0 552.1
         Oct 51 199 1,946.7 558.2 540.2 152.9 387.3 18.0 633.7 513.2 13.9 499.3 120.5 754.8 525.1
         Nov 51 199 1,980.5 533.8 515.8 150.0 365.8 18.0 658.8 528.5 14.6 513.9 130.4 787.9 557.2
         Dec 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016          Jan 50 196 1,960.5 540.7 523.3 169.1 354.2 17.4 652.2 529.7 14.2 515.5 122.6 767.5 568.7
         Feb 49 192 2,022.6 555.3 538.2 173.5 364.7 17.2 658.4 538.2 14.3 523.9 120.2 808.8 607.9
         Mar 49 192 1,943.8 558.9 543.2 172.4 370.8 15.7 642.2 529.2 14.6 514.6 113.1 742.6 557.5
         Apr 49 192 1,933.2 545.0 529.1 177.2 351.8 15.9 659.8 545.1 14.7 530.4 114.7 728.4 539.0
         May 48 187 1,930.1 563.9 548.9 176.4 372.5 15.0 642.5 529.8 13.6 516.3 112.7 723.7 519.2
Changes *
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2015          Sep − 1 − 3 + 10.3 − 15.7 − 15.9 − 8.4 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 0.9 + 28.3 + 8.1
         Oct − − − 32.3 − 33.6 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 2.4 − 12.9 − 31.3
         Nov − − + 30.2 − 35.3 − 34.8 − 2.9 − 31.9 − 0.5 + 10.7 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 7.8 + 29.4 + 23.8
         Dec − − 1 − 135.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 11.2 − 10.6 − 0.4 − 11.7 − 6.8 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 4.9 − 106.1 − 51.3
2016          Jan − 1 − 2 + 118.2 + 16.1 + 15.9 + 7.9 + 8.1 + 0.2 + 20.9 + 21.3 + 0.2 + 21.1 − 0.4 + 85.8 + 71.1
         Feb − 1 − 4 + 61.6 + 13.6 + 13.8 + 4.4 + 9.5 − 0.3 + 5.1 + 7.4 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 2.3 + 40.7 + 38.8
         Mar − − − 75.2 + 14.9 + 16.0 − 1.0 + 17.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 62.5 − 39.6
         Apr − − − 10.9 − 14.2 − 14.4 + 4.8 − 19.2 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.4 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 1.4 − 14.5 − 18.8
         May − 1 − 5 − 4.7 + 13.3 + 14.4 − 0.9 + 15.3 − 1.1 − 25.5 − 22.3 − 1.2 − 21.1 − 3.2 − 6.4 − 24.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2015          Aug 25 60 382.5 136.1 121.6 67.2 54.4 14.5 185.4 152.3 22.4 129.9 33.1 61.0 −
         Sep 25 59 386.2 133.4 119.3 58.0 61.2 14.1 186.1 152.0 22.8 129.2 34.2 66.7 −
         Oct 25 59 380.8 130.3 114.9 55.6 59.2 15.4 185.8 152.7 22.8 129.9 33.0 64.8 −
         Nov 25 59 379.5 121.1 107.4 44.5 62.8 13.7 191.7 158.3 22.5 135.8 33.3 66.8 −
         Dec 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016          Jan 24 58 375.6 129.1 116.5 53.7 62.7 12.7 185.1 152.9 21.7 131.1 32.3 61.3 −
         Feb 24 58 359.4 120.7 108.5 50.7 57.9 12.2 174.1 141.8 22.3 119.6 32.3 64.6 −
         Mar 24 58 352.2 113.6 102.1 47.9 54.2 11.5 173.4 140.6 22.6 118.1 32.8 65.2 −
         Apr 24 58 349.7 116.3 104.9 48.9 56.0 11.4 169.8 137.4 23.0 114.4 32.4 63.7 −
         May 24 57 350.4 115.3 103.9 49.0 54.9 11.4 170.6 138.2 22.9 115.3 32.4 64.5 −
Changes *
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2015          Sep − − 1 + 3.9 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 9.1 + 6.9 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.0 + 5.7 −
         Oct − − − 7.2 − 4.0 − 5.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 −
         Nov − − − 4.8 − 10.9 − 8.8 − 11.1 + 2.3 − 2.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 −
         Dec − 1 − 1 − 0.7 + 6.8 + 7.2 + 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 −
2016          Jan − − + 0.6 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.5 − 3.8 −
         Feb − − − 16.4 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 3.1 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 11.2 − 11.2 + 0.5 − 11.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 −
         Mar − − − 3.7 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 −
         Apr − − − 2.5 + 2.7 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.3 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.4 − 1.5 −
         May − − 1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2016
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 2015
1,144.2 797.5 416.5 381.0 346.7 19.9 15.4 4.6 326.8 138.3 47.3 637.1 537.1 2015          Aug 
1,122.3 774.4 419.2 355.3 347.8 19.4 14.9 4.5 328.4 141.6 47.3 666.1 544.8          Sep 
1,124.6 763.8 406.5 357.3 360.8 19.7 15.0 4.7 341.1 141.0 47.6 633.5 520.6          Oct 
1,124.3 742.0 377.3 364.7 382.3 22.0 17.0 5.0 360.3 138.6 48.4 669.2 554.0          Nov 1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4          Dec 
1,101.8 733.9 357.8 376.1 367.9 21.3 16.6 4.8 346.5 129.4 50.0 679.3 566.3 2016          Jan 
1,105.0 734.8 368.7 366.1 370.3 22.1 17.4 4.7 348.2 127.7 49.7 740.1 605.7          Feb 1,083.8 714.8 344.5 370.3 369.0 23.6 19.5 4.1 345.4 121.3 49.4 689.3 559.2          Mar 
1,108.9 719.0 348.0 371.0 389.9 21.5 17.4 4.1 368.5 117.7 49.4 657.2 541.5          Apr 
1,130.1 746.9 358.9 388.0 383.2 20.7 17.2 3.6 362.5 111.0 49.7 639.4 523.0          May
Changes *
+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015
− 22.1 − 23.2 + 2.7 − 25.9 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 29.0 + 7.7 2015          Sep 
− 2.7 − 15.5 − 12.7 − 2.8 + 12.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 12.5 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 32.6 − 28.7          Oct 
− 11.5 − 33.4 − 29.2 − 4.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 19.6 − 6.0 + 0.9 + 35.7 + 24.6          Nov − 55.2 − 18.9 − 18.0 − 0.9 − 36.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 35.4 − 7.2 + 1.5 − 66.8 − 49.3          Dec 
+ 42.4 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 21.6 + 22.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 22.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 76.2 + 70.3 2016          Jan 
+ 2.0 − 0.4 + 10.9 − 11.3 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 60.9 + 39.1          Feb − 9.5 − 8.6 − 24.2 + 15.5 − 0.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 50.9 − 34.9          Mar 
+ 24.6 + 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 20.9 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 18.0          Apr 
+ 15.1 + 22.0 + 10.9 + 11.1 − 6.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 8.3 + 0.3 − 17.9 − 23.8          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015
298.2 160.9 82.3 78.6 137.3 13.9 11.4 2.5 123.3 14.3 26.2 43.8 − 2015          Aug 
301.6 168.9 94.6 74.3 132.7 14.4 11.9 2.5 118.2 14.4 26.3 44.0 −          Sep 
298.3 166.2 91.7 74.5 132.1 14.8 12.3 2.5 117.3 13.4 26.5 42.6 −          Oct 
293.4 159.3 90.2 69.0 134.1 11.8 9.2 2.6 122.3 14.8 26.7 44.7 −          Nov 
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 −          Dec 
294.1 170.0 101.9 68.1 124.1 11.9 9.4 2.6 112.2 14.5 26.4 40.6 − 2016          Jan 
282.1 157.1 99.1 58.0 125.0 13.2 10.5 2.8 111.8 12.9 24.3 40.1 −          Feb 
275.0 160.5 100.5 59.9 114.5 13.4 10.5 2.9 101.1 13.3 24.2 39.6 −          Mar 
274.5 161.1 102.8 58.3 113.4 13.8 10.9 2.9 99.6 13.5 24.2 37.5 −          Apr 
275.9 164.2 103.6 60.6 111.8 12.7 9.9 2.8 99.1 13.3 24.3 36.8 −          May
Changes *
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015
+ 3.4 + 8.0 + 12.3 − 4.3 − 4.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 2015          Sep 
− 4.7 − 3.5 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 −          Oct 
− 7.8 − 8.6 − 1.5 − 7.1 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 −          Nov 
+ 1.3 + 8.7 + 9.3 − 0.6 − 7.4 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.2 −          Dec 
+ 2.3 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.3 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 2016          Jan 
− 12.1 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.7 −          Feb 
− 4.2 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 9.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 −          Mar 
− 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 −          Apr 
− 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2016
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 8 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016          Apr 11,548.6 115.5 115.0 623.8 508.7 0.0
         May . . . . . .
         June p 11,630.4 116.3 115.8 657.5 541.6 ...
         July p ... ... 116.7 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016          Apr 3,183,073 27.6 31,831 31,659 186,505 154,846 0
         May . . . . . . .
         June 3,205,801 27.6 32,058 31,887 196,614 164,727 0
         July p 3,226,967 ... 32,270 32,101 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in 1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,170
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016          Apr 5,903 5,167 2,222 10,713 5,755 235 1,668
         May . . . . . . .
         June 5,967 5,196 2,366 10,742 5,805 231 1,583
         July 5,978 5,220 2,470 10,751 5,834 232 1,617
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in 1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 3 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016          Apr 2,117,242 2,655 361,713 594,518 107,165
         May . . . . .
         June 2,128,104 3,241 378,003 590,967 105,797
         July 2,149,432 2,352 378,231 589,495 107,539
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, lump-sum allowance. 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve allowance, including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 
2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2016
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2016 July                  6 44,089 44,089 0.00−−−7
         July                13 42,467 42,467 0.00−−−7
         July                20 43,569 43,569 0.00−−−7
         July                27 49,593 49,593 0.00−−−7
         Aug                  3 42,989 42,989 0.00−−−7
         Aug                10 41,621 41,621 0.00−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2016 May                26 6,270 6,270 2 ... − − − 98
         June                29 6,724 6,724 0.00−−− 8 19
         June                29 399,289 399,289 0.00−−− 1,456
         June                30 7,726 7,726 2 ... − − − 91
         July                28 7,010 7,010 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2016          Jan − 0.24 − 0.26 − 0.22 − 0.15 − 0.06 − 0.01 0.04
         Feb − 0.24 − 0.27 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.12 − 0.06 − 0.01
         Mar − 0.29 − 0.32 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.13 − 0.07 − 0.01
         Apr − 0.34 − 0.36 − 0.34 − 0.25 − 0.14 − 0.07 − 0.01
         May − 0.34 − 0.36 − 0.35 − 0.26 − 0.14 − 0.08 − 0.01
         June − 0.33 − 0.37 − 0.36 − 0.27 − 0.16 − 0.10 − 0.03
         July − 0.33 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.29 − 0.19 − 0.12 − 0.06
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          June 0.54 84,531 1.75 224,254 0.29 74,338 2.22 19,325
         July 0.52 82,865 1.73 221,848 0.27 76,685 2.19 17,642
         Aug 0.51 81,011 1.71 221,355 0.26 77,081 2.17 17,717
         Sep 0.50 79,461 1.70 221,031 0.26 75,281 2.17 17,611
         Oct 0.49 78,623 1.69 220,371 0.25 74,750 2.15 17,702
         Nov 0.48 77,788 1.67 219,914 0.24 76,639 2.09 17,194
         Dec 0.46 77,515 1.66 221,625 0.22 79,591 2.04 17,364
2016          Jan 0.45 76,746 1.64 221,432 0.22 79,489 2.00 17,335
         Feb 0.44 75,932 1.62 221,154 0.21 80,142 2.00 17,271
         Mar 0.44 76,809 1.61 221,229 0.20 82,706 1.95 17,573
         Apr 0.44 77,166 1.59 220,954 0.19 83,709 1.92 17,490
         May 0.43 77,295 1.58 220,985 0.19 80,922 1.86 18,025
         June 0.42 77,303 1.56 220,707 0.16 78,910 1.80 18,063
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          June 2.68 5,138 2.52 27,830 3.50 1,022,718 7.60 56,765 4.58 77,795 4.62 305,203
         July 2.64 5,301 2.49 27,836 3.46 1,028,020 7.46 54,891 4.54 78,042 4.59 306,587
         Aug 2.63 5,233 2.46 27,881 3.44 1,032,080 7.46 54,768 4.51 78,424 4.56 307,560
         Sep 2.64 5,135 2.44 27,890 3.41 1,036,799 7.55 55,936 4.48 78,671 4.54 306,905
         Oct 2.62 5,160 2.41 27,887 3.38 1,041,492 7.43 54,093 4.44 79,409 4.51 307,750
         Nov 2.61 5,139 2.38 27,838 3.36 1,044,861 7.39 53,821 4.42 79,222 4.49 308,002
         Dec 2.62 5,029 2.36 27,692 3.33 1,047,658 7.38 54,838 4.39 79,345 4.46 306,514
2016          Jan 2.61 5,011 2.34 27,438 3.30 1,047,865 7.44 52,884 4.35 79,779 4.43 307,381
         Feb 2.60 5,022 2.36 27,364 3.27 1,049,663 7.45 53,249 4.31 80,351 4.41 307,866
         Mar 2.63 5,014 2.34 27,371 3.24 1,052,498 7.49 54,287 4.29 80,695 4.38 307,355
         Apr 2.56 4,928 2.31 27,215 3.21 1,057,019 7.33 52,229 4.27 81,376 4.35 308,474
         May 2.57 4,959 2.29 27,187 3.19 1,059,863 7.36 52,678 4.24 81,793 4.33 309,250
         June 2.57 4,863 2.28 27,272 3.16 1,064,492 7.39 53,521 4.22 82,253 4.31 309,023
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          June 2.89 134,307 2.43 127,057 2.88 580,448
         July 2.80 130,434 2.43 125,698 2.85 585,342
         Aug 2.82 130,317 2.41 126,738 2.84 587,082
         Sep 2.86 132,444 2.39 126,160 2.82 585,043
         Oct 2.80 130,602 2.36 127,257 2.80 587,398
         Nov 2.82 128,922 2.33 129,015 2.78 594,272
         Dec 2.77 125,750 2.29 129,455 2.74 593,021
2016          Jan 2.68 130,505 2.26 129,655 2.72 595,850
         Feb 2.67 134,107 2.23 130,842 2.70 598,794
         Mar 2.65 137,421 2.20 130,530 2.67 597,332
         Apr 2.66 136,364 2.18 131,883 2.64 601,069
         May 2.60 136,538 2.15 132,698 2.62 605,918
         June 2.62 135,843 2.13 133,462 2.60 604,519
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          June
0.15 1,062,893 0.29 6,524 0.70 703 0.88 880 0.46 527,934 0.56 69,686
         July 0.14 1,073,284 0.33 6,953 0.74 656 0.93 866 0.44 527,609 0.54 68,185
         Aug 0.14 1,079,170 0.32 5,546 0.65 636 0.94 879 0.43 527,949 0.52 66,653
         Sep 0.14 1,079,060 0.34 6,158 0.87 668 1.12 971 0.42 528,705 0.51 65,229
         Oct 0.15 1,089,962 0.34 5,760 0.71 793 0.90 1,088 0.41 529,980 0.49 63,966
         Nov 0.14 1,107,307 0.34 5,900 0.69 840 0.89 1,196 0.40 530,810 0.47 62,774
         Dec 0.13 1,111,065 0.28 6,140 0.50 1,161 0.97 1,379 0.39 533,865 0.45 61,900
2016          Jan 0.12 1,117,856 0.35 7,184 0.62 1,024 1.00 1,360 0.37 534,775 0.43 60,627
         Feb 0.12 1,123,332 0.34 6,226 0.71 914 1.03 1,493 0.36 536,409 0.40 59,334
         Mar 0.11 1,120,146 0.34 6,804 0.82 1,137 0.93 1,721 0.34 535,575 0.39 58,239
         Apr 0.10 1,140,220 0.35 5,852 0.69 994 0.94 1,130 0.32 534,792 0.38 57,125
         May 0.10 1,142,947 0.34 5,430 0.69 747 0.89 901 0.31 534,122 0.37 56,154
         June 0.08 1,149,604 0.27 6,027 0.73 759 0.83 935 0.30 533,649 0.36 55,413
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          June
0.06 342,151 0.20 10,205 0.43 484 0.41 512
         July 0.06 351,672 0.17 10,002 0.31 565 0.61 1,243
         Aug 0.06 354,182 0.11 8,622 0.30 312 0.73 305
         Sep 0.05 357,208 0.15 8,732 0.22 723 0.54 351
         Oct 0.05 373,013 0.10 10,805 0.28 798 0.43 528
         Nov 0.05 377,900 0.11 10,676 0.39 574 0.56 326
         Dec 0.04 375,456 0.07 14,914 0.36 1,338 0.57 872
2016          Jan 0.03 370,533 0.10 9,780 0.32 1,283 0.42 489
         Feb 0.03 369,125 0.08 10,334 0.48 890 0.50 244
         Mar 0.05 369,344 − 0.03 14,907 0.20 931 1.34 1,057
         Apr 0.05 377,546 − 0.01 10,820 0.13 851 0.40 439
         May 0.01 380,942 − 0.02 9,700 0.18 694 0.52 1,123
         June 0.01 376,703 − 0.02 10,619 0.16 689 0.46 858
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          June
1.95 8,380 2.02 2,716 1.69 4,215 2.74 998 2.05 3,167 2.01 2,452 2.84 771 2.04 2,119
         July 2.08 8,720 1.92 3,489 1.75 4,272 2.75 1,149 2.27 3,299 1.93 2,649 2.91 868 2.21 2,152
         Aug 2.12 6,485 2.01 2,170 1.88 3,121 2.72 909 2.21 2,455 2.06 1,801 2.83 694 2.16 1,665         Sep 2.19 6,448 1.99 2,333 1.91 3,289 2.96 838 2.30 2,321 1.96 1,949 3.21 618 2.23 1,576
         Oct 2.07 7,280 1.93 2,886 1.76 3,823 2.75 966 2.29 2,491 1.97 2,264 2.88 745 2.21 1,636
         Nov 2.03 6,561 1.97 2,146 1.75 3,295 2.74 872 2.17 2,394 2.07 1,872 2.81 694 2.13 1,556         Dec 2.05 8,344 2.03 2,796 1.81 4,005 2.75 1,136 2.11 3,203 2.06 2,469 2.80 886 2.06 2,163
2016          Jan 1.96 7,252 2.01 2,816 1.68 3,753 2.63 1,054 2.11 2,445 2.04 2,153 2.70 823 2.03 1,617
         Feb 2.05 6,669 2.10 2,300 1.87 3,388 2.64 904 2.08 2,377 2.15 2,032 2.76 690 2.05 1,528         Mar 2.02 7,255 1.87 2,578 1.77 3,549 2.70 996 2.09 2,710 1.96 2,167 2.81 756 2.03 1,796
         Apr 2.03 6,381 1.89 2,492 1.81 3,375 2.68 981 2.09 2,025 2.02 2,079 2.87 757 2.01 1,420
         May 2.00 5,898 1.92 1,926 1.77 2,921 2.71 876 2.03 2,101 2.01 1,859 2.97 647 1.97 1,372         June 2.02 6,818 1.93 2,359 1.84 3,200 2.58 1,132 1.98 2,486 2.09 1,953 2.67 896 1.89 1,769
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          June 6.37 6.29 8,006 7.63 1,547 4.83 327 4.98 3,211 7.33 4,468
         July 6.48 6.40 8,959 7.81 1,769 5.09 361 5.01 3,554 7.47 5,044
         Aug 6.34 6.26 7,313 7.71 1,263 5.33 309 4.98 3,020 7.31 3,984
         Sep 6.28 6.21 7,331 7.63 1,200 5.20 338 4.94 3,052 7.28 3,941
         Oct 6.28 6.20 7,233 7.69 1,135 5.17 309 4.88 3,104 7.36 3,820
         Nov 6.21 6.15 6,657 7.58 1,055 5.24 276 4.90 2,993 7.32 3,388
         Dec 6.03 5.97 6,067 7.30 934 5.67 316 4.78 2,867 7.19 2,884
2016          Jan 6.44 6.37 7,338 7.52 1,426 5.59 309 4.99 2,938 7.41 4,091
         Feb 6.25 6.20 7,862 7.44 1,444 5.55 322 4.94 3,260 7.22 4,280
         Mar 6.06 6.04 8,415 7.33 1,833 5.49 341 4.79 3,577 7.07 4,497
         Apr 6.21 6.19 8,734 7.33 1,814 5.89 310 4.88 3,548 7.16 4,876
         May 6.22 6.20 8,244 7.47 1,715 5.89 306 4.90 3,329 7.16 4,609
         June 6.20 6.18 8,942 7.47 1,864 5.73 314 4.87 3,618 7.15 5,010
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          June . 3.11 301 . . 2.86 35 3.59 156 2.50 110
         July . 3.44 281 . . 2.81 28 3.93 156 2.85 97
         Aug . 3.49 240 . . 3.05 18 3.86 144 2.92 78
         Sep . 3.28 238 . . 2.52 38 3.90 116 2.78 84
         Oct . 3.33 244 . . 2.33 41 3.87 131 2.89 72
         Nov . 3.58 218 . . 2.84 23 3.90 136 3.14 59
         Dec . 3.39 219 . . 2.72 22 3.89 128 2.66 69
2016          Jan . 3.32 191 . . 2.50 21 3.72 111 2.85 59
         Feb . 3.51 220 . . 2.85 33 3.84 135 3.08 52
         Mar . 3.29 260 . . 2.58 25 3.71 158 2.65 77
         Apr . 3.49 206 . . 2.75 13 3.80 145 2.77 48
         May . 3.56 202 . . 2.69 18 3.95 135 2.79 49
         June . 3.62 213 . . 2.95 17 3.96 141 2.94 55
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          June 1.89 1.85 24,015 1.98 5,330 2.11 2,798 1.81 2,197 1.72 9,297 1.92 9,723
         July 2.04 1.99 25,310 2.06 6,017 2.17 2,915 1.91 2,502 1.86 10,095 2.10 9,798
         Aug 2.09 2.06 19,745 2.15 4,445 2.27 2,290 1.95 1,939 1.92 7,566 2.15 7,950
         Sep 2.07 2.03 19,161 2.08 4,209 2.17 2,344 1.98 1,851 1.92 7,276 2.12 7,690
         Oct 2.07 2.05 19,874 2.04 5,455 2.11 2,577 1.99 2,125 1.94 7,230 2.14 7,942
         Nov 2.04 2.02 18,426 2.11 4,212 2.27 2,190 1.94 1,874 1.89 7,319 2.09 7,043
         Dec 1.98 1.95 19,521 2.02 4,769 2.16 2,713 1.88 2,045 1.83 7,385 2.01 7,378
2016          Jan 2.00 1.97 18,507 2.05 5,833 2.22 2,413 1.87 2,054 1.84 6,800 2.05 7,240
         Feb 1.97 1.96 18,778 2.16 4,870 2.45 2,584 1.86 1,994 1.79 6,837 1.97 7,363
         Mar 1.85 1.82 22,396 1.94 4,799 2.10 2,618 1.82 2,256 1.70 8,246 1.86 9,276
         Apr 1.93 1.88 17,859 1.94 4,981 2.16 2,206 1.82 1,820 1.67 6,054 1.97 7,779
         May 1.86 1.79 17,968 2.03 3,654 2.19 2,133 1.83 1,698 1.62 6,635 1.83 7,502
         June 1.82 1.76 21,409 1.94 4,079 2.04 2,567 1.85 1,931 1.60 7,424 1.79 9,487
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          June . 1.76 11,120 . . 2.02 1,096 1.59 1,090 1.65 4,502 1.84 4,432
         July . 1.91 11,976 . . 2.15 1,134 1.69 1,314 1.80 4,906 2.03 4,622
         Aug . 1.98 9,203 . . 2.23 794 1.71 1,016 1.86 3,653 2.11 3,740
         Sep . 1.96 8,434 . . 2.13 912 1.74 878 1.87 3,334 2.07 3,310
         Oct . 1.99 9,323 . . 2.10 995 1.71 1,063 1.86 3,583 2.16 3,682
         Nov . 1.94 8,245 . . 2.21 812 1.69 888 1.83 3,378 2.05 3,167
         Dec . 1.86 8,294 . . 2.06 969 1.63 915 1.77 3,272 1.95 3,138
2016          Jan . 1.92 8,349 . . 2.30 916 1.62 1,003 1.80 3,276 2.04 3,154
         Feb . 1.89 7,875 . . 2.47 987 1.62 875 1.73 3,048 1.95 2,965
         Mar . 1.74 9,786 . . 2.01 1,002 1.63 1,075 1.63 3,807 1.81 3,902
         Apr . 1.89 7,980 . . 2.17 848 1.53 843 1.62 2,827 2.14 3,462
         May . 1.71 7,343 . . 2.08 783 1.53 752 1.54 2,804 1.81 3,004
         June . 1.67 9,111 . . 1.96 956 1.55 849 1.53 3,475 1.75 3,831
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          June
9.01 43,164 9.06 36,409 15.28 3,864 4.08 68,150 4.09 67,919
         July 8.90 41,364 8.92 34,649 15.36 3,861 3.97 64,222 3.98 63,998
         Aug 8.91 41,624 8.93 34,639 15.39 3,989 4.01 64,895 4.03 64,693
         Sep 8.95 42,843 9.01 35,907 15.43 3,899 4.08 65,570 4.10 65,322
         Oct 8.89 41,116 8.89 34,203 15.43 3,971 4.00 62,917 4.01 62,664
         Nov 8.82 40,622 8.82 33,577 15.32 4,064 3.92 65,212 3.94 64,959
         Dec 8.69 41,921 8.80 34,544 15.31 3,938 3.94 61,493 3.96 61,270
2016          Jan 8.83 40,469 8.78 33,630 15.36 4,043 3.82 65,219 3.84 65,010
         Feb 8.82 41,049 8.81 34,005 15.36 4,071 3.79 67,167 3.80 66,930
         Mar 8.81 42,187 8.80 35,211 15.42 3,982 3.84 68,638 3.85 68,394
         Apr 8.70 40,129 8.67 33,142 15.24 4,067 3.83 66,708 3.85 66,461
         May 8.72 40,781 8.75 33,466 15.21 4,135 3.70 67,212 3.71 66,974
         June 8.75 41,709 8.77 34,494 15.23 4,093 3.74 67,687 3.75 67,430
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          June 1.71 68,584 1.86 19,621 2.67 8,097 2.87 1,487 1.99 1,733 1.41 43,785 1.91 2,647 1.95 10,835
         July 1.68 69,195 1.64 24,802 2.64 8,543 2.91 1,586 2.05 1,791 1.37 45,314 1.94 2,211 1.97 9,750
         Aug 1.62 49,640 1.67 14,967 2.64 6,644 2.99 1,260 2.03 1,321 1.28 33,589 1.99 1,497 1.98 5,329         Sep 1.84 60,340 1.82 19,271 2.78 8,061 2.91 1,323 2.08 1,333 1.56 39,892 1.69 1,704 2.11 8,027
         Oct 1.68 57,781 1.57 20,890 2.64 8,271 2.89 1,452 2.07 1,254 1.37 37,386 1.71 2,319 1.86 7,099
         Nov 1.67 51,840 1.63 16,651 2.71 7,599 2.91 1,381 2.09 1,254 1.30 32,330 1.98 2,249 1.81 7,027         Dec 1.68 71,770 1.68 21,964 2.63 8,367 2.90 1,688 1.98 1,765 1.42 46,829 1.79 3,286 1.82 9,835
2016          Jan 1.60 56,798 1.62 19,979 2.58 7,835 2.87 1,331 2.02 1,328 1.26 38,673 2.16 2,309 1.90 5,322
         Feb 1.54 52,765 1.61 15,300 2.71 7,805 2.78 1,310 1.93 1,160 1.20 34,426 1.42 2,142 1.67 5,922         Mar 1.64 62,713 1.70 19,300 2.67 8,680 2.73 1,524 1.88 1,394 1.35 41,099 1.76 2,294 1.68 7,722
         Apr 1.55 57,589 1.60 19,803 2.60 8,290 2.74 1,645 1.82 1,410 1.23 38,162 1.56 1,933 1.68 6,149
         May 1.47 53,170 1.55 15,321 2.59 7,987 2.73 1,363 1.85 1,338 1.11 34,259 1.55 1,651 1.64 6,572         June 1.52 66,541 1.68 19,898 2.61 8,991 2.79 1,599 1.76 1,526 1.23 43,823 1.57 2,249 1.55 8,353
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          June 1.73 10,890 . . 2.11 642 2.51 133 1.84 561 1.53 5,897 1.90 677 1.94 2,980
         July 1.70 13,470 . . 1.99 894 2.59 175 1.86 593 1.55 8,144 1.85 592 1.87 3,072
         Aug 1.65 6,913 . . 2.14 546 2.69 128 1.86 445 1.41 4,037 1.91 302 1.93 1,455         Sep 1.93 9,689 . . 2.07 584 2.73 101 1.92 380 1.63 5,151 1.65 395 2.44 3,078
         Oct 1.72 9,269 . . 1.99 722 2.53 160 1.94 448 1.60 5,036 1.83 752 1.78 2,151
         Nov 1.76 7,680 . . 2.04 503 2.62 130 1.92 395 1.48 4,036 2.31 1,162 1.87 1,454         Dec 1.61 13,483 . . 1.98 636 2.57 150 1.76 539 1.47 7,249 1.84 1,438 1.67 3,471
2016          Jan 1.65 9,419 . . 2.01 674 2.55 125 1.89 463 1.33 6,286 3.51 656 1.93 1,215
         Feb 1.60 8,658 . . 2.07 554 2.29 149 1.84 382 1.45 4,958 1.69 627 1.71 1,988         Mar 1.62 10,561 . . 1.94 611 2.60 154 1.73 406 1.50 5,407 1.79 1,089 1.66 2,894
         Apr 1.59 9,251 . . 1.95 660 2.39 153 1.67 438 1.49 5,471 1.92 530 1.57 1,999
         May 1.58 5,951 . . 2.03 479 2.60 134 1.65 406 1.47 2,864 1.57 364 1.55 1,704         June 1.59 10,055 . . 1.91 601 2.51 159 1.64 468 1.56 4,884 1.72 1,003 1.46 2,940
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2015 2,514.9 2,433.9 488.7 417.6 310.4 244.0 837.0 71.1 65.1 81.0
2014          Q2 2,339.8 2,266.5 538.5 345.4 291.6 226.3 736.6 66.1 61.9 73.3
         Q3 2,380.2 2,305.6 530.3 366.1 293.9 227.3 758.5 67.2 62.3 74.7
         Q4 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2015          Q1 2,531.6 2,454.3 517.8 411.7 305.0 239.5 845.5 70.7 64.2 77.3
         Q2 2,471.6 2,394.1 509.8 393.4 305.3 236.1 813.8 70.7 65.1 77.5
         Q3 2,485.9 2,407.4 498.1 408.3 308.8 238.7 817.7 71.0 65.0 78.5
         Q4 2,514.9 2,433.9 488.7 417.6 310.4 244.0 837.0 71.1 65.1 81.0
2016          Q1 2,592.0 2,509.3 486.8 458.8 314.3 249.2 860.6 73.6 66.0 82.7
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2015 1,948.9 1,897.2 334.0 358.5 280.7 228.7 577.3 66.0 52.0 51.7
2014          Q2 1,823.8 1,776.3 381.8 299.8 263.8 212.9 506.6 61.5 50.0 47.5
         Q3 1,855.8 1,807.3 375.2 316.5 266.1 213.5 523.2 62.5 50.3 48.5
         Q4 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2015          Q1 1,976.3 1,926.5 362.6 355.3 276.2 224.9 590.0 65.7 51.8 49.9
         Q2 1,927.0 1,877.1 355.5 339.5 276.4 221.6 565.7 65.8 52.6 49.9
         Q3 1,935.2 1,884.7 345.7 351.0 279.6 224.0 566.2 65.9 52.3 50.5
         Q4 1,948.9 1,897.2 334.0 358.5 280.7 228.7 577.3 66.0 52.0 51.7
2016          Q1 2,018.5 1,965.5 333.9 394.5 284.4 233.6 597.8 68.3 53.0 53.0
Pension funds 4
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2015 566.0 536.7 154.7 59.1 29.7 15.3 259.7 5.2 13.1 29.3
2014          Q2 516.0 490.2 156.8 45.6 27.8 13.4 230.0 4.6 11.9 25.8
         Q3 524.4 498.3 155.1 49.6 27.8 13.8 235.2 4.7 12.0 26.1
         Q4 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2015          Q1 555.2 527.8 155.2 56.4 28.8 14.6 255.4 4.9 12.4 27.4
         Q2 544.6 517.0 154.2 53.9 28.9 14.5 248.1 5.0 12.5 27.6
         Q3 550.7 522.7 152.4 57.2 29.1 14.7 251.6 5.0 12.7 28.0
         Q4 566.0 536.7 154.7 59.1 29.7 15.3 259.7 5.2 13.1 29.3
2016          Q1 573.5 543.8 152.9 64.3 30.0 15.5 262.8 5.2 13.0 29.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2015 Q4 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.5
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.82012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.82013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.52014 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2015 2,514.9 18.3 92.3 233.1 1,975.1 1,667.5 307.6 75.7 120.3
2014          Q2 2,339.8 16.2 86.7 184.1 1,844.3 1,553.4 290.9 72.6 136.1
         Q3 2,380.2 17.6 86.3 188.0 1,861.3 1,568.1 293.3 72.6 154.4         Q4 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2015          Q1 2,531.6 17.7 90.8 223.1 1,937.6 1,631.9 305.8 74.8 187.5
         Q2 2,471.6 17.9 91.1 206.2 1,942.6 1,636.5 306.1 75.0 138.8         Q3 2,485.9 17.5 91.6 208.4 1,954.5 1,647.4 307.1 75.5 138.3         Q4 2,514.9 18.3 92.3 233.1 1,975.1 1,667.5 307.6 75.7 120.3
2016          Q1 2,592.0 17.7 95.4 231.7 2,011.7 1,690.7 321.0 78.0 157.4
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2015 1,948.9 18.3 87.3 221.7 1,468.8 1,161.7 307.1 72.4 80.3
2014          Q2 1,823.8 16.2 82.3 175.6 1,380.4 1,090.0 290.4 69.6 99.8
         Q3 1,855.8 17.6 81.8 179.3 1,392.5 1,099.7 292.8 69.6 115.1
         Q4 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2015          Q1 1,976.3 17.7 86.1 212.6 1,449.7 1,144.4 305.3 71.6 138.7
         Q2 1,927.0 17.9 86.3 196.5 1,452.9 1,147.3 305.6 71.8 101.7
         Q3 1,935.2 17.5 86.8 198.5 1,460.5 1,153.9 306.6 72.2 99.7
         Q4 1,948.9 18.3 87.3 221.7 1,468.8 1,161.7 307.1 72.4 80.3
2016          Q1 2,018.5 17.7 90.4 220.8 1,500.8 1,180.3 320.5 74.6 114.2
Pension funds 5
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2015 566.0 − 5.0 11.3 506.3 505.8 0.5 3.3 40.0
2014          Q2 516.0 − 4.4 8.4 463.9 463.4 0.5 3.0 36.3
         Q3 524.4 − 4.5 8.7 468.9 468.4 0.5 3.1 39.3
         Q4 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2015          Q1 555.2 − 4.8 10.5 487.9 487.4 0.5 3.2 48.8
         Q2 544.6 − 4.8 9.7 489.8 489.3 0.5 3.2 37.1
         Q3 550.7 − 4.8 9.9 494.0 493.5 0.5 3.2 38.7
         Q4 566.0 − 5.0 11.3 506.3 505.8 0.5 3.3 40.0
2016          Q1 573.5 − 5.0 10.9 510.9 510.4 0.5 3.4 43.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2013 are partially estimated. Figures from 2015 Q4 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2016
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 12,603 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 89,013 18,583 − 25,778 − 12,708 57,069 − 31,185
2014 63,381 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,341 51,779 − 12,124 − 11,951 75,854 11,601
2015 32,891 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,902 123,662 − 66,330 121,164 68,828 − 90,773
2015          Aug 18,142 14,808 1,576 1,949 11,284 3,334 15,405 − 781 9,915 6,271 2,736
         Sep 36,863 20,567 3,560 19,563 − 2,555 16,296 45,478 1,546 12,775 31,157 − 8,615
         Oct 4,370 − 1,263 5,758 − 6,129 − 892 5,633 6,801 − 12,250 12,664 6,387 − 2,432
         Nov − 821 − 2,159 − 14,282 − 1,729 13,853 1,338 5,797 3,259 12,847 − 10,309 − 6,618
         Dec − 59,323 − 57,836 − 55,168 996 − 3,664 − 1,487 − 13,826 − 39,384 11,090 14,468 − 45,497
2016          Jan 8,853 − 1,881 7,474 2,924 − 12,279 10,733 6,823 2,236 12,023 − 7,436 2,029
         Feb 31,114 19,483 14,851 1,224 3,407 11,631 20,916 2,002 12,911 6,003 10,198
         Mar 26,539 12,729 1,330 4,510 6,889 13,810 26,890 1,261 13,401 12,228 − 351
         Apr 12,556 − 3,469 7,238 1,970 − 12,677 16,025 34,517 − 5,143 15,821 23,839 − 21,961
         May 32,838 29,686 8,729 3,993 16,964 3,152 15,400 − 6,052 18,093 3,359 17,438
         June − 5,008 − 7,553 − 2,177 − 4,636 − 740 2,544 14,769 − 8,528 16,907 6,390 − 19,777
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 21,553 10,106 11,447 18,344 11,991 6,353 3,209
2014 47,506 18,778 28,728 39,661 17,203 22,458 7,845
2015 38,855 7,668 31,187 24,017 − 5,421 29,438 14,838
2015          Aug 962 122 840 1,261 − 6,693 7,954 − 299
         Sep − 4,412 966 − 5,378 − 2,610 − 9,059 6,449 − 1,802
         Oct 1,268 903 365 − 838 150 − 988 2,106
         Nov 4,836 640 4,196 1,526 5,566 − 4,040 3,310
         Dec 5,812 1,100 4,712 6,195 − 4,336 10,531 − 383
2016          Jan − 1,294 120 − 1,414 367 − 5,901 6,268 − 1,661
         Feb − 611 66 − 677 1,539 − 5,401 6,940 − 2,150
         Mar 8,290 59 8,231 5,935 1,861 4,074 2,355
         Apr − 949 39 − 988 472 − 639 1,111 − 1,421
         May 5,585 288 5,297 6,964 2,838 4,126 − 1,379
         June 2,210 335 1,875 4,572 − 330 4,902 − 2,362
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700 −
2015          Nov 100,701 62,684 4,141 1,158 40,780 16,605 5,567 32,450 −
         Dec 65,645 45,949 1,436 793 32,123 11,597 8,406 11,290 −
2016          Jan 120,383 77,552 1,810 1,099 54,961 19,682 6,448 36,384 −
         Feb 127,058 80,388 6,236 886 55,057 18,208 4,135 42,535 −
         Mar 111,271 61,483 2,722 1,030 38,521 19,209 9,240 40,548 −
         Apr 115,428 69,506 1,282 536 53,522 14,167 5,762 40,160 −
         May 109,656 67,125 3,518 355 48,486 14,766 7,177 35,353 −
         June 98,036 56,397 1,402 1,345 35,416 18,235 3,694 37,944 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742 −
2015          Nov 33,799 16,563 1,910 1,158 6,586 6,909 4,010 13,227 −
         Dec 14,240 5,609 36 43 1,269 4,262 6,029 2,603 −
2016          Jan 29,680 15,067 1,810 1,099 7,480 4,678 3,168 11,446 −
         Feb 36,168 19,792 5,716 540 9,953 3,582 1,579 14,797 −         Mar 37,922 17,301 2,209 1,030 6,745 7,317 5,178 15,444 −
         Apr 30,946 11,246 1,207 511 4,680 4,848 4,481 15,219 −
         May 36,255 17,367 2,711 55 8,707 5,895 4,908 13,980 −         June 34,458 16,553 1,291 711 6,590 7,962 2,098 15,808 −
Net sales  6 
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174 − 1,441
2015          Nov 4,210 − 10,065 3,189 989 − 9,760 − 4,483 − 1,260 15,536 −
         Dec − 81,812 − 66,259 − 610 − 1,459 − 8,176 − 56,013 1,431 − 16,984 − 191
2016          Jan − 6,853 4,029 − 3,139 − 445 4,467 3,145 2,324 − 13,206 −
         Feb 16,450 12,194 4,786 42 6,832 534 122 4,133 −         Mar 11,323 4,244 977 − 477 1,174 2,571 4,323 2,756 − 219
         Apr − 8,359 7,324 236 − 1,468 6,691 1,865 1,909 − 17,592 − 159
         May 28,473 9,196 − 1,402 − 660 9,052 2,206 3,294 15,983 − 590         June − 3,182 − 4,261 − 2,543 − 3,575 1,322 534 − 4,057 5,135 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2016
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
2015          Dec 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
2016          Jan 3,039,308 1,158,202 127,460 75,234 571,278 384,231 259,936 1,621,171 6,356
         Feb 3,055,758 1,170,396 132,246 75,276 578,109 384,765 260,058 1,625,304 6,356
         Mar 3,067,081 1,174,640 133,223 74,800 579,283 387,335 264,380 1,628,060 6,137
         Apr 3,058,722 1,181,964 133,459 73,331 585,974 389,200 266,289 1,610,468 5,978
         May 3,087,195 1,191,160 132,057 72,672 595,026 391,406 269,584 1,626,451 5,389
         June 3,084,013 1,186,899 129,514 69,097 596,349 391,940 265,527 1,631,587 5,389
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2016 
1,021,157 463,603 37,045 28,011 247,795 150,752 49,183 508,371 1,935    less than 2
665,804 289,676 38,667 18,100 158,821 74,087 51,408 324,721 204 2 to less than 4
452,712 190,444 24,030 9,300 94,254 62,861 34,637 227,631 341 4 to less than 6
327,679 86,536 16,311 6,952 34,009 29,266 23,646 217,497 1,333 6 to less than 8
222,915 73,767 9,155 4,871 34,502 25,240 14,334 134,814 111 8 to less than 10
124,080 28,011 4,067 1,212 9,661 13,070 15,412 80,657 498 10 to less than 15
41,647 11,020 65 600 7,298 3,057 3,810 26,818 − 15 to less than 20
228,019 43,842 175 52 10,008 33,607 73,098 111,079 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2015          Dec 177,416 973 1,081 − 23 − − 10 − 73 − 48 1,614,442
2016          Jan 177,279 − 136 112 43 − − − 2 − 222 − 68 1,468,888
         Feb 177,125 − 154 52 −1−0 − 6 3− 1 44 1,435,286
         Mar 177,113 − 12 57 −0−0 − 2 − 6 7 1,512,940
         Apr 176,705 − 408 31 − 34 − − 281 − 2 − 188 1,528,339
         May 175,609 − 1,097 209 14 5 − − 4 − 378 − 942 1,529,297
         June 175,694 85 213 67 228 − − 30 − 305 − 87 1,432,091
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) are included as well as enter-
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- prises listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.012016          Feb 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 1.3 2.8 142.48 116.73 451.93 9,495.40
         Mar 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 1.2 2.4 142.21 116.20 473.69 9,965.51
         Apr 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.1 2.2 141.89 112.67 474.25 10,038.97
         May 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.19 113.75 478.01 10,262.74         June 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 0.7 2.0 143.74 116.88 450.95 9,680.09
         July − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 0.2 0.7 1.7 144.06 116.16 481.02 10,337.50
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,743 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,407 117,675 771 100 116,904 32,305 6,069
2014 139,011 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 41,302 144,168 819 − 1,745 143,349 43,046 − 5,154
2015 181,632 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,495 176,116 7,362 494 168,754 35,001 5,515
2015          Dec 26,600 26,955 5,428 − 248 5,262 487 21,527 − 355 25,069 − 1,935 − 2,182 27,004 1,827 1,5312016          Jan 17,489 15,246 2,675 366 673 1,335 12,571 2,243 18,048 − 339 − 397 18,387 2,640 − 559
         Feb 13,857 9,934 1,404 − 79 469 704 8,530 3,924 14,315 557 107 13,758 3,817 − 457         Mar 11,178 7,620 1,620 − 191 657 836 6,000 3,558 12,939 1,053 915 11,886 2,643 − 1,761
         Apr 12,939 6,740 1,705 − 76 940 496 5,035 6,199 14,526 671 − 230 13,855 6,429 − 1,587
         May 12,486 11,294 5,506 − 50 1,132 4,156 5,788 1,192 12,325 887 − 65 11,438 1,257 161         June 8,318 7,914 − 1,062 42 565 − 1,971 8,976 404 8,727 557 − 87 8,170 491 − 408
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 4.68 − 7.30 41.49 − 4.62 − 10.85 3.71 28.11 20.52 0.15
Debt securities 0.65 − 1.26 − 0.93 − 3.57 − 1.48 0.56 0.51 − 0.52 0.87
short-term debt securities 1.56 1.62 − 0.77 0.40 − 1.06 0.93 − 1.42 0.78 0.98
long-term debt securities − 0.91 − 2.88 − 0.15 − 3.97 − 0.42 − 0.37 1.93 − 1.29 − 0.10
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.27 − 1.88 0.73 − 2.74 − 0.07 0.24 0.94 − 0.38 0.51
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66
Financial corporations − 2.14 − 1.26 1.93 − 0.52 0.75 − 0.27 0.87 0.58 0.31
General government 0.07 − 0.57 − 0.41 − 2.12 − 0.28 − 0.08 0.39 − 0.44 − 0.46
Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.91 0.62 − 1.66 − 0.83 − 1.41 0.32 − 0.42 − 0.14 0.37
Loans 9.45 14.24 30.19 4.76 23.01 5.79 1.29 0.11 6.50
short-term loans 27.76 36.06 25.03 2.25 20.39 1.61 1.10 1.93 3.21
long-term loans − 18.32 − 21.83 5.17 2.50 2.62 4.18 0.19 − 1.82 3.29
Memo item
to domestic sectors 2.36 10.23 11.76 8.37 17.82 − 1.20 0.44 − 5.30 0.78
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.30 9.79 − 1.43 0.02 4.30 − 0.60 3.28
Financial corporations − 1.81 10.65 9.68 − 1.39 19.30 − 1.17 − 3.81 − 4.64 − 2.50
General government 0.26 − 0.11 − 0.22 − 0.03 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 − 0.05 0.00
to the rest of the world 7.09 4.01 18.44 − 3.61 5.19 6.99 0.85 5.41 5.72
Equity and investment fund shares 39.55 10.18 47.40 − 6.68 3.23 9.09 14.47 20.61 9.11
Equity 31.90 20.57 31.05 3.82 − 4.92 6.27 10.59 19.11 8.66
Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.70 − 1.62 − 10.41 − 2.76 − 16.68 1.41 1.98 2.88 − 6.00
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17
Financial corporations − 0.95 3.78 − 2.37 3.19 − 2.59 0.34 − 0.14 0.02 0.17
Listed shares of the rest of the world 1.41 9.31 7.25 0.30 10.12 − 0.22 − 5.02 2.37 1.60
Other equity 1 21.80 12.87 34.22 6.28 1.64 5.08 13.64 13.86 13.06
Investment fund shares 7.65 − 10.38 16.35 − 10.50 8.15 2.82 3.87 1.50 0.45
Money market fund shares − 0.15 0.23 0.21 − 0.08 − 0.25 0.17 − 0.06 0.35 − 0.30
Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.80 − 10.61 16.13 − 10.41 8.40 2.65 3.93 1.15 0.75
Insurance technical reserves 3.02 1.04 1.65 0.06 0.29 0.55 0.56 0.25 2.07
Financial derivatives 6.49 − 1.27 3.07 − 3.94 3.55 − 2.41 2.07 − 0.14 − 0.37
Other accounts receivable 167.66 − 92.43 63.32 − 46.69 − 27.86 48.21 15.17 27.80 9.20
Total 231.49 − 76.81 186.19 − 60.69 − 10.12 65.50 62.17 68.63 27.53
External financing
Debt securities 12.78 1.26 7.78 4.32 3.58 4.91 0.46 − 1.17 10.40
short-term securities − 1.12 − 11.63 1.96 − 0.88 1.26 − 0.04 1.01 − 0.27 2.04
long-term securities 13.90 12.89 5.82 5.20 2.32 4.95 − 0.55 − 0.89 8.36
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 5.10 4.25 1.75 0.18 0.95 2.72 − 0.72 − 1.20 4.97
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66
Financial corporations 2.85 4.11 2.06 0.44 1.26 1.85 − 0.44 − 0.61 3.59
General government − 0.05 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 − 0.00 0.01 0.01 − 0.00
Households 1.50 0.20 0.46 − 0.16 0.22 0.29 0.03 − 0.07 0.73
Debt securities of the rest of the world 7.67 − 2.99 6.03 4.14 2.63 2.19 1.18 0.03 5.43
Loans 27.15 − 15.51 47.95 − 12.40 28.94 17.03 − 2.13 4.10 14.68
short-term loans 24.45 1.96 21.17 − 9.82 8.16 14.80 − 2.94 1.16 16.55
long-term loans 2.71 − 17.47 26.77 − 2.59 20.78 2.24 0.81 2.95 − 1.88
Memo item
from domestic sectors − 4.64 2.51 23.34 − 0.23 22.29 6.62 − 0.74 − 4.83 3.15
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.30 9.79 − 1.43 0.02 4.30 − 0.60 3.28
Financial corporations 12.69 13.48 15.16 − 5.33 15.91 8.19 − 1.72 − 7.22 3.50
General government − 21.23 − 10.67 5.89 − 4.68 7.81 − 1.59 − 3.32 3.00 − 3.63
from the rest of the world 31.74 − 18.01 24.60 − 12.18 6.65 10.41 − 1.39 8.93 11.53
Equity 12.04 27.88 15.04 15.43 0.05 5.40 5.89 3.69 3.25
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 4.47 − 0.97 6.66 − 4.69 − 1.81 − 3.65 0.73 11.39 − 2.71
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17
Financial corporations − 5.02 1.59 11.05 − 0.31 17.66 − 5.34 − 6.36 5.09 − 1.14
General government − 0.88 0.03 0.11 0.01 0.06 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.00
Households − 8.21 2.80 3.55 1.57 − 5.43 0.61 4.95 3.43 4.61
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 7.80 9.72 − 0.64 6.65 2.08 5.36 1.97 − 10.04 2.75
Other equity 1 8.70 19.13 9.02 13.46 − 0.22 3.70 3.20 2.34 3.21
Insurance technical reserves 6.34 6.05 6.05 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 3.72 1.93 − 8.22 1.92 10.89 − 16.16 − 1.04 − 1.92 8.63
Other accounts payable 19.44 − 11.43 56.92 − 19.56 28.57 18.60 0.16 9.60 8.40
Total 81.46 10.18 125.52 − 8.77 73.54 31.30 4.87 15.81 46.87
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.5 406.5 463.7 406.5 387.7 397.2 432.0 463.7 455.2
Debt securities 45.0 49.6 47.8 49.6 48.6 48.4 48.4 47.8 48.8
short-term debt securities 5.1 6.8 6.0 6.8 5.7 6.7 5.2 6.0 7.0
long-term debt securities 39.9 42.9 41.7 42.9 42.9 41.7 43.2 41.7 41.7
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 24.6 22.9 23.3 22.9 23.0 23.0 23.8 23.3 23.8
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.6 4.1 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3
Financial corporations 13.8 12.7 14.5 12.7 13.5 13.2 14.0 14.5 14.8
General government 6.1 5.7 5.2 5.7 5.4 5.3 5.6 5.2 4.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world 20.5 26.7 24.4 26.7 25.6 25.4 24.7 24.4 24.9
Loans 447.0 466.0 496.0 466.0 493.4 498.2 497.4 496.0 500.1
short-term loans 340.0 375.8 399.7 375.8 398.6 399.5 399.6 399.7 401.6
long-term loans 107.0 90.2 96.3 90.2 94.9 98.7 97.9 96.3 98.5
Memo item
to domestic sectors 305.2 315.4 327.2 315.4 333.2 332.0 332.5 327.2 328.0
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.5 216.2 214.8 214.8 219.1 218.5 221.8
Financial corporations 82.1 92.8 102.4 92.8 112.1 110.9 107.1 102.4 100.0
General government 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.4 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.2
to the rest of the world 141.8 150.5 168.8 150.5 160.2 166.1 165.0 168.8 172.1
Equity and investment fund shares 1,810.8 1,921.5 2,101.8 1,921.5 2,150.8 2,087.2 1,979.2 2,101.8 2,036.1
Equity 1,672.7 1,786.0 1,949.8 1,786.0 1,999.7 1,937.2 1,829.3 1,949.8 1,885.0
Listed shares of domestic sectors 275.4 262.2 273.0 262.2 290.6 274.6 239.0 273.0 248.1
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 252.2 283.1 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0
Financial corporations 5.7 10.0 6.3 10.0 7.4 7.2 5.9 6.3 6.1
Listed shares of the rest of the world 52.2 62.2 69.5 62.2 74.0 71.8 66.4 69.5 70.9
Other equity 1 1,345.1 1,461.5 1,607.3 1,461.5 1,635.1 1,590.8 1,523.9 1,607.3 1,566.0
Investment fund shares 138.1 135.5 151.9 135.5 151.0 150.0 149.8 151.9 151.1
Money market fund shares 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.2 0.9 1.1 1.0 1.4 1.0
Non-MMF investment fund shares 137.0 134.4 150.6 134.4 150.1 149.0 148.8 150.6 150.1
Insurance technical reserves 46.1 47.3 48.7 47.3 47.6 48.0 48.3 48.7 50.9
Financial derivatives 16.8 22.7 24.0 22.7 25.9 23.0 24.6 24.0 23.2Other accounts receivable 891.1 857.9 929.5 857.9 900.0 927.0 922.0 929.5 922.9
Total 3,668.4 3,771.4 4,111.5 3,771.4 4,054.0 4,028.9 3,952.0 4,111.5 4,037.3
Liabilities
Debt securities 138.9 150.9 156.8 150.9 159.5 157.2 158.1 156.8 173.1
short-term securities 13.4 1.8 3.0 1.8 2.3 2.3 3.3 3.0 5.1
long-term securities 125.4 149.1 153.7 149.1 157.1 154.9 154.8 153.7 168.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 51.1 60.1 58.6 60.1 62.6 62.7 60.7 58.6 65.8
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.6 4.1 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3
Financial corporations 30.8 39.8 39.9 39.8 42.0 42.8 41.3 39.9 45.9
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.6 15.8 15.0 15.8 16.4 15.3 15.2 15.0 15.6
Debt securities of the rest of the world 87.8 90.7 98.1 90.7 96.9 94.5 97.4 98.1 107.3
Loans 1,418.5 1,388.8 1,439.5 1,388.8 1,422.6 1,439.0 1,436.6 1,439.5 1,451.4
short-term loans 494.2 496.2 517.8 496.2 508.5 522.0 517.8 517.8 532.5
long-term loans 924.2 892.6 921.7 892.6 914.1 917.1 918.8 921.7 918.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,098.7 1,083.3 1,104.9 1,083.3 1,105.3 1,112.1 1,112.3 1,104.9 1,108.1
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.5 216.2 214.8 214.8 219.1 218.5 221.8
Financial corporations 821.1 814.5 828.3 814.5 831.1 839.6 838.0 828.3 828.6
General government 61.0 52.6 58.0 52.6 59.4 57.7 55.1 58.0 57.7
from the rest of the world 319.8 305.5 334.6 305.5 317.3 326.9 324.3 334.6 343.3
Equity 2,436.6 2,542.2 2,670.9 2,542.2 2,860.2 2,715.7 2,484.8 2,670.9 2,567.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors 571.9 570.0 626.4 570.0 681.4 625.1 551.6 626.4 585.2
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 252.2 283.1 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0
Financial corporations 120.3 133.9 150.1 133.9 181.9 159.4 130.8 150.1 140.3
General government 35.2 35.2 43.4 35.2 42.9 39.5 41.1 43.4 41.5
Households 146.6 148.7 166.2 148.7 173.4 158.8 146.5 166.2 161.5
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 670.8 719.9 756.3 719.9 839.8 789.6 693.2 756.3 724.7
Other equity 1 1,194.0 1,252.3 1,288.3 1,252.3 1,339.0 1,301.0 1,240.0 1,288.3 1,257.5
Insurance technical reserves 243.9 249.9 256.0 249.9 251.5 253.0 254.5 256.0 257.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 37.3 54.0 42.0 54.0 63.9 46.6 44.7 42.0 49.8
Other accounts payable 964.8 985.6 1,051.6 985.6 1,037.2 1,023.9 1,025.4 1,051.6 1,044.3
Total 5,240.0 5,371.4 5,616.8 5,371.4 5,794.9 5,635.4 5,404.0 5,616.8 5,543.5
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 63.87 85.60 85.21 40.18 14.61 31.14 8.49 30.98 8.12
Currency 8.08 15.42 14.05 6.88 4.12 7.18 3.01 − 0.26 2.42
Deposits 55.79 70.18 71.16 33.30 10.49 23.96 5.48 31.24 5.70
Transferable deposits 89.41 73.84 100.96 33.62 19.30 34.43 15.01 32.22 7.24
Time deposits − 9.78 8.74 − 9.22 4.12 − 2.32 − 3.12 − 4.21 0.44 0.83
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 23.85 − 12.41 − 20.58 − 4.44 − 6.49 − 7.35 − 5.32 − 1.43 − 2.37
Debt securities − 17.81 − 18.00 − 17.40 − 5.89 − 7.38 − 5.09 − 1.87 − 3.07 − 1.76
short-term debt securities − 0.36 − 0.67 0.75 − 0.32 0.29 0.31 0.28 − 0.13 0.10
long-term debt securities − 17.45 − 17.33 − 18.16 − 5.57 − 7.66 − 5.40 − 2.14 − 2.95 − 1.86
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 14.86 − 15.08 − 9.34 − 4.25 − 4.76 − 2.98 − 0.16 − 1.45 1.08
Non-financial corporations 1.24 0.02 0.39 − 0.23 0.21 0.23 0.02 − 0.07 0.67
Financial corporations − 12.46 − 12.52 − 6.80 − 3.58 − 4.05 − 2.40 0.44 − 0.78 0.74
General government − 3.64 − 2.58 − 2.93 − 0.44 − 0.91 − 0.81 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 0.33
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.94 − 2.93 − 8.06 − 1.64 − 2.62 − 2.11 − 1.71 − 1.62 − 2.84
Equity and investment fund shares 9.63 36.87 46.39 10.43 4.53 10.53 16.85 14.48 15.67
Equity − 0.41 12.17 15.03 3.95 − 6.26 2.87 11.73 6.69 10.26
Listed Shares of domestic sectors − 5.63 4.61 4.06 1.79 − 6.53 1.13 6.67 2.79 6.59
Non-financial corporations − 5.29 2.69 3.77 1.55 − 5.50 0.49 6.03 2.76 4.52
Financial corporations − 0.35 1.93 0.28 0.23 − 1.03 0.64 0.64 0.03 2.07
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 2.99 3.70 6.75 1.06 0.66 0.80 3.00 2.30 1.65
Other equity 1 2.24 3.86 4.22 1.10 − 0.39 0.95 2.07 1.60 2.02
Investment fund shares 10.04 24.70 31.36 6.49 10.79 7.66 5.12 7.79 5.41
Money market fund shares − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.57 0.12 − 0.16 − 0.02 − 0.10 − 0.30 − 0.30
Non-MMF investment fund shares 10.34 25.04 31.93 6.37 10.95 7.68 5.22 8.09 5.71
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 26.02 24.46 19.75 5.88 5.63 5.07 4.93 4.12 5.70
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 31.69 30.40 33.33 7.67 16.20 8.99 5.28 2.87 19.32
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 19.39 28.83 28.31 7.31 6.19 4.09 6.21 11.82 3.49
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 9.76 − 34.02 − 15.91 − 25.03 11.75 − 10.21 0.02 − 17.47 8.37
Total 142.56 154.13 179.68 40.55 51.53 44.53 39.90 43.72 58.91
  External financing
Loans 11.96 19.31 38.41 4.18 3.59 11.78 14.56 8.48 6.23
short-term loans − 3.31 − 1.98 − 3.17 − 2.04 1.00 − 1.26 − 1.51 − 1.40 − 0.42
long-term loans 15.27 21.29 41.58 6.22 2.59 13.04 16.07 9.88 6.64
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.89 23.58 35.84 8.33 2.30 10.24 13.76 9.53 4.51
Consumer loans − 0.30 1.21 5.44 − 1.71 1.57 2.15 1.40 0.32 2.11
Entrepreneurial loans − 6.64 − 5.49 − 2.88 − 2.44 − 0.29 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 1.38 − 0.38
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 12.60 18.87 39.35 4.17 3.27 11.60 15.09 9.38 5.24
Loans from other financial institutions − 0.60 0.43 − 0.94 0.01 0.32 0.18 − 0.53 − 0.90 0.99
Loans from general government and restof the world − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.01 0.78 0.31 0.31 0.25 0.05 − 0.01 0.02 0.17
Total 11.94 20.09 38.72 4.49 3.84 11.83 14.55 8.50 6.40
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,910.8 1,997.9 2,083.1 1,997.9 2,012.5 2,043.6 2,052.1 2,083.1 2,091.3
Currency 112.0 127.5 141.5 127.5 131.6 138.8 141.8 141.5 143.9
Deposits 1,798.8 1,870.4 1,941.6 1,870.4 1,880.9 1,904.8 1,910.3 1,941.6 1,947.4
Transferable deposits 907.8 981.4 1,082.4 981.4 1,000.6 1,035.1 1,050.1 1,082.4 1,089.8
Time deposits 245.9 256.4 246.8 256.4 254.0 250.9 246.4 246.8 248.3
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 645.1 632.7 612.4 632.7 626.2 618.9 613.8 612.4 609.3
Debt securities 179.0 162.2 139.8 162.2 156.8 149.2 144.0 139.8 137.1
short-term debt securities 2.7 2.1 2.9 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.9
long-term debt securities 176.3 160.1 136.9 160.1 154.3 146.5 141.0 136.9 134.2
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 116.9 102.4 89.4 102.4 98.6 94.3 92.2 89.4 89.6
Non-financial corporations 14.2 14.1 13.4 14.1 14.8 13.7 13.5 13.4 13.9
Financial corporations 90.7 78.7 69.5 78.7 75.1 72.9 71.5 69.5 69.4
General government 12.0 9.6 6.5 9.6 8.7 7.8 7.1 6.5 6.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 62.0 59.8 50.3 59.8 58.2 54.9 51.8 50.3 47.6
Equity and investment fund shares 885.9 951.4 1,040.7 951.4 1,051.1 1,018.4 982.1 1,040.7 1,024.3
Equity 487.6 508.9 555.9 508.9 563.4 537.0 518.3 555.9 544.9
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 167.4 169.7 188.9 169.7 197.9 179.6 168.4 188.9 181.8
Non-financial corporations 140.4 142.1 158.7 142.1 165.4 151.1 140.2 158.7 154.1
Financial corporations 26.9 27.6 30.3 27.6 32.5 28.5 28.2 30.3 27.6
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 55.8 64.0 74.8 64.0 74.6 71.7 67.9 74.8 73.1
Other equity 1 264.4 275.3 292.2 275.3 290.9 285.7 282.0 292.2 290.1
Investment fund shares 398.3 442.5 484.8 442.5 487.7 481.3 463.8 484.8 479.3
Money market fund shares 4.4 4.0 3.4 4.0 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.1Non-MMF investment fund shares 393.8 438.5 481.4 438.5 483.8 477.5 460.1 481.4 476.3
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 291.3 307.3 323.0 307.3 311.5 315.7 319.8 323.0 328.7
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 847.3 885.6 922.5 885.6 903.1 912.9 918.8 922.5 941.7
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 708.3 745.6 777.9 745.6 753.2 758.2 765.2 777.9 781.4
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 36.7 35.8 34.8 35.8 35.6 35.5 35.1 34.8 34.6
Total 4,859.4 5,085.8 5,321.8 5,085.8 5,223.8 5,233.4 5,217.1 5,321.8 5,339.2
  Liabilities
Loans 1,549.6 1,569.2 1,605.6 1,569.2 1,571.6 1,583.1 1,597.3 1,605.6 1,612.2
short-term loans 66.4 64.6 60.9 64.6 65.6 64.1 62.6 60.9 60.5
long-term loans 1,483.2 1,504.7 1,544.7 1,504.7 1,506.0 1,519.0 1,534.7 1,544.7 1,551.7
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,092.9 1,116.8 1,152.7 1,116.8 1,119.0 1,129.5 1,142.9 1,152.7 1,157.3
Consumer loans 188.7 188.9 191.9 188.9 189.2 191.2 192.2 191.9 194.0
Entrepreneurial loans 268.0 263.6 260.9 263.6 263.3 262.5 262.1 260.9 260.9
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,477.6 1,479.6 1,491.0 1,505.7 1,514.9 1,520.5
Loans from other financial institutions 91.2 91.7 90.7 91.7 92.0 92.2 91.6 90.7 91.7
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.6 16.5 16.5 16.5 17.5 17.3 17.5 16.5 17.2
Total 1,565.2 1,585.7 1,622.1 1,585.7 1,589.1 1,600.4 1,614.8 1,622.1 1,629.4
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 p − 2.7 − 16.3 − 7.4 + 2.7 + 18.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 3.8 − 7.7 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 5.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.4 + 8.6 − 0.8 − 2.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 pe + 19.6 + 10.0 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2014          H1  p + 10.8 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5
         H2  p − 2.4 + 6.9 − 0.0 − 6.1 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2
2015          H1  pe + 13.5 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 5.0 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2
         H2  pe + 6.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2010 2,089.9 1,335.2 629.7 143.0 1.3 81.0 51.7 24.4 5.5 0.1
2011 2,116.8 1,342.3 644.1 146.8 1.3 78.3 49.7 23.8 5.4 0.0
2012 p 2,193.3 1,386.6 672.3 151.0 1.2 79.6 50.3 24.4 5.5 0.0
2013 p 2,177.8 1,389.6 650.7 153.5 1.3 77.2 49.3 23.1 5.4 0.0
2014 p 2,177.7 1,396.0 644.2 154.1 1.4 74.7 47.9 22.1 5.3 0.0
2015 p 2,152.9 1,372.0 646.5 154.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.4 5.1 0.0
2014          Q1 p 2,168.9 1,386.8 646.5 153.3 1.2 76.1 48.6 22.7 5.4 0.0
         Q2 p 2,175.8 1,395.3 644.6 154.0 1.1 75.8 48.6 22.4 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,176.6 1,391.4 647.1 154.3 1.1 75.2 48.1 22.4 5.3 0.0
         Q4 p 2,177.7 1,396.0 644.2 154.1 1.4 74.7 47.9 22.1 5.3 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,185.8 1,399.3 653.5 154.3 1.4 74.4 47.6 22.2 5.3 0.0
         Q2 p 2,152.0 1,382.7 633.8 153.8 1.4 72.6 46.6 21.4 5.2 0.0
         Q3 p 2,154.1 1,377.2 641.9 154.3 1.5 72.0 46.0 21.4 5.2 0.0
         Q4 p 2,152.9 1,372.0 646.5 154.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.4 5.1 0.0
2016          Q1 p 2,167.5 1,384.9 643.6 155.9 1.2 71.1 45.4 21.1 5.1 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
  
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts
*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 63.9 59.4 258.0 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 67.5 61.4 237.2 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 p 1,222.1 623.9 454.2 144.0 1,224.8 644.4 212.9 63.1 62.2 242.3 − 2.7 1,082.6
2013 p 1,252.4 642.0 464.9 145.5 1,256.2 665.7 218.6 56.0 63.5 252.4 − 3.8 1,111.3
2014 p 1,299.6 665.1 481.9 152.5 1,291.2 691.1 224.6 51.5 63.2 260.8 + 8.4 1,151.5
2015 pe 1,350.7 698.1 500.8 151.8 1,331.1 722.9 229.6 48.0 66.6 264.1 + 19.6 1,204.4
as a percentage of GDP
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 10.0 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.8 − 1.0 38.7
2012 p 44.4 22.6 16.5 5.2 44.5 23.4 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.8 − 0.1 39.3
2013 p 44.4 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.5 23.6 7.8 2.0 2.3 8.9 − 0.1 39.4
2014 p 44.6 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.3 23.7 7.7 1.8 2.2 8.9 + 0.3 39.5
2015 pe 44.6 23.1 16.6 5.0 44.0 23.9 7.6 1.6 2.2 8.7 + 0.6 39.8
Percentage growth rates
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.9 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 3.3 − 8.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 6.5 + 1.4 + 2.1 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.5 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 2.6 + 3.3 + 2.7 − 11.2 + 2.1 + 4.2 . + 2.6
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.7 − 8.1 − 0.5 + 3.3 . + 3.6
2015 pe + 3.9 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.5 + 3.1 + 4.6 + 2.2 − 6.8 + 5.3 + 1.3 . + 4.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and                                                            
social contributions plus customs duties. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.4 551.1 + 3.2 1,245.1 1,236.8 + 8.4
2015 p 832.1 673.3 10.4 802.9 243.5 302.0 49.9 46.3 12.7 + 29.2 574.2 572.5 + 1.7 1,302.8 1,271.9 + 30.9
2014          Q1 p 188.2 153.6 2.0 193.9 56.7 77.9 20.0 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 296.0 305.0 − 9.0
         Q2 p 193.1 157.4 2.2 188.1 56.9 71.8 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 5.0 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.5 299.0 + 5.6
         Q3 p 192.2 157.5 3.4 193.5 57.1 71.2 17.7 11.3 4.0 − 1.4 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 303.1 305.5 − 2.4
         Q4 p 219.0 174.9 3.5 211.8 65.4 73.5 9.5 16.5 3.1 + 7.2 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 341.6 327.6 + 14.0
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2 p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 73.2 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3 p 202.9 159.0 3.8 198.1 62.3 70.9 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.2 315.6 + 2.6
         Q4 p 222.2 178.1 2.6 219.4 63.2 77.3 7.6 17.1 3.7 + 2.8 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 349.1 338.9 + 10.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.2 326.4 + 11.8 355.1 350.4 + 4.7 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 50.0 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.8 52.0 + 2.8
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.4 − 0.5
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.0 61.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4 p 91.4 83.3 + 8.1 94.1 96.6 − 2.6 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558
         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016          Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 ... 152,046 82,185 64,685 5,175 ... ... 6,512
2015          June . 60,268 32,823 25,517 1,929 . . 2,211
2016          June . 63,479 34,058 27,918 1,504 . . 2,171
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059
         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783
         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907
         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453
         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016          Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,100 74,493 45,315 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,055
2015          June 64,776 37,076 16,033 11,043 6,639 3,361 16,659 12,758 3,901 4 9,046 1,620 372 4,508
2016          June 68,089 38,863 16,170 11,667 6,533 4,493 17,685 13,581 4,104 1 8,734 2,403 403 4,610
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2015: 52.3:45.5:2.2. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2015: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 14,921 15,930 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 . 11,249 6,290 2,801 60,396 45,752 13,215
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 3,683 4,278 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 . 2,561 1,617 660 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,981 3,714 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 . 3,021 1,335 672 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 5,034 4,155 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 . 2,906 1,670 689 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016          Q1 4,620 2,722 3,979 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 . 3,217 1,668 787 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,139 4,470 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 . 2,952 2,283 717 ... ... ...
2015          June 3,273 1,116 2,175 654 788 401 149 490 . 895 504 221 . . .2016          June 3,414 849 2,204 623 777 422 153 292 . 1,003 1,153 247 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016          Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016          Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance forsures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043
         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016          Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016          Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,781,987 4,440 556,202 188,858 134,956 897,531
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,089,946 4,440 691,199 208,244 133,531 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,116,832 4,440 631,193 208,005 120,689 1,152,5052012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,193,258 4,440 634,707 200,406 140,259 1,213,4452013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,177,830 4,440 625,050 190,921 144,951 1,212,4682014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 
p 2,177,735 4,440 612,957 190,343 130,905 1,239,089
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 p 2,152,943 77,220 601,197 186,703 151,358 1,136,465
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 2,168,893 4,440 622,203 190,620 131,109 1,220,521
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 2,175,778 4,440 619,901 189,862 131,186 1,230,389
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 2,176,615 4,440 621,869 189,118 127,758 1,233,431
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 2,177,735 4,440 612,957 190,343 130,905 1,239,089
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 p 2,185,757 12,335 620,410 189,242 136,092 1,227,678
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 p 2,152,027 34,310 606,650 187,345 137,223 1,186,499
         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 p 2,154,069 54,990 610,635 188,220 138,513 1,161,710
         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 p 2,152,943 77,220 601,197 186,703 151,358 1,136,465
2016          Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 p 2,167,478 100,051 600,501 183,172 150,139 1,133,614
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,903 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,606 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,254 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,806 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013 1,816,017 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,429 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,809,286 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,383 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 1,821,829 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,729 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 1,818,450 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,889 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 1,822,276 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 281,984 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 p 1,821,447 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,067 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,806,385 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 270,776 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,810,270 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 269,138 42 110,741 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,811,144 19,735 429,513 246,940 1,305 725,236 1,070 271,419 42 111,442 4,440 2
2016          Q1 p 1,824,563 22,315 426,579 240,281 1,205 730,491 1,051 287,519 42 110,638 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016          Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
State government
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,870 1,975 283,601 .... 154,844 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,836 950 299,750 .... 138,698 52 101,386 . 1
2013 545,814 125 313,412 .... 133,899 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 540,134 261 309,346 .... 132,020 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 542,656 1,098 314,024 .... 128,616 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 546,756 856 322,362 .... 125,257 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 549,692 0 326,188 .... 124,802 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 p 547,175 1,821 323,055 .... 123,632 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 p 537,972 2,040 320,492 .... 117,313 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 p 543,326 2,056 326,447 .... 116,573 5 98,245 . 1
         Q4 p 550,085 1,199 333,124 .... 116,761 5 98,996 . 1
2016          Q1 p 551,943 1,789 328,347 .... 123,278 5 98,524 . 1
Local government9
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 140,198 . − . . 1,046 . 135,811 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 140,719 . − . . 1,046 . 136,332 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 141,274 . − . . 1,046 . 136,888 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 142,456 . − . . 1,297 . 136,674 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 p 147,230 . − . . 1,597 . 141,146 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 p 146,776 . − . . 1,847 . 140,442 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 p 147,274 . − . . 1,997 . 140,790 37 4,450 . .
         Q4 p 147,318 . − . . 1,997 . 140,834 37 4,450 . .
2016          Q1 p 148,229 . − . . 2,034 . 141,708 37 4,450 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and itsnon-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2014   2015   2016
  2013   2014   2015   2013   2014   2015   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 106.3 108.1 110.2 0.4 1.6 2.0 1.6 1.1 1.1 2.2 2.3 2.3 0.5Construction 101.3 104.0 104.0 − 1.2 2.6 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 2.6 0.5Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 103.9 105.2 106.7 − 2.4 1.3 1.4 0.7 1.5 1.7 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.2Information and communication 122.6 125.5 129.6 6.0 2.4 3.3 2.5 2.4 2.2 3.5 3.4 3.9 2.3Financial and insuranceactivities 99.1 99.8 98.8 0.5 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 0.2 0.0 − 1.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 2.5Real estate activities 102.6 103.6 105.0 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.7 0.9Business services 
1 104.0 106.6 109.2 0.6 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.2 1.8 2.7 2.2 3.4 1.8
Public services, education and
health 102.6 103.7 105.2 0.6 1.0 1.5 0.7 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.3 0.7Other services 98.4 98.5 98.9 − 0.9 0.1 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 0.3 0.1 1.2 0.3
Gross value added 104.4 106.0 107.6 0.3 1.5 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.0Gross domestic product 
2 104.4 106.1 107.9 0.3 1.6 1.7 1.2 1.6 1.3 1.6 1.7 2.1 1.3
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.0 103.9 106.1 0.6 0.9 2.0 0.5 1.6 2.3 1.7 2.2 1.9 1.8
Government consumption 103.0 104.8 107.4 0.8 1.7 2.5 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.4 2.4 3.0 2.7
Machinery and equipment 101.6 106.3 111.4 − 2.3 4.5 4.8 3.8 2.3 3.9 3.4 5.4 6.3 2.4Premises 107.5 110.7 111.0 − 1.1 2.9 0.3 − 0.0 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.2 3.2 1.9Other investment 
4 106.3 109.7 112.5 − 0.3 3.1 2.6 3.7 3.7 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.2
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1
Domestic demand 102.7 104.1 105.7 0.8 1.3 1.6 0.0 1.5 1.4 0.8 1.9 2.3 2.0Net exports 
6 . . . − 0.5 0.4 0.2 1.1 0.2 0.0 0.9 − 0.1 0.0 − 0.5
Exports 113.0 117.6 123.9 1.6 4.0 5.4 4.7 4.4 4.8 6.5 5.2 5.0 1.5Imports 109.9 114.0 120.7 3.1 3.7 5.8 2.4 4.6 5.8 5.4 6.2 5.9 3.1
Gross domestic product 
2 104.4 106.1 107.9 0.3 1.6 1.7 1.2 1.6 1.3 1.6 1.7 2.1 1.3
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,562.7 1,592.2 1,634.8 1.9 1.9 2.7 1.5 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.9 2.6 2.4
Government consumption 541.9 564.0 586.8 3.7 4.1 4.0 4.1 4.0 3.5 4.0 3.8 4.7 4.9Machinery and equipment 181.3 189.8 200.1 − 2.0 4.7 5.4 4.0 2.6 4.3 4.0 6.1 6.9 3.0Premises 277.2 291.8 297.6 1.6 5.2 2.0 1.8 2.7 − 0.2 1.7 1.8 4.7 3.2Other investment 
4 98.8 103.5 108.5 0.9 4.8 4.7 5.6 5.4 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.6 4.7
Changes in inventories 5 − 10.5 − 22.0 − 38.0 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,651.4 2,719.3 2,789.7 2.5 2.6 2.6 1.3 2.4 2.2 1.8 2.9 3.4 2.9Net exports 169.4 196.4 236.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,283.1 1,333.2 1,419.7 1.3 3.9 6.5 4.8 4.7 5.6 8.4 6.4 5.5 0.8Imports 1,113.7 1,136.8 1,183.5 1.3 2.1 4.1 1.1 3.1 3.4 4.6 4.9 3.5 0.0
Gross domestic product 
2 2,820.8 2,915.7 3,025.9 2.4 3.4 3.8 2.9 3.2 3.3 3.7 3.7 4.4 3.1
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 104.9 105.9 106.6 1.2 1.0 0.6 1.0 0.7 0.4 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.6Gross domestic product 104.7 106.6 108.7 2.1 1.7 2.1 1.7 1.6 2.0 2.1 1.9 2.2 1.8Terms of trade 98.3 99.7 102.4 1.4 1.5 2.7 1.3 1.7 3.1 2.6 2.4 2.8 2.5
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,430.8 1,485.3 1,541.3 2.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.9 3.9 3.8 4.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 665.8 690.9 719.9 0.9 3.8 4.2 4.2 1.5 4.0 2.9 4.1 5.8 1.8
National income 2,096.6 2,176.2 2,261.2 2.2 3.8 3.9 3.9 3.1 3.6 3.6 4.0 4.4 3.2
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,882.0 2,982.4 3,091.3 2.2 3.5 3.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 3.3 3.7 4.2 3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2016. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2012 106.3 105.9 97.4 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.7
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.8
2014 107.9 108.4 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.5 106.0 97.5 110.3 106.2 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.5 114.8 119.3
 
2015          Q2 108.4 108.3 91.3 110.6 107.7 117.5 101.5 100.7 113.4 108.0 115.9 120.3
         Q3 109.0 113.8 93.1 110.4 107.4 116.6 100.2 103.2 112.2 111.0 113.5 117.5
         Q4 111.3 117.9 100.7 111.7 103.3 122.6 105.4 104.4 109.7 111.3 122.5 116.5
2016          Q1 r 106.8 86.5 101.9 110.3 107.6 116.6 106.7 100.7 112.9 108.9 109.1 124.9
         Q2 x,p 108.7 107.2 89.0 111.4 108.0 118.8 105.3 101.2 114.4 109.1 112.7 124.7
 
2015          June 111.0 111.4 89.3 113.7 109.8 121.9 102.6 103.5 115.2 113.5 123.4 120.3
         July 2 111.7 116.0 94.2 113.4 109.9 121.0 97.2 104.8 114.8 111.7 116.1 126.8
         Aug 2 102.1 110.2 90.7 102.4 102.5 103.8 90.8 100.8 105.8 105.0 105.6 96.8
         Sep 113.3 115.1 94.5 115.5 109.9 125.1 112.7 103.9 116.0 116.2 118.9 129.0
         Oct 113.9 119.0 99.0 115.2 110.2 123.2 109.5 106.7 117.6 112.6 116.1 130.4
         Nov 115.7 120.6 101.3 116.9 109.5 127.0 113.4 108.7 117.1 115.8 121.3 129.5
         Dec 104.2 114.2 101.7 103.1 90.2 117.7 93.4 97.7 94.3 105.5 130.0 89.7
2016          Jan r 100.3 71.6 106.5 103.6 103.2 105.7 100.1 99.6 107.6 102.2 96.1 114.6
         Feb r 104.1 84.7 96.9 107.9 105.1 114.9 105.4 96.1 110.0 106.6 106.3 125.5
         Mar r 115.9 103.1 102.4 119.5 114.6 129.1 114.5 106.4 121.2 117.9 125.0 134.5
         Apr x 108.1 104.3 91.3 110.8 107.7 118.0 106.4 99.8 114.1 107.2 110.6 128.4
         May x 106.3 106.3 89.9 108.4 106.9 113.2 99.0 101.0 112.3 105.4 108.2 116.1
         June x,p 111.6 111.1 85.7 115.1 109.4 125.2 110.6 102.7 116.9 114.6 119.3 129.6
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 − 0.4 − 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.1
2013 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.9
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
2015 + 0.6 − 2.2 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
 
2015          Q2 + 1.2 − 2.0 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 3.4 − 1.3
         Q3 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 7.5 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Q4 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.0
2016          Q1 r + 1.5 + 2.8 − 2.6 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.8
         Q2 x,p + 0.3 − 1.0 − 2.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 2.8 + 3.7
 
2015          June + 1.3 − 3.3 + 7.3 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 3.4 − 2.1
         July 2 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 11.0 + 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.3
         Aug 2 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 6.7 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 4.8 + 8.9 + 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 15.7
         Sep + 0.2 − 2.6 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 1.0
         Oct + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 1.2 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.5
         Nov + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.6
         Dec − 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 2.7 − 4.5 − 7.0
2016          Jan r + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 6.1
         Feb r + 1.8 + 7.9 − 4.2 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 0.2
         Mar r + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 0.3
         Apr x + 0.7 − 1.3 − 4.2 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 1.4 + 6.3
         May x − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.1
         June x,p + 0.5 − 0.3 − 4.0 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 7.8 − 0.8 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 3.3 + 7.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.3 − 0.9 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.6 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2015          June 123.4 + 9.1 106.7 + 0.9 136.5 + 14.8 114.3 + 5.4 108.0 + 3.1 116.5 + 6.2
         July 116.6 + 0.0 105.0 − 1.3 124.4 + 0.3 118.7 + 3.5 107.8 + 10.0 122.6 + 1.7
         Aug 
102.7 + 2.4 93.4 − 1.2 108.4 + 5.3 109.7 − 0.6 99.5 + 5.9 113.3 − 2.5
         Sep 112.0 + 0.1 100.0 − 1.8 120.1 + 1.0 114.2 + 1.6 116.4 + 6.7 113.5 − 0.1
         Oct 113.8 − 1.0 102.9 − 3.9 120.6 + 0.0 120.2 + 4.9 114.8 + 5.8 122.1 + 4.5
         Nov 
116.6 + 1.7 105.3 + 1.1 124.9 + 2.1 115.4 + 1.9 109.6 + 4.6 117.4 + 1.0
         Dec 110.6 − 1.9 90.3 − 2.5 125.5 − 2.6 106.3 + 8.8 98.7 + 6.2 109.0 + 9.7
2016          Jan 114.1 + 0.2 102.8 − 5.2 120.3 + 2.0 126.6 + 11.6 116.1 + 10.6 130.3 + 12.0
         Feb 112.4 + 0.1 100.6 − 1.8 120.0 + 1.4 119.2 − 0.7 104.1 + 2.8 124.4 − 1.8
         Mar 127.3 + 1.4 108.8 − 3.9 141.1 + 4.3 123.1 + 4.9 118.0 + 3.6 124.9 + 5.2
         Apr 113.8 − 1.9 105.0 + 1.1 120.4 − 4.0 111.6 + 0.8 117.1 + 12.8 109.6 − 3.1
         May 112.2 − 1.3 101.1 − 3.3 120.1 − 0.3 111.9 + 0.9 100.3 − 1.5 115.9 + 1.6
         June p 118.5 − 4.0 102.4 − 4.0 130.5 − 4.4 113.7 − 0.5 110.2 + 2.0 114.9 − 1.4
From the domestic market
2011 109.7 + 10.3 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.8 + 0.9 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.8 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015
107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.7 106.3 + 4.0
2015          June 107.2 + 1.9 100.7 − 1.2 114.5 + 4.8 102.0 + 2.1 100.0 − 6.2 102.7 + 5.2
         July 112.4 + 3.6 101.5 − 2.5 123.5 + 9.3 110.7 + 2.2 104.6 + 3.0 112.9 + 2.0
         Aug 98.9 + 1.0 93.1 − 1.0 103.5 + 2.5 106.6 + 3.6 99.7 + 4.2 109.1 + 3.5
         Sep 105.4 + 3.1 96.2 − 0.6 114.3 + 6.8 107.8 + 2.4 115.0 + 2.4 105.3 + 2.4
         Oct 107.8 − 1.1 98.8 − 3.1 116.8 + 0.4 108.3 + 1.5 113.0 + 2.1 106.7 + 1.3
         Nov 110.4 + 4.2 102.0 + 1.8 119.1 + 6.2 108.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 2.0 108.2 + 6.8
         Dec 97.9 + 0.7 84.1 − 4.2 112.8 + 4.4 90.8 + 2.7 83.6 − 1.4 93.4 + 4.1
2016          Jan 105.6 − 2.3 98.3 − 5.7 112.7 + 0.4 107.1 + 0.8 105.1 + 3.3 107.8 − 0.1
         Feb 105.6 + 0.6 95.0 − 2.4 115.5 + 3.3 110.1 − 0.7 99.4 + 0.5 113.9 − 1.1
         Mar 117.2 − 4.2 102.9 − 5.1 132.3 − 4.2 113.1 + 2.0 114.7 + 5.7 112.6 + 0.7
         Apr 108.7 + 0.6 102.2 + 1.7 116.3 − 0.9 101.8 + 2.7 105.1 + 5.3 100.6 + 1.8
         May 105.1 − 0.7 95.6 − 5.4 114.5 + 2.9 105.5 + 4.7 94.6 + 2.6 109.4 + 5.4
         June p 108.4 + 1.1 96.6 − 4.1 121.5 + 6.1 100.2 − 1.8 100.2 + 0.2 100.2 − 2.4
From abroad
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.5 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.8 − 0.4 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.8 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.3 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.8 + 0.4 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.4 126.0 + 2.0
2015          June 136.6 + 14.3 113.8 + 3.3 150.1 + 20.2 124.9 + 8.0 115.0 + 11.3 128.3 + 7.0
         July 120.0 − 2.6 109.2 + 0.0 125.0 − 4.4 125.6 + 4.5 110.5 + 16.6 130.8 + 1.4
         Aug 
105.8 + 3.5 93.8 − 1.4 111.4 + 7.0 112.4 − 3.8 99.3 + 7.2 116.9 − 6.7
         Sep 117.3 − 2.0 104.5 − 3.0 123.6 − 2.1 119.7 + 1.0 117.6 + 10.6 120.4 − 1.9
         Oct 118.6 − 1.0 107.7 − 4.7 122.9 − 0.2 130.4 + 7.4 116.3 + 9.2 135.2 + 6.9
         Nov 121.7 − 0.2 109.2 + 0.2 128.4 − 0.2 121.5 − 0.7 110.7 + 7.0 125.2 − 2.9
         Dec 121.0 − 3.4 97.7 − 0.6 133.3 − 6.0 119.6 + 13.2 111.8 + 11.8 122.3 + 13.7
2016          Jan 121.0 + 1.9 108.2 − 4.6 125.0 + 3.0 143.3 + 19.9 125.6 + 16.5 149.4 + 21.0
         Feb 118.0 − 0.3 107.1 − 1.1 122.7 + 0.2 126.9 − 0.8 108.2 + 4.7 133.3 − 2.3
         Mar 135.5 + 5.8 115.8 − 2.6 146.5 + 9.7 131.6 + 7.0 120.9 + 1.9 135.3 + 8.7
         Apr 118.0 − 3.7 108.3 + 0.4 122.9 − 5.8 119.9 − 0.6 127.6 + 18.9 117.3 − 6.3
         May 118.0 − 1.8 107.5 − 1.0 123.6 − 2.1 117.3 − 1.9 105.2 − 4.5 121.5 − 1.1
         June p 126.7 − 7.2 109.2 − 4.0 136.1 − 9.3 125.2 + 0.2 119.0 + 3.5 127.3 − 0.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 107.1 + 7.5 112.1 + 12.4 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.8 91.5 − 8.1 102.0 + 2.5 112.7 + 13.2 95.9 − 3.7
2012 114.7 + 7.1 121.4 + 8.3 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.8 + 0.3 107.9 + 5.8 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
 
2015          May 132.8 + 4.0 138.2 + 5.6 167.9 + 6.9 131.0 + 6.6 101.3 − 1.6 127.4 + 2.2 130.6 + 8.6 120.9 − 2.1
         June 137.8 + 4.4 145.5 + 4.0 175.0 + 7.4 139.1 + 4.6 106.7 − 7.3 130.0 + 4.7 134.1 + 2.0 126.6 + 5.4
         July 132.0 − 3.4 139.4 − 0.4 184.5 + 28.1 120.3 − 18.4 107.2 − 1.9 124.6 − 6.5 120.7 − 13.6 122.4 − 6.1
         Aug 123.9 + 2.0 130.1 + 6.2 157.6 + 24.1 123.1 − 5.7 96.8 + 7.9 117.6 − 2.3 119.3 − 4.3 115.0 − 0.8         Sep 134.3 + 10.3 151.3 + 16.3 202.3 + 35.8 133.8 + 3.7 103.1 + 7.3 117.3 + 3.3 128.3 + 4.0 113.1 + 3.4
         Oct 117.7 + 3.5 128.0 − 1.0 158.4 + 4.2 116.4 − 10.0 102.8 + 21.7 107.5 + 9.7 120.5 + 1.1 98.6 + 6.4
         Nov 118.8 + 19.6 137.1 + 21.3 152.4 + 17.1 144.6 + 24.0 84.9 + 24.3 100.5 + 17.3 140.4 + 28.9 83.2 + 7.8         Dec 123.3 + 21.0 135.0 + 10.6 166.7 + 8.0 125.4 + 8.9 101.2 + 27.6 111.6 + 36.4 114.8 + 4.6 114.6 + 57.2
2016          Jan 108.5 + 13.9 117.7 + 15.5 147.4 + 20.5 106.6 + 6.1 92.0 + 40.0 99.3 + 11.8 111.5 + 7.0 89.7 + 19.0
         Feb 120.6 + 15.0 126.0 + 11.0 157.8 + 15.4 115.4 + 9.2 94.7 + 4.2 115.3 + 19.7 109.5 + 5.7 117.1 + 25.4         Mar 164.7 + 15.5 168.4 + 12.3 227.3 + 19.9 146.7 + 9.9 117.0 − 2.9 160.9 + 18.9 150.0 + 9.6 154.5 + 19.1
         Apr 151.0 + 18.9 155.3 + 16.7 195.8 + 14.2 142.3 + 20.0 114.0 + 13.0 146.7 + 21.3 140.3 + 18.8 143.8 + 21.7
         May 157.4 + 18.5 176.1 + 27.4 209.6 + 24.8 173.7 + 32.6 117.6 + 16.1 138.7 + 8.9 156.0 + 19.4 137.9 + 14.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.7 + 2.6 101.1 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.3 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 0.3 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.6 + 0.9 100.7 + 0.4 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.3 + 1.7 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.1 + 0.8 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.2 103.4 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 108.2 + 1.8 102.7 + 1.4 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.7 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 107.1 + 2.5
2015 3 111.2 + 2.8 105.6 + 2.8 114.8 + 2.9 105.4 + 0.5 95.9 + 1.4 104.8 + 2.8 117.0 + 5.7 115.4 + 7.7
 
2015          June 3 108.5 + 1.5 102.7 + 1.4 114.2 + 0.5 105.5 + 3.1 82.1 − 0.2 102.3 + 3.1 113.9 + 4.5 121.2 + 9.3
         July 111.6 + 4.0 106.3 + 4.1 115.6 + 3.2 108.1 + 4.6 90.9 + 1.0 103.4 + 4.0 120.0 + 5.4 118.6 + 9.2
         Aug 107.9 + 2.3 102.7 + 2.3 115.2 + 6.3 96.3 − 9.9 86.3 + 3.1 99.2 − 0.1 112.1 + 4.7 105.6 + 6.1         Sep 108.4 + 3.3 102.7 + 3.5 110.1 + 3.8 111.6 + 3.8 93.3 + 1.9 102.1 + 3.3 114.1 + 5.3 114.5 + 6.9
         Oct 114.4 + 2.6 108.0 + 2.2 115.6 + 1.9 120.6 + 6.1 98.1 − 0.4 110.7 + 1.9 119.7 + 4.7 124.7 + 7.5
         Nov 115.8 + 2.8 109.8 + 2.2 116.5 + 3.2 104.5 − 2.8 110.9 + 1.2 114.7 + 3.7 123.1 + 6.3 124.4 + 10.4         Dec 131.4 + 3.4 125.7 + 3.2 133.9 + 3.6 124.2 + 0.6 148.5 + 1.3 113.5 + 5.7 131.2 + 4.5 106.4 + 4.5
2016          Jan 103.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 2.0 108.3 + 3.5 92.2 + 3.7 99.1 − 2.4 93.2 + 3.0 116.5 + 3.9 105.6 + 10.1
         Feb 99.9 + 1.9 95.5 + 1.8 105.6 + 3.5 80.2 − 1.7 85.8 − 0.1 94.4 + 4.0 113.6 + 4.3 110.6 + 9.1
         Mar 113.3 + 0.5 107.2 + 0.5 117.0 + 1.2 97.4 − 8.1 91.3 + 1.2 112.1 − 0.2 123.4 + 3.7 134.4 + 4.7
         Apr 112.7 + 0.4 106.0 + 0.4 117.0 + 0.1 112.7 + 3.2 81.9 + 0.1 111.5 + 2.1 118.6 + 1.9 130.5 + 6.0
         May 112.9 + 1.1 106.2 + 1.0 117.9 + 0.4 109.2 + 1.2 79.6 − 2.0 110.1 + 1.7 118.6 + 4.8 125.3 + 4.1         June 
4 110.2 + 1.6 104.2 + 1.5 116.5 + 2.0 104.4 − 1.0 82.8 + 0.9 104.8 + 2.4 115.7 + 1.6 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2015 are provisional,
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimat es for missing reports.
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In 4 Unadjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector r ment r ment r butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2011 41,577 + 1.4 28,687 + 2.4 8,580 19,094 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 r 42,062 r + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 r 42,327 r + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 r 42,662 r + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 r 43,057 r + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 88 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2013          Q2 r 42,262 r + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,747 19,867 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459
         Q3 r 42,512 r + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,810 19,955 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471
         Q4 r 42,644 r + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,878 20,234 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 r 42,214 r + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,760 20,103 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 r 42,626 r + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,829 20,255 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487
         Q3 r 42,849 r + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 799 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 r 42,958 r + 0.7 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 r 42,512 r + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 r 42,985 r + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560
         Q3 r 43,272 r + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595
         Q4 r 43,457 r + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 77 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016          Q1 r 43,053 r + 1.3 8 31,069 8 + 2.3 8 8,928 8 21,124 8 793 8 4,784 ... 8 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 9 43,514 9 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,674 782 10 6.1 653
2013          Mar r 41,937 r + 0.7 29,423 + 1.2 8,703 19,801 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463
         Apr r 42,095 r + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,746 19,866 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460
         May r 42,301 r + 0.7 29,637 + 1.2 8,763 19,902 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457
         June r 42,390 r + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,764 19,866 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459
         July r 42,425 r + 0.7 29,596 + 1.2 8,769 19,817 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469
         Aug r 42,475 r + 0.5 29,843 + 1.2 8,826 20,002 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471
         Sep r 42,635 r + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,906 20,228 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473
         Oct r 42,731 r + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,900 20,255 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466
         Nov r 42,710 r + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,889 20,252 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458
         Dec r 42,490 r + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,783 20,161 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan r 42,164 r + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,739 20,060 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb r 42,183 r + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,750 20,088 729 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456
         Mar r 42,296 r + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,797 20,162 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476
         Apr r 42,486 r + 0.9 30,060 + 1.7 8,826 20,244 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485
         May r 42,643 r + 0.8 30,125 + 1.6 8,836 20,292 751 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481
         June r 42,748 r + 0.8 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July r 42,780 r + 0.8 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502
         Aug r 42,804 r + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep r 42,964 r + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct r 43,053 r + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517
         Nov r 43,010 r + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515
         Dec r 42,810 r + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan r 42,443 r + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb r 42,464 r + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
         Mar r 42,630 r + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr r 42,820 r + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
         May r 43,002 r + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557
         June r 43,134 r + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July r 43,177 r + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589
         Aug r 43,232 r + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597
         Sep r 43,408 r + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600
         Oct r 43,492 r + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
         Nov r 43,526 r + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610
         Dec r 43,353 r + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 105 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016          Jan r 42,979 r + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 169 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,011 r + 1.3 8 31,057 8 + 2.4 8 8,922 8 21,118 8 794 8 4,763 ... 8 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,170 r + 1.3 8 31,224 8 + 2.3 8 8,956 8 21,226 8 808 8 4,783 ... 8 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,344 r + 1.2 8 31,327 8 + 2.2 8 8,985 8 21,287 8 813 8 4,809 ... 8 56 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,530 r + 1.2 8 31,416 8 + 2.3 8 9,001 8 21,338 8 829 8 4,844 ... 8 46 2,664 774 10 6.0 655
         June 9 43,667 9 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,661 805 6.0 674
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2014
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- and 2015, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 0.3 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal 1.4 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 31.2 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9Initial preliminary estimate
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding by the Federal Statistical Office. 10From May 2016 calculated on the basis of new la-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located bour force figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 155.2 135.9
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 106.9 112.4 105.1 107.4 106.9 106.7 111.3 103.9 8 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
 
2014          Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 107.9 104.3 103.8 144.6 105.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 103.7 104.2 103.5 135.8 105.7
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 103.6 104.2 102.7 126.7 106.7
         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 102.7 103.9 101.0 108.2 104.9
2015          Jan 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.3 106.1 104.2 102.4 104.4 100.2 92.1 106.8
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 104.8 104.7 101.6 108.0 105.9
         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.1 105.3 102.6 109.0 107.1
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 104.5 106.0 105.6 103.2 115.5 105.6
         May 107.1 113.2 105.1 110.9 106.2 106.5 111.1 104.5 104.8 105.4 103.0 116.8 104.7
         June 107.0 112.6 104.9 110.4 106.3 106.6 104.4 105.3 105.3 102.5 113.3 103.4
         July 107.2 111.8 104.4 109.8 107.8 106.7 104.4 104.5 105.4 101.8 106.0 101.6
         Aug 107.2 111.5 104.9 107.5 108.1 106.8 111.5 103.9 102.1 104.9 100.3 91.5 96.0
         Sep 107.0 112.1 105.9 105.7 107.0 106.9 103.5 8 107.4 104.6 99.6 90.8 94.1
         Oct 107.0 112.7 106.1 104.9 106.9 107.0 103.1 108.9 104.4 99.3 91.6 93.4
         Nov 107.1 112.9 106.0 105.0 107.1 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.6 104.5 99.1 89.6 92.7
         Dec 107.0 112.4 105.6 102.0 108.4 107.1 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016          Jan 106.1 112.4 105.0 99.5 106.8 107.3 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 106.5 113.2 105.1 98.6 107.7 107.4 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6
         Mar 107.3 113.7 106.1 99.6 108.8 107.5 101.2 106.5 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 106.9 113.8 106.8 100.5 106.6 107.6 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 107.2 113.2 106.7 102.1 107.5 107.7 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2
         June 107.3 112.7 106.1 103.3 108.0 107.8 102.1 ... 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July e 107.6 113.0 105.6 102.1 109.6 107.9 ... ... ... ... 84.4 100.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 33.7 + 15.8
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.8 8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
 
2014          Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 10.7 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 11.1 − 7.2
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 14.5 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 − 4.5
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 15.3 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.4 − 4.8
         Dec + 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 16.1 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 32.7 − 6.3
2015          Jan − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 − 14.3 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 41.4 − 3.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 12.2 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 30.1 − 4.6
         Mar + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.7 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 27.3 − 2.9
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.5 − 12.5 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 21.6 − 6.4
         May + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 21.5 − 5.8
         June + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 1.4 − 10.5 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 25.0 − 4.6
         July + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 6.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 8.3 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 26.5 − 5.1
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 8.4 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 35.5 − 10.4
         Sep + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.1 8 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 37.2 − 10.4
         Oct + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 8.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 32.5 − 11.6
         Nov + 0.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 − 7.5 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 29.3 − 13.1
         Dec + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 6.5 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016          Jan + 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 5.8 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb + 0.0 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar + 0.3 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 8.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 1.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 8.5 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 7.9 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 6.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 2.2 ... − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July e + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 7.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 20.4 − 1.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided gas. 6Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From September 2015
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding onwards, provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2008
1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.2 0.5 1,029.1 2.4 1,582.6 2.6 165.9 4.9 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.2 7.0 1,055.7 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 387.7 1.2 1,089.9 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 383.0 − 1.2 1,112.4 2.1 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.5 4.1 757.8 3.9 389.3 1.6 1,147.1 3.1 1,690.4 2.2 156.5 − 1.0 9.3
2013 1,168.3 3.1 779.7 2.9 398.5 2.4 1,178.2 2.7 1,719.8 1.7 157.1 0.4 9.1
2014 1,213.7 3.9 808.1 3.6 409.8 2.8 1,217.8 3.4 1,759.7 2.3 167.6 6.7 9.5
2015 1,261.1 3.9 836.5 3.5 426.5 4.1 1,263.0 3.7 1,809.8 2.8 175.0 4.4 9.7
2014          Q4 334.8 3.8 222.0 3.5 102.6 4.7 324.6 3.9 447.5 3.1 36.7 13.0 8.2
2015          Q1 292.5 3.5 193.9 2.8 108.5 4.2 302.4 3.3 448.3 2.8 58.0 4.0 12.9
         Q2 308.6 4.1 200.2 3.4 105.2 4.7 305.3 3.8 447.9 2.8 41.7 4.9 9.3
         Q3 311.8 4.1 211.5 3.7 106.8 4.2 318.4 3.9 453.7 3.0 36.7 3.9 8.1
         Q4 348.2 4.0 231.0 4.1 106.0 3.3 337.0 3.8 459.9 2.8 38.6 5.1 8.4
2016          Q1 305.0 4.3 202.0 4.2 111.4 2.7 313.5 3.7 459.6 2.5 60.0 3.5 13.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2016. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2008 96.5 2.8 96.3 2.9 96.2 3.1 95.9 3.3 97.6 2.4
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.3 2.2 98.2 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.6 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.82013 107.1 2.5 107.1 2.5 107.4 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.4 2.8 110.4 2.9 111.4 2.7
2015 112.9 2.4 112.7 2.3 113.0 2.4 113.0 2.4 114.4 2.8
2015          Q1 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 104.3 2.3 111.7 2.3 107.5 2.5
         Q2 105.9 2.3 105.7 2.2 106.1 2.3 112.8 2.4 112.3 3.0         Q3 115.2 2.5 115.0 2.4 115.3 2.4 113.7 2.5 112.8 2.9         Q4 126.1 2.4 125.9 2.4 126.2 2.4 113.9 2.4 125.0 2.7
2016          Q1 106.6 2.0 106.4 2.0 106.7 2.3 114.3 2.3 110.4 2.7
         Q2 108.2 2.2 108.0 2.2 108.1 1.9 115.2 2.1 . .
2015          Dec 108.2 2.1 108.0 2.0 108.3 2.1 113.9 2.4 . .
2016          Jan 106.4 2.3 106.3 2.2 106.6 2.4 114.1 2.4 . .
         Feb 106.4 2.1 106.2 2.1 106.5 2.3 114.1 2.3 . .
         Mar 107.0 1.6 106.8 1.6 107.1 2.3 114.8 2.3 . .
         Apr 108.3 2.1 108.1 2.0 108.3 1.9 114.9 2.0 . .
         May 108.1 1.9 108.0 1.9 108.2 1.8 115.3 2.3 . .
         June 108.2 2.6 108.0 2.5 107.6 1.9 115.3 1.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2016. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.1 176.8 160.9
2012 1,904.7 1,178.7 380.6 490.5 240.6 726.0 189.9 179.1 125.9 561.6 1,343.1 719.0 380.1 624.1 180.0 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.3 635.9 191.3 166.8
2014 2,117.2 1,311.0 433.0 534.4 260.1 806.3 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.0 1,529.2 835.3 434.3 693.9 216.0 179.8
2015 p 2,277.7 1,428.2 476.5 582.6 283.4 849.5 216.8 195.8 140.9 642.1 1,635.5 887.6 475.2 747.9 234.6 186.2
2015          Q1 2,257.4 1,399.4 456.7 558.9 284.4 858.0 220.3 212.5 139.0 607.7 1,649.8 910.0 454.1 739.7 224.9 184.3
         Q2 2,218.5 1,384.0 459.8 557.6 281.8 834.5 219.1 204.4 132.0 629.9 1,588.6 857.6 449.8 731.0 224.7 180.7         Q3 2,206.1 1,368.1 450.6 553.4 277.8 838.0 219.0 195.9 142.1 622.7 1,583.4 861.4 450.4 722.0 213.9 179.3         Q4
p 2,277.7 1,428.2 476.5 582.6 283.4 849.5 216.8 195.8 140.9 642.1 1,635.5 887.6 475.2 747.9 234.6 186.2
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.8 9.5 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014 100.0 61.9 20.5 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2015 p 100.0 62.7 20.9 25.6 12.4 37.3 9.5 8.6 6.2 28.2 71.8 39.0 20.9 32.8 10.3 8.2
2015          Q1 100.0 62.0 20.2 24.8 12.6 38.0 9.8 9.4 6.2 26.9 73.1 40.3 20.1 32.8 10.0 8.2
         Q2 100.0 62.4 20.7 25.1 12.7 37.6 9.9 9.2 6.0 28.4 71.6 38.7 20.3 33.0 10.1 8.2
         Q3 100.0 62.0 20.4 25.1 12.6 38.0 9.9 8.9 6.4 28.2 71.8 39.1 20.4 32.7 9.7 8.1
         Q4 p 100.0 62.7 20.9 25.6 12.4 37.3 9.5 8.6 6.2 28.2 71.8 39.0 20.9 32.8 10.3 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.7 921.3 258.9 388.0 222.1 619.4 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.7 1,097.0 581.8 286.6 515.2 161.0 116.5
2013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 286.2 521.4 170.4 118.6
2014 1,693.7 1,016.3 278.4 425.8 246.5 677.4 187.0 143.6 102.1 456.2 1,237.5 667.4 325.9 570.0 194.4 126.4
2015 p 1,819.9 1,102.0 305.8 460.6 268.2 717.9 199.9 150.0 108.2 491.1 1,328.7 712.3 360.0 616.4 209.5 131.3
2015          Q1 1,810.1 1,084.9 291.7 445.3 269.4 725.2 202.3 162.9 108.4 470.3 1,339.8 730.0 341.4 609.8 202.0 134.5         Q2 1,782.5 1,075.0 295.2 446.2 267.7 707.5 202.0 156.0 107.0 492.7 1,289.8 693.7 343.5 596.1 195.9 132.0         Q3 1,771.2 1,058.9 286.4 440.9 263.7 712.3 201.8 148.8 114.7 482.6 1,288.5 697.3 345.0 591.2 185.1 129.7         Q4
p 1,819.9 1,102.0 305.8 460.6 268.2 717.9 199.9 150.0 108.2 491.1 1,328.7 712.3 360.0 616.4 209.5 131.3
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.4 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.6 40.0 11.0 8.5 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2015 p 100.0 60.6 16.8 25.3 14.7 39.5 11.0 8.2 5.9 27.0 73.0 39.1 19.8 33.9 11.5 7.2
2015          Q1 100.0 59.9 16.1 24.6 14.9 40.1 11.2 9.0 6.0 26.0 74.0 40.3 18.9 33.7 11.2 7.4
         Q2 100.0 60.3 16.6 25.0 15.0 39.7 11.3 8.8 6.0 27.6 72.4 38.9 19.3 33.4 11.0 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.8 16.2 24.9 14.9 40.2 11.4 8.4 6.5 27.3 72.8 39.4 19.5 33.4 10.5 7.3
         Q4 p 100.0 60.6 16.8 25.3 14.7 39.5 11.0 8.2 5.9 27.0 73.0 39.1 19.8 33.9 11.5 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.1
2012 364.0 257.4 121.7 102.6 18.4 106.5 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.9 246.1 137.1 93.6 108.9 18.9 44.2
2013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.8 48.2
2014 423.5 294.7 154.7 108.6 13.6 128.9 17.4 47.1 33.7 131.8 291.7 167.9 108.4 123.8 21.6 53.4
2015 p 457.8 326.1 170.7 122.1 15.2 131.7 16.9 45.7 32.8 151.0 306.8 175.3 115.1 131.5 25.1 54.9
2015          Q1 447.3 314.5 165.0 113.6 14.9 132.8 17.9 49.6 30.6 137.3 310.0 180.1 112.7 129.9 23.0 49.8
         Q2 436.0 309.1 164.6 111.4 14.1 126.9 17.1 48.3 25.0 137.3 298.8 163.9 106.3 134.9 28.8 48.7
         Q3 434.9 309.2 164.2 112.5 14.1 125.6 17.2 47.1 27.4 140.0 294.8 164.0 105.3 130.8 28.8 49.6
         Q4 p 457.8 326.1 170.7 122.1 15.2 131.7 16.9 45.7 32.8 151.0 306.8 175.3 115.1 131.5 25.1 54.9
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.1
2012 100.0 70.7 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.3 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.6 37.7 25.7 29.9 5.2 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 8.0 31.1 68.9 39.6 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 p 100.0 71.2 37.3 26.7 3.3 28.8 3.7 10.0 7.2 33.0 67.0 38.3 25.1 28.7 5.5 12.0
2015          Q1 100.0 70.3 36.9 25.4 3.3 29.7 4.0 11.1 6.8 30.7 69.3 40.3 25.2 29.0 5.1 11.1
         Q2 100.0 70.9 37.8 25.6 3.2 29.1 3.9 11.1 5.7 31.5 68.5 37.6 24.4 30.9 6.6 11.2
         Q3 100.0 71.1 37.8 25.9 3.2 28.9 3.9 10.8 6.3 32.2 67.8 37.7 24.2 30.1 6.6 11.4
         Q4 p 100.0 71.2 37.3 26.7 3.3 28.8 3.7 10.0 7.2 33.0 67.0 38.3 25.1 28.7 5.5 12.0
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2007 1,234.1 4.4 173.6 15.1 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.6 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.3 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 177.9 − 0.3 12.4 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.7 6.6 190.8 3.3 12.3 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 96.9 − 7.1 6.2 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 188.5 − 2.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.0 9.9 18.2 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2014 1,586.1 1.0 200.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.6 10.2 17.2 109.2 7.4 6.9 0.4 1.8 6.2 11.1
2015 p 1,672.7 6.6 199.5 − 0.5 11.9 − 0.9 5.9 10.5 17.3 91.8 − 15.5 5.5 − 1.4 1.4 6.4 10.8
2013          Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.2 − 1.0 12.3 0.1 5.1 10.3 16.1 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8         Q4 406.7 − 0.4 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.1 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.2 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 − 0.1 50.2 8.9 13.2 1.1 3.7 8.7 16.2 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.1 10.2
         Q2 386.7 − 2.0 47.9 − 0.2 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 2.3 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1         Q3 394.7 2.8 49.9 3.9 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.2 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7         Q4 423.6 3.0 52.8 7.2 12.5 0.5 4.0 11.6 19.3 23.5 8.7 5.6 0.3 0.5 6.7 12.0
2015          Q1 409.8 7.3 51.2 1.9 12.5 − 0.7 4.5 9.7 17.2 28.8 − 5.9 7.0 − 1.0 − 0.8 5.9 11.4
         Q2 425.7 9.9 52.9 10.2 12.4 0.0 4.7 9.7 16.6 30.8 16.6 7.2 0.4 1.3 5.6 10.9         Q3 416.8 5.4 49.5 − 0.6 11.9 − 0.7 4.8 10.5 16.6 17.2 − 39.5 4.1 − 3.1 1.0 6.3 11.5         Q4
p 437.0 3.9 46.3 − 12.5 10.6 − 2.0 6.9 11.7 18.3 15.4 − 35.1 3.5 − 2.1 2.2 7.4 12.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.9 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.1 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.2 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.1 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.3 7.6 143.1 5.5 12.0 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.8 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.7 140.2 − 2.2 11.7 − 0.2 4.3 9.9 15.4 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.82014 1,217.7 0.9 149.9 5.7 12.3 0.6 5.1 9.4 15.1 81.8 7.8 6.7 0.4 1.0 5.8 9.9
2015
p 1,301.8 6.6 146.3 − 2.2 11.2 − 1.0 6.1 10.2 15.1 64.8 − 19.4 5.0 − 1.7 1.3 6.3 9.8
2013          Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4
         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 33.4 − 0.4 11.5 0.2 4.5 10.1 15.0 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.5 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.3 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.1 39.1 6.4 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.7 14.5 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.3 5.3 9.0
         Q2 297.2 − 2.3 36.1 0.3 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 − 0.2 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3 300.0 3.3 36.4 6.3 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 12.6 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3         Q4 322.9 2.8 38.4 10.1 11.9 0.8 3.3 10.6 15.6 15.5 9.1 4.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 10.3
2015          Q1 319.0 7.0 41.2 5.4 12.9 − 0.2 5.4 9.7 14.9 25.3 1.4 7.9 − 0.4 0.9 6.0 9.6
         Q2 329.0 10.5 40.1 11.2 12.2 0.1 4.4 9.5 15.2 24.1 17.9 7.3 0.5 1.4 5.3 9.7         Q3 316.5 5.3 34.3 − 5.2 10.8 − 1.2 4.6 10.0 15.1 8.8 − 54.6 2.8 − 4.0 1.0 5.8 10.1         Q4
p 338.0 4.0 30.7 − 19.8 9.1 − 2.7 5.9 11.0 16.2 6.6 − 53.8 2.0 − 2.8 2.0 6.4 10.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2007 333.5 6.4 43.9 9.3 13.2 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.32008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.2 8.7 13.3 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.4 3.0 47.7 − 3.3 13.3 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.22014 368.4 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.2 12.7 23.2 27.4 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 7.2 14.1
2015
p 370.9 6.4 53.3 5.3 14.4 − 0.1 5.9 11.1 22.1 27.0 − 1.5 7.3 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.0
2013          Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9
         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.6 11.1 20.1 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 49.8 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.5 11.9 − 1.8 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 10.0 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8         Q4 100.7 3.7 14.4 − 1.6 14.3 − 0.7 5.4 15.6 25.3 8.1 7.5 8.0 0.2 2.1 8.4 19.5
2015          Q1 90.9 8.7 10.1 − 12.1 11.1 − 2.7 3.8 9.6 22.2 3.5 − 45.4 3.9 − 3.4 − 2.6 5.6 14.3
         Q2 96.7 7.8 12.8 7.0 13.2 − 0.1 5.0 11.4 21.7 6.7 11.2 6.9 0.2 1.3 6.7 13.8         Q3 100.3 5.9 15.2 13.8 15.2 1.1 5.2 12.1 20.0 8.4 9.1 8.4 0.3 0.7 7.1 13.1         Q4
p 99.0 3.5 15.6 9.7 15.8 0.9 7.8 14.1 26.2 8.7 9.2 8.8 0.5 2.3 9.7 17.5
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2015 2016
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May p
Current account + 215,159 + 251,343 + 329,586 + 97,315 + 106,287 + 60,610 + 36,771 + 36,088 + 15,390 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,914,039 1,968,822 2,114,420 526,662 539,441 501,888 184,880 175,560 168,217
Imports 1,703,470 1,721,229 1,760,112 437,146 440,407 420,541 145,455 140,862 137,067
Balance + 210,569 + 247,594 + 354,310 + 89,516 + 99,035 + 81,346 + 39,425 + 34,699 + 31,149
2 Services
Receipts 647,717 707,405 769,169 202,613 199,912 177,758 62,370 59,104 62,235
Expenditure 578,716 631,846 711,110 183,865 187,470 168,954 58,079 53,594 54,723
Balance + 69,001 + 75,558 + 58,061 + 18,751 + 12,443 + 8,803 + 4,291 + 5,511 + 7,512
3 Primary income
Receipts 611,127 633,589 621,913 147,343 160,529 142,621 51,308 48,700 46,615
Expenditure 531,996 563,804 572,481 136,419 135,510 128,129 45,539 44,013 61,395
Balance + 79,131 + 69,789 + 49,428 + 10,923 + 25,018 + 14,492 + 5,769 + 4,687 − 14,780
4 Secondary income
Receipts 88,185 92,947 103,260 23,929 26,258 22,558 7,820 8,312 10,263
Expenditure 231,725 234,539 235,475 45,804 56,468 66,590 20,534 17,120 18,755
Balance − 143,539 − 141,593 − 132,211 − 21,873 − 30,209 − 44,032 − 12,714 − 8,808 − 8,492
Capital account + 20,588 + 19,086 − 15,587 + 5,297 + 6,305 − 953 − 127 + 253 − 30 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 350,211 + 370,297 + 274,597 + 57,717 + 170,644 + 48,868 + 70,765 + 42,863 + 44,107 C
1 Direct investment − 58,477 + 59,624 + 108,983 − 10,391 + 39,287 + 43,527 + 30,453 + 7,863 + 36,836
By resident units abroad + 611,335 + 195,890 + 635,768 + 114,014 + 181,324 + 165,670 + 43,966 + 20,299 + 57,502
By non-resident units in the euro area + 669,813 + 136,262 + 526,787 + 124,406 + 142,038 + 122,143 + 13,513 + 12,436 + 20,667
2 Portfolio investment − 3,844 + 113,297 + 201,330 + 94,330 + 121,540 + 142,649 + 21,452 + 121,134 + 9,853
By resident units abroad + 258,618 + 455,442 + 395,319 + 25,547 + 105,444 + 134,951 + 51,876 + 73,245 + 31,101
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 171,690 + 143,539 + 12,577 − 13,330 − 4,109 − 17,519 + 5,470 + 14,615 + 8,439
Long-term debt securities + 79,370 + 222,275 + 371,797 + 71,011 + 74,905 + 140,305 + 38,677 + 73,992 + 29,442
Short-term debt securities + 7,559 + 89,628 + 10,944 − 32,134 + 34,648 + 12,164 + 7,729 − 15,362 − 6,780
By non-resident units in the euro area + 262,463 + 342,144 + 193,989 − 68,783 − 16,096 − 7,698 + 30,424 − 47,889 + 21,248
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 189,935 + 262,328 + 239,360 + 4,756 + 54,205 − 7,916 + 3,083 + 18,453 + 7,254
Long-term debt securities + 64,320 + 98,062 + 8,766 − 61,331 − 11,180 − 23,511 + 26,933 − 90,088 + 13,005
Short-term debt securities + 8,208 − 18,242 − 54,136 − 12,209 − 59,120 + 23,730 + 408 + 23,745 + 989
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 14,605 + 42,827 + 84,892 − 1,192 + 54,203 + 18,559 − 3,096 − 6,116 − 1,639
4 Other investment + 393,233 + 150,171 − 131,174 − 27,702 − 48,966 − 156,837 + 20,892 − 78,420 − 4,064
Eurosystem + 57,972 + 55,790 − 13,537 − 18,210 + 3,184 − 7,278 − 4,869 − 6,860 + 5,362
General government − 9,132 + 10,692 + 20,032 + 3,832 + 1,906 + 8,245 − 798 − 4,348 + 3,093
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 262,772 + 101,813 − 128,148 − 33,056 − 44,254 − 85,405 + 21,641 − 68,054 + 5,665
Enterprises and households + 81,622 − 18,125 − 9,520 + 19,733 − 9,802 − 72,399 + 4,917 + 843 − 18,184
5 Reserve assets + 4,691 + 4,380 + 10,568 + 2,672 + 4,579 + 970 + 1,064 − 1,599 + 3,120
Net errors and omissions + 114,462 + 99,869 − 39,401 − 44,896 + 58,051 − 10,791 + 34,120 + 6,522 + 28,747 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2001 − 7,911 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,155 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,116
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,6062003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,960
2006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,1302008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,351
2011 + 164,581 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,482 + 69,156 − 35,520 + 1,642 + 120,858 + 2,836 − 45,365
2012 + 193,593 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 65,825 − 39,858 − 413 + 144,802 + 1,297 − 48,3782013 + 190,420 + 211,647 − 4,331 − 43,223 + 65,754 − 43,758 − 591 + 218,884 + 838 + 29,0562014 + 212,880 + 226,499 − 7,739 − 35,353 + 62,387 − 40,653 + 1,138 + 244,434 − 2,564 + 30,4152015 + 256,144 + 263,185 − 4,407 − 31,230 + 63,739 − 39,550 − 159 + 225,848 − 2,213 − 30,137
2013          Q3 + 41,102 + 50,743 − 3,290 − 16,483 + 16,129 − 9,287 − 5 + 54,577 − 785 + 13,480
         Q4 + 62,069 + 53,496 − 1,273 − 6,470 + 26,157 − 11,114 − 1,738 + 71,558 + 1,464 + 11,227
2014          Q1 + 48,137 + 52,292 + 168 − 6,298 + 17,061 − 14,918 + 2,142 + 60,264 − 565 + 9,985
         Q2 + 44,982 + 54,295 − 2,031 − 7,242 + 4,641 − 6,712 + 519 + 55,960 − 610 + 10,458         Q3 + 54,257 + 60,313 − 2,818 − 15,461 + 17,223 − 7,818 + 367 + 59,283 + 332 + 4,659         Q4 + 65,503 + 59,599 − 3,058 − 6,352 + 23,462 − 11,206 − 1,890 + 68,927 − 1,722 + 5,313
2015          Q1 + 58,230 + 60,426 − 1,680 − 4,714 + 18,340 − 15,822 + 218 + 30,366 − 21 − 28,082
         Q2 + 58,504 + 69,391 − 2,043 − 5,941 + 2,107 − 7,052 + 1,098 + 72,772 − 465 + 13,170         Q3 + 65,959 + 68,045 + 577 − 13,852 + 18,393 − 6,628 + 703 + 64,091 − 1,455 − 2,571         Q4 + 73,451 + 65,323 − 1,260 − 6,722 + 24,898 − 10,048 − 2,178 + 58,620 − 272 − 12,654
2016          Q1 + 64,695 + 64,437 + 333 − 5,707 + 19,425 − 13,460 − 417 + 22,749 + 1,228 − 41,529
         Q2 
p + 73,063 + 78,178 − 42 − 5,151 + 4,469 − 4,433 + 1,560 + 58,294 + 761 − 16,329
2014          Jan + 13,276 + 15,435 − 945 − 2,527 + 4,741 − 4,371 + 1,486 + 2,235 − 375 − 12,527         Feb + 13,109 + 17,038 − 278 − 2,507 + 5,908 − 7,330 + 417 + 22,757 − 898 + 9,231         Mar + 21,752 + 19,819 + 1,391 − 1,263 + 6,413 − 3,217 + 239 + 35,273 + 708 + 13,281
         Apr + 16,501 + 18,418 − 720 − 1,585 + 2,911 − 3,243 + 186 + 29,516 + 151 + 12,830
         May + 12,180 + 17,917 − 1,675 − 1,948 − 2,726 − 1,063 − 72 + 9,435 − 631 − 2,673         June + 16,301 + 17,960 + 363 − 3,708 + 4,456 − 2,406 + 405 + 17,008 − 130 + 302
         July + 20,303 + 22,747 − 1,684 − 4,991 + 5,562 − 3,016 − 402 + 13,449 + 431 − 6,452
         Aug + 10,707 + 14,254 − 748 − 6,617 + 5,430 − 2,359 + 426 + 13,062 + 166 + 1,930         Sep + 23,247 + 23,312 − 385 − 3,853 + 6,231 − 2,442 + 343 + 32,772 − 265 + 9,181
         Oct + 21,331 + 22,823 − 1,448 − 4,994 + 6,058 − 2,556 − 112 + 15,294 + 203 − 5,926
         Nov + 18,686 + 18,095 − 382 − 2,039 + 6,130 − 3,500 + 152 + 22,905 + 30 + 4,067         Dec + 25,486 + 18,681 − 1,228 + 681 + 11,274 − 5,150 − 1,930 + 30,728 − 1,955 + 7,172
2015          Jan + 14,904 + 15,713 − 1,154 − 1,713 + 5,103 − 4,199 + 20 − 3,644 + 372 − 18,569
         Feb + 16,279 + 19,585 − 948 − 1,625 + 5,826 − 7,505 + 24 + 11,597 + 266 − 4,707         Mar + 27,046 + 25,129 + 422 − 1,376 + 7,411 − 4,117 + 173 + 22,413 − 660 − 4,806
         Apr + 21,546 + 22,552 − 1,240 − 1,432 + 3,303 − 2,877 + 348 + 31,171 − 69 + 9,276
         May + 11,683 + 21,472 − 437 − 2,002 − 5,805 − 1,982 + 557 + 17,542 − 78 + 5,301         June + 25,275 + 25,366 − 367 − 2,507 + 4,609 − 2,194 + 192 + 24,059 − 318 − 1,408
         July + 25,385 + 25,485 − 1,024 − 4,339 + 6,553 − 2,314 + 462 + 20,319 − 1,170 − 5,528
         Aug + 14,429 + 16,856 + 472 − 5,423 + 5,735 − 2,739 + 40 + 19,461 − 180 + 4,992         Sep + 26,144 + 25,704 + 1,129 − 4,090 + 6,106 − 1,575 + 201 + 24,311 − 105 − 2,035
         Oct + 22,157 + 24,283 + 23 − 5,847 + 6,808 − 3,087 − 94 + 16,509 + 154 − 5,554
         Nov + 25,371 + 22,722 − 378 − 1,741 + 6,874 − 2,485 + 163 + 20,203 − 548 − 5,331         Dec + 25,923 + 18,318 − 905 + 866 + 11,216 − 4,476 − 2,248 + 21,908 + 123 − 1,768
2016          Jan + 14,160 + 13,749 − 183 − 2,455 + 5,140 − 2,275 − 89 − 5,751 − 186 − 19,822
         Feb + 20,896 + 22,626 + 673 − 1,143 + 6,932 − 7,518 + 426 + 9,125 + 1,478 − 12,197         Mar + 29,640 + 28,062 − 158 − 2,109 + 7,353 − 3,666 − 754 + 19,375 − 64 − 9,511
         Apr + 28,351 + 27,650 − 188 − 845 + 3,238 − 1,692 + 1,267 + 36,312 + 696 + 6,694
         May + 18,403 + 23,759 + 500 − 1,584 − 3,181 − 591 + 153 + 4,135 + 776 − 14,420         June 
p + 26,309 + 26,768 − 354 − 2,722 + 4,413 − 2,149 + 141 + 17,847 − 711 − 8,603
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2016
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2016
Ländergruppe/Land  2013  2014  2015 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,088,025 1,123,746 1,196,378 88,596 99,401 106,846 104,344 97,224 106,836
Imports 890,393 910,145 948,504 75,264 79,451 80,947 78,610 76,196 81,967Balance + 197,632 + 213,601 + 247,874 + 13,332 + 19,950 + 25,899 + 25,734 + 21,028 + 24,869
I Exports 743,067 761,914 805,238 62,565 68,819 72,519 71,097 66,810 ... European countries
Imports 625,934 642,738 654,064 50,319 55,301 56,280 55,516 53,179 ...
Balance + 117,133 + 119,176 + 151,174 + 12,246 + 13,519 + 16,240 + 15,580 + 13,631 ...
Exports 618,383 648,446 693,903 54,568 59,610 62,675 61,296 57,536 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 509,738 527,117 543,505 41,963 46,816 47,369 47,012 45,149 ...
Balance + 108,645 + 121,329 + 150,397 + 12,605 + 12,794 + 15,306 + 14,284 + 12,387 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 405,220 413,753 435,066 34,312 37,042 39,003 38,527 36,106 ...
countries Imports 343,487 350,550 356,916 27,627 30,386 31,020 30,511 29,545 ...
Balance + 61,732 + 63,203 + 78,151 + 6,685 + 6,656 + 7,984 + 8,017 + 6,561 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,217 55,807 58,115 4,468 4,884 5,256 5,185 4,747 ...
Imports 36,734 36,218 37,293 2,853 3,184 3,390 3,270 3,089 ...
Balance + 19,483 + 19,590 + 20,822 + 1,614 + 1,700 + 1,865 + 1,915 + 1,658 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,954 47,345 46,416 3,662 3,922 4,187 4,148 3,883 ...
Luxembourg Imports 41,965 42,548 40,108 3,225 3,396 3,440 3,521 3,087 ...
Balance + 5,989 + 4,797 + 6,307 + 437 + 526 + 748 + 626 + 796 ...
France Exports 99,250 100,580 102,953 8,427 8,685 9,030 8,931 8,098 ...
Imports 63,489 66,714 66,922 5,129 6,050 5,802 5,690 5,673 ...
Balance + 35,761 + 33,866 + 36,031 + 3,297 + 2,635 + 3,228 + 3,240 + 2,424 ...
Italy Exports 53,212 54,240 58,070 4,736 5,125 5,434 5,285 5,080 ...
Imports 46,911 48,522 49,056 3,790 4,298 4,404 4,334 4,379 ...
Balance + 6,301 + 5,718 + 9,015 + 945 + 827 + 1,030 + 951 + 701 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,975 72,736 79,486 5,987 6,508 6,911 6,668 6,363 ...
Imports 88,698 87,796 87,950 6,714 6,714 7,247 6,851 6,905 ...
Balance − 17,723 − 15,060 − 8,463 − 726 − 206 − 336 − 182 − 542 ...
Spain Exports 31,349 34,820 38,782 3,096 3,429 3,529 3,665 3,446 ...
Imports 23,639 24,804 26,466 2,090 2,359 2,341 2,465 2,356 ...
Balance + 7,709 + 10,016 + 12,316 + 1,006 + 1,070 + 1,188 + 1,199 + 1,090 ...
Other EU member Exports 213,163 234,693 258,836 20,257 22,568 23,672 22,768 21,430 ...
states Imports 166,251 176,567 186,590 14,337 16,430 16,349 16,501 15,604 ...
Balance + 46,912 + 58,126 + 72,247 + 5,920 + 6,138 + 7,322 + 6,267 + 5,826 ...
of which
United Exports 71,280 79,163 89,285 6,916 7,944 8,024 7,346 6,704 ...
Kingdom Imports 39,466 38,545 38,326 2,712 3,298 2,997 3,063 2,966 ...
Balance + 31,815 + 40,618 + 50,959 + 4,204 + 4,646 + 5,028 + 4,283 + 3,738 ...
Exports 124,684 113,468 111,336 7,996 9,209 9,845 9,801 9,274 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,196 115,621 110,559 8,355 8,484 8,911 8,504 8,030 ... countries
Balance + 8,488 − 2,153 + 777 − 359 + 725 + 934 + 1,297 + 1,244 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,924 46,202 49,279 3,838 4,035 4,382 4,241 3,949 ...
Imports 38,321 39,392 42,466 3,314 3,518 3,642 3,705 3,250 ...
Balance + 8,603 + 6,810 + 6,813 + 524 + 517 + 740 + 536 + 699 ...
II Exports 341,213 358,337 388,569 25,861 30,439 34,284 33,033 30,176 ... Non-European
Imports 264,459 267,407 294,438 24,945 24,151 24,571 23,094 23,015 ... countries
Balance + 76,754 + 90,930 + 94,131 + 915 + 6,288 + 9,713 + 9,939 + 7,161 ...
Exports 21,803 22,505 24,038 1,486 1,880 2,695 2,339 1,953 ... 1 Africa
Imports 23,108 20,242 18,241 1,310 1,217 1,333 1,284 1,291 ...
Balance − 1,305 + 2,263 + 5,797 + 176 + 663 + 1,362 + 1,055 + 661 ...
Exports 130,427 135,293 157,416 10,080 12,393 13,986 12,475 11,790 ... 2 America
Imports 75,023 74,191 84,922 6,461 6,749 7,273 6,877 6,750 ...
Balance + 55,404 + 61,103 + 72,494 + 3,619 + 5,644 + 6,713 + 5,598 + 5,040 ...
of which
Exports 89,348 95,928 113,990 7,474 8,928 10,566 9,024 7,884 ... United States
Imports 48,582 49,207 59,641 4,540 4,872 5,241 4,847 4,775 ...
Balance + 40,766 + 46,721 + 54,350 + 2,934 + 4,055 + 5,325 + 4,177 + 3,109 ...
Exports 179,038 190,973 196,869 13,601 15,392 16,759 17,322 15,691 ... 3 Asia
Imports 162,960 170,050 188,337 16,913 15,965 15,701 14,664 14,672 ...
Balance + 16,077 + 20,923 + 8,532 − 3,312 − 573 + 1,058 + 2,657 + 1,018 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,754 35,462 39,697 2,468 2,848 3,322 3,470 3,176 ...
Imports 8,921 7,865 7,318 532 536 459 449 578 ...
Balance + 23,833 + 27,598 + 32,379 + 1,937 + 2,312 + 2,863 + 3,021 + 2,598 ...
Japan Exports 17,076 16,910 17,031 1,277 1,408 1,556 1,470 1,371 ...
Imports 19,492 19,007 20,221 1,683 1,718 1,938 1,831 1,707 ...
Balance − 2,416 − 2,097 − 3,190 − 406 − 311 − 383 − 361 − 336 ...
Exports 66,912 74,369 71,385 5,162 5,842 6,122 6,572 5,836 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 74,544 79,828 91,694 8,337 7,863 7,403 6,816 6,833 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 7,633 − 5,459 − 20,309 − 3,174 − 2,021 − 1,281 − 244 − 998 ...
Exports 45,894 48,476 51,669 3,588 3,948 4,305 4,423 3,926 ... New industrial countries
Imports 36,672 38,782 42,443 3,989 3,419 3,499 3,304 3,382 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,222 + 9,695 + 9,226 − 401 + 529 + 806 + 1,120 + 543 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,946 9,566 10,246 694 775 844 898 743 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,368 2,924 2,938 261 219 263 269 302 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,578 + 6,641 + 7,308 + 432 + 555 + 580 + 629 + 440 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2011 − 32,482 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,812 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,358 + 64,718 + 1,081
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 3,155 + 61,666 + 1,0052013 − 43,223 − 12,075 − 37,713 + 8,123 + 3,605 − 758 − 5,912 + 3,078 + 523 + 64,008 + 1,2232014 − 35,353 − 13,254 − 37,653 + 7,817 + 4,274 + 2,600 − 1,785 + 3,035 + 259 + 61,258 + 8712015 − 31,230 − 12,655 − 36,632 + 10,181 + 5,118 + 3,796 − 3,659 + 3,102 + 735 + 63,370 − 366
2014          Q4 − 6,352 − 3,312 − 7,278 + 2,076 + 1,130 + 1,550 − 1,206 + 705 + 132 + 19,643 + 3,687
2015          Q1 − 4,714 − 2,926 − 5,740 + 2,319 + 1,306 + 278 − 347 + 904 + 799 + 18,598 − 1,057
         Q2 − 5,941 − 2,218 − 7,808 + 2,272 + 1,093 + 1,298 − 1,155 + 830 − 31 + 3,256 − 1,118         Q3 − 13,852 − 3,352 − 14,495 + 2,779 + 847 + 292 − 594 + 770 − 445 + 20,042 − 1,204         Q4 − 6,722 − 4,158 − 8,590 + 2,811 + 1,872 + 1,928 − 1,563 + 598 + 411 + 21,474 + 3,013
2016          Q1 − 5,707 − 2,439 − 6,421 + 2,272 + 1,243 + 249 − 1,168 + 840 + 754 + 19,316 − 645
         Q2 
p − 5,151 − 1,187 − 8,057 + 2,337 + 1,157 + 1,061 − 1,039 + 864 − 152 + 5,706 − 1,085
2015          Aug − 5,423 − 883 − 5,944 + 777 + 569 + 75 − 391 + 268 − 98 + 6,226 − 393         Sep − 4,090 − 1,339 − 4,890 + 918 + 129 + 412 + 476 + 232 − 110 + 6,670 − 454
         Oct − 5,847 − 1,409 − 5,526 + 686 + 436 + 197 − 675 + 235 + 144 + 7,076 − 411
         Nov − 1,741 − 1,530 − 1,759 + 1,044 + 609 + 260 − 683 + 220 + 139 + 7,175 − 440         Dec + 866 − 1,220 − 1,304 + 1,081 + 826 + 1,471 − 205 + 143 + 128 + 7,223 + 3,864
2016          Jan − 2,455 − 921 − 1,687 + 952 + 184 − 459 − 722 + 276 + 258 + 5,227 − 345
         Feb − 1,143 − 1,039 − 1,723 + 607 + 774 + 165 − 138 + 290 + 272 + 6,590 + 70         Mar − 2,109 − 479 − 3,011 + 714 + 285 + 543 − 308 + 274 + 224 + 7,498 − 370
         Apr − 845 − 443 − 1,174 + 809 + 480 − 5 − 666 + 300 − 33 + 3,726 − 455
         May − 1,584 − 277 − 3,302 + 854 + 743 + 197 − 268 + 251 − 90 − 2,748 − 344         June 
p − 2,722 − 467 − 3,582 + 675 − 67 + 869 − 106 + 314 − 30 + 4,728 − 285
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2011 − 35,520 − 21,293 − 4,446 + 6,718 − 14,227 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 494
2012 − 39,858 − 25,493 − 5,214 + 5,206 − 14,366 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,1582013 − 43,758 − 29,708 − 5,611 + 6,177 − 14,050 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 591 + 1,076 − 1,6672014 − 40,653 − 28,169 − 6,076 + 8,088 − 12,485 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 1,138 + 2,782 − 1,6432015 − 39,550 − 25,546 − 7,065 + 9,800 − 14,004 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 159 + 2,136 − 2,295
2014          Q4 − 11,206 − 8,633 − 1,944 + 759 − 2,573 − 866 − 863 − 1,890 + 332 − 2,222
2015          Q1 − 15,822 − 12,975 − 2,614 + 1,327 − 2,847 − 885 − 881 + 218 − 10 + 228
         Q2 − 7,052 − 1,803 − 1,161 + 6,278 − 5,249 − 885 − 881 + 1,098 + 1,143 − 45         Q3 − 6,628 − 3,850 − 1,196 + 1,212 − 2,778 − 885 − 881 + 703 + 870 − 167         Q4 − 10,048 − 6,918 − 2,094 + 981 − 3,130 − 885 − 881 − 2,178 + 134 − 2,312
2016          Q1 − 13,460 − 10,054 − 2,704 + 1,284 − 3,406 − 1,270 − 1,267 − 417 − 676 + 259
         Q2 
p − 4,433 − 996 − 1,613 + 5,524 − 3,437 − 1,057 − 1,053 + 1,560 + 2,073 − 512
2015          Aug − 2,739 − 1,961 − 441 + 276 − 778 − 295 − 294 + 40 + 294 − 255         Sep − 1,575 − 551 − 291 + 659 − 1,024 − 295 − 294 + 201 + 41 + 160
         Oct − 3,087 − 2,281 − 394 + 197 − 806 − 295 − 294 − 94 + 141 − 235
         Nov − 2,485 − 1,543 − 722 + 77 − 941 − 295 − 294 + 163 + 274 − 110         Dec − 4,476 − 3,094 − 979 + 707 − 1,383 − 295 − 294 − 2,248 − 281 − 1,966
2016          Jan − 2,275 − 1,167 − 1,181 + 586 − 1,109 − 441 − 440 − 89 + 2 − 91
         Feb − 7,518 − 6,258 − 1,079 + 281 − 1,260 − 441 − 440 + 426 + 188 + 238         Mar − 3,666 − 2,629 − 444 + 416 − 1,038 − 388 − 387 − 754 − 866 + 112
         Apr − 1,692 − 703 − 509 + 1,217 − 989 − 354 − 353 + 1,267 + 1,411 − 144
         May − 591 + 555 − 408 + 3,020 − 1,147 − 351 − 350 + 153 + 244 − 91         June 
p − 2,149 − 849 − 696 + 1,287 − 1,301 − 352 − 350 + 141 + 418 − 277
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2015 2016
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 p Apr May June p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 60,705 + 299,954 + 253,658 − 53,343 + 155,981 + 159,778 + 69,332 + 30,301 + 60,145
1 Direct investment + 68,688 + 85,658 + 98,017 + 29,606 + 30,747 + 12,169 + 805 + 3,911 + 7,453
Equity + 43,586 + 66,413 + 69,542 + 22,053 + 22,203 + 11,573 + 5,047 + 4,477 + 2,048
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 17,880 + 21,373 + 15,866 + 4,442 + 7,335 + 5,199 + 2,249 + 2,282 + 668
Debt instruments + 25,103 + 19,246 + 28,475 + 7,552 + 8,544 + 597 − 4,242 − 567 + 5,405
2 Portfolio investment + 140,366 + 149,023 + 124,134 + 17,656 + 47,212 + 34,164 + 21,287 + 8,390 + 4,486
Shares 2 + 18,946 + 12,380 + 19,737 + 7,552 + 1,314 + 4,647 − 937 + 4,046 + 1,538
Investment fund shares 3 + 32,407 + 41,302 + 35,495 + 4,620 + 9,724 + 7,796 + 6,199 + 1,192 + 404
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 84,469 + 95,794 + 73,923 + 6,023 + 31,209 + 26,475 + 15,607 + 6,109 + 4,759
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 4,543 − 454 − 5,021 − 539 + 4,965 − 4,754 + 418 − 2,957 − 2,215
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 23,944 + 31,769 + 25,796 + 5,492 + 4,925 + 3,970 + 2,522 + 1,367 + 80
4. Other investment 7 − 173,131 + 36,069 + 7,923 − 105,825 + 71,868 + 108,714 + 44,022 + 15,857 + 48,835
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 56,929 + 76,305 − 90,287 − 110,672 + 11,342 + 38,581 + 20,263 − 5,720 + 24,037
Long-term − 50,777 + 21,149 − 2,803 − 15,050 + 1,948 + 8,492 + 710 + 6,403 + 1,378
Short-term − 6,152 + 55,156 − 87,484 − 95,622 + 9,394 + 30,089 + 19,553 − 12,123 + 22,659
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 21,335 − 7,517 − 13,097 − 22,398 + 30,486 − 3,942 + 11,195 − 10,338 − 4,800
Long-term + 7,033 + 2,091 + 12,588 + 1,260 − 772 − 220 − 522 + 1,803 − 1,501
Short-term + 14,302 − 9,608 − 25,685 − 23,658 + 31,258 − 3,722 + 11,717 − 12,140 − 3,299
General government + 7,982 + 17,161 − 12,057 − 1,790 + 5,061 + 2,195 − 4,021 + 2,144 + 4,071
Long-term + 15,663 − 405 − 7,425 − 1,202 − 1,367 − 790 − 220 + 21 − 592
Short-term − 7,681 + 17,566 − 4,632 − 588 + 6,428 + 2,985 − 3,801 + 2,123 + 4,663
Bundesbank − 145,519 − 49,880 + 123,364 + 29,035 + 24,980 + 71,881 + 16,584 + 29,771 + 25,526
5. Reserve assets + 838 − 2,564 − 2,213 − 272 + 1,228 + 761 + 696 + 776 − 711
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) − 158,179 + 55,521 + 27,809 − 111,963 + 133,231 + 101,484 + 33,020 + 26,166 + 42,298
1 Direct investment + 47,079 + 6,240 + 41,579 + 4,087 + 26,907 + 28,299 + 5,761 + 6,432 + 16,106
Equity + 685 + 23,991 + 18,498 + 1,593 + 6,492 + 4,805 + 4,774 + 655 − 624
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 − 4,538 + 3,662 + 5,765 − 1,378 + 3,677 + 802 + 1,331 + 267 − 796
Debt instruments + 46,394 − 17,751 + 23,081 + 2,494 + 20,416 + 23,494 + 987 + 5,778 + 16,730
2 Portfolio investment − 20,184 + 11,583 − 75,003 − 49,097 + 6,102 − 31,648 − 25,312 + 16,213 − 22,549
Shares 2) + 4,933 + 5,137 + 10,255 + 4,866 − 2,998 − 5,514 − 1,764 − 1,387 − 2,363
Investment fund shares 3 + 6,069 − 5,154 + 5,515 + 584 − 2,777 − 1,834 − 1,587 + 161 − 408
Long-termdebt securities 
4 − 8,329 + 14,785 − 97,980 − 32,606 − 6,427 − 31,934 − 27,331 + 15,795 − 20,398
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 22,857 − 3,185 + 7,207 − 21,941 + 18,303 + 7,633 + 5,369 + 1,643 + 621
3. Other investment 7 − 185,075 + 37,698 + 61,232 − 66,953 + 100,221 + 104,833 + 52,571 + 3,521 + 48,741
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 158,323 + 32,495 − 41,434 − 99,753 + 41,105 + 68,523 + 48,647 + 8,185 + 11,692
Long-term − 16,819 − 14,555 − 19,517 − 1,753 − 3,913 − 3,063 − 1,856 − 918 − 289
Short-term − 141,504 + 47,050 − 21,918 − 98,000 + 45,018 + 71,587 + 50,503 + 9,103 + 11,981
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 1,957 + 16,777 + 18,120 + 5,579 + 39,419 − 315 + 32 − 9,059 + 8,712
Long-term − 13,166 − 2,008 + 15,290 − 1,038 + 141 − 1,253 + 1,005 − 1,667 − 591
Short-term + 11,209 + 18,785 + 2,829 + 6,616 + 39,278 + 938 − 973 − 7,393 + 9,304
General government − 1,900 − 5,610 − 11,235 + 204 + 5,643 + 6,637 − 801 − 2,733 + 10,171
Long-term + 8,979 − 931 − 3,654 + 283 − 2,478 + 2,898 + 105 + 67 + 2,726
Short-term − 10,878 − 4,680 − 7,582 − 79 + 8,121 + 3,739 − 907 − 2,800 + 7,445
Bundesbank − 22,895 − 5,964 + 95,782 + 27,018 + 14,054 + 29,988 + 4,694 + 7,129 + 18,165
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 218,884 + 244,434 + 225,848 + 58,620 + 22,749 + 58,294 + 36,312 + 4,135 + 17,847
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,213 37,7352003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,296 12,098
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,199
2013          Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 12,962 7,945 27,473 557,441 544,488 56,278 412,241 349,489
         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 13,030 8,080 28,388 512,785 500,357 54,153 405,409 311,459
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 394,012 324,305
         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 382,743 304,814
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 403,530 289,426
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 406,416 274,472
         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 399,788 278,348
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 378,120 282,401
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 380,001 301,323
         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 386,216 310,586
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 396,445 285,345
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 400,850 282,119
         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 452,230 298,833
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 444,069 300,483
         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 435,366 332,490
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,617 325,820
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 437,079 321,421
         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 440,233 316,029
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 446,157 317,090
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 443,522 337,764
         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 466,216 308,212
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 474,882 311,811
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 491,813 321,506
         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,199
2016          Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 482,988 324,983
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 500,440 338,895
         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 504,187 333,188
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 508,944 347,323
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 519,210 365,677
         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 537,378 384,854
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 540,084 363,961
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,892
2013 785,507 281,970 503,537 323,869 179,668 164,454 15,214 936,110 143,112 792,998 630,740 162,258 95,301 66,957
2014 822,028 278,523 543,506 357,855 185,651 170,854 14,797 939,809 150,429 789,379 624,860 164,519 98,104 66,415
2015 852,363 264,278 588,085 395,013 193,072 178,495 14,576 976,497 142,494 834,003 652,968 181,035 108,750 72,285
2016          Jan 846,398 273,154 573,244 388,749 184,495 169,786 14,708 974,421 146,162 828,259 654,534 173,725 100,803 72,922
         Feb 874,773 291,586 583,187 393,091 190,095 175,332 14,763 1,009,838 164,012 845,826 667,275 178,551 103,967 74,583         Mar 883,207 287,250 595,957 400,697 195,260 180,437 14,822 1,027,771 165,906 861,865 679,384 182,481 108,046 74,435
         Apr 890,888 298,645 592,243 397,288 194,955 179,780 15,175 1,027,429 167,545 859,884 679,990 179,894 105,422 74,472
         May 
r 881,076 281,620 599,455 405,152 194,303 179,006 15,297 1,027,622 148,798 878,823 699,546 179,278 104,941 74,337
         June 880,003 275,784 604,219 404,291 199,928 184,927 15,001 1,051,427 151,918 899,509 715,300 184,209 109,968 74,241
Industrial countries 1
 
2012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,181
2013 694,860 278,667 416,194 294,116 122,077 108,620 13,458 849,161 141,744 707,417 593,197 114,219 79,543 34,676
2014 720,924 273,624 447,300 321,894 125,406 112,308 13,098 851,172 149,212 701,960 585,678 116,282 81,103 35,179
2015 747,289 260,378 486,912 354,225 132,687 119,558 13,129 881,625 137,526 744,099 617,932 126,168 89,593 36,575
2016          Jan 743,124 269,139 473,986 347,306 126,680 113,404 13,276 882,924 143,944 738,981 620,048 118,932 82,347 36,585         Feb 770,595 287,714 482,881 351,585 131,297 118,011 13,286 913,388 156,995 756,393 633,157 123,236 85,904 37,332         Mar 778,357 283,324 495,033 359,834 135,199 121,844 13,355 927,197 154,259 772,937 645,563 127,374 89,901 37,474
         Apr 784,153 295,131 489,022 355,235 133,787 120,105 13,682 930,270 158,850 771,420 646,146 125,274 87,540 37,734
         May 
r 774,260 277,851 496,410 363,225 133,184 119,399 13,785 931,064 140,435 790,629 665,236 125,393 87,134 38,259
         June 773,105 271,974 501,131 363,029 138,102 124,648 13,454 949,784 141,769 808,015 679,587 128,428 91,144 37,285
EU member states 1
 
2012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,507
2013 586,790 264,116 322,674 235,608 87,066 76,539 10,527 710,428 127,372 583,057 503,394 79,662 53,339 26,323
2014 606,568 258,507 348,061 259,475 88,585 77,975 10,611 712,497 134,943 577,555 496,878 80,677 53,797 26,880
2015 613,734 242,218 371,516 276,868 94,648 84,071 10,577 725,496 127,114 598,383 513,560 84,823 58,469 26,354
2016          Jan 613,335 250,758 362,577 271,602 90,975 80,300 10,675 730,367 134,847 595,520 515,261 80,259 54,071 26,188         Feb 639,193 271,325 367,868 273,949 93,919 83,284 10,635 754,032 148,517 605,515 521,753 83,762 56,972 26,790         Mar 643,718 266,225 377,494 281,292 96,201 85,399 10,803 768,240 145,494 622,746 536,094 86,652 59,707 26,945
         Apr 655,949 278,786 377,162 281,741 95,422 84,334 11,087 767,248 148,165 619,084 535,043 84,041 56,975 27,065
         May 
r 645,080 260,815 384,265 288,942 95,323 84,146 11,177 766,982 130,473 636,509 552,330 84,180 56,627 27,553
         June 636,691 254,830 381,861 284,348 97,513 86,675 10,838 777,925 128,096 649,829 563,576 86,253 59,287 26,966
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,196
2013 427,049 197,297 229,752 173,609 56,143 49,968 6,175 602,056 101,150 500,906 447,404 53,502 36,670 16,832
2014 449,392 203,069 246,323 189,755 56,568 50,348 6,220 598,660 105,883 492,777 440,290 52,487 35,568 16,919
2015 457,947 195,011 262,936 201,414 61,522 54,913 6,609 589,407 91,735 497,672 444,542 53,130 37,976 15,155
2016          Jan 461,143 200,677 260,466 200,521 59,946 53,194 6,751 598,659 101,003 497,656 446,583 51,072 36,016 15,056         Feb 475,470 214,552 260,918 199,605 61,313 54,582 6,731 612,509 109,540 502,969 449,528 53,441 38,143 15,299         Mar 472,348 204,988 267,360 205,072 62,289 55,497 6,792 620,115 100,578 519,537 464,419 55,118 39,855 15,263
         Apr 479,513 208,903 270,610 207,865 62,745 55,745 7,001 624,101 107,214 516,886 463,344 53,543 38,321 15,222
         May 
r 473,673 202,636 271,037 208,569 62,468 55,501 6,967 621,900 96,071 525,829 472,502 53,327 37,892 15,434
         June 469,684 198,682 271,002 207,525 63,476 56,689 6,787 634,548 96,870 537,678 482,667 55,011 39,693 15,318
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,683
2013 90,640 3,303 87,337 29,751 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,946 1,368 85,578 37,543 48,035 15,755 32,280
2014 101,101 4,899 96,202 35,957 60,244 58,546 1,699 88,634 1,217 87,417 39,182 48,235 17,001 31,234
2015 104,086 3,093 100,994 40,788 60,205 58,758 1,448 90,701 997 89,704 34,836 54,868 19,157 35,710
2016          Jan 102,303 3,206 99,097 41,431 57,666 56,233 1,432 90,088 1,010 89,079 34,286 54,793 18,456 36,336         Feb 103,209 3,062 100,147 41,494 58,653 57,175 1,478 90,274 1,041 89,233 33,918 55,315 18,064 37,251         Mar 103,883 3,114 100,769 40,851 59,917 58,450 1,467 89,814 1,087 88,728 33,621 55,106 18,145 36,961
         Apr 105,756 2,701 103,055 42,041 61,014 59,521 1,493 89,565 1,301 88,264 33,645 54,619 17,881 36,738
         May 
r 105,804 2,956 102,848 41,893 60,956 59,444 1,512 89,407 1,412 87,995 34,110 53,885 17,806 36,078
         June 105,866 2,995 102,871 41,228 61,643 60,096 1,547 92,780 1,526 91,254 35,513 55,741 18,785 36,956
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.10952015          Aug 1.5269 1.4637 7.0626 7.4627 137.12 9.1815 9.5155 1.0777 0.71423 1.1139
         Sep 1.5900 1.4882 7.1462 7.4610 134.85 9.3075 9.3924 1.0913 0.73129 1.1221
         Oct 1.5586 1.4685 7.1346 7.4601 134.84 9.2892 9.3485 1.0882 0.73287 1.1235
         Nov 1.5011 1.4248 6.8398 7.4602 131.60 9.2572 9.3133 1.0833 0.70658 1.0736         Dec 1.5009 1.4904 7.0193 7.4612 132.36 9.4642 9.2451 1.0827 0.72595 1.0877
2016          Jan 1.5510 1.5447 7.1393 7.4619 128.32 9.5899 9.2826 1.0941 0.75459 1.0860
         Feb 1.5556 1.5317 7.2658 7.4628 127.35 9.5628 9.4105 1.1018 0.77559 1.1093         Mar 1.4823 1.4697 7.2220 7.4569 125.39 9.4300 9.2848 1.0920 0.78020 1.1100
         Apr 1.4802 1.4559 7.3461 7.4427 124.29 9.3224 9.2027 1.0930 0.79230 1.1339
         May 1.5461 1.4626 7.3864 7.4386 123.21 9.3036 9.2948 1.1059 0.77779 1.1311         June 1.5173 1.4477 7.4023 7.4371 118.45 9.3278 9.3338 1.0894 0.79049 1.1229
         July 1.4694 1.4428 7.3910 7.4390 115.25 9.3690 9.4742 1.0867 0.84106 1.1069
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2016
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.8 85.3 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.3 85.1 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.8
2001 87.8 87.1 86.4 86.2 90.5 86.9 91.6 96.4 85.9 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.3 89.6 95.0 90.5 92.2 95.5 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.7 101.2 100.2 101.0 106.9 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.6 94.8 97.1 96.5 96.7
2004 104.5 105.0 103.0 104.5 111.5 105.1 95.9 93.3 100.0 95.1 98.5 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.5 100.8 102.5 109.5 102.5 94.7 92.0 99.1 92.9 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.5 100.1 101.4 109.4 101.8 93.5 90.3 98.5 91.2 98.6 96.5 95.8
2007 106.3 106.2 101.9 103.7 112.9 103.8 94.4 89.5 102.5 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.0
2008 109.4 108.3 103.3 107.0 117.1 105.8 94.6 88.1 105.6 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.1
2009 110.8 109.0 104.0 111.7 120.0 106.8 94.8 88.8 104.8 91.1 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.3 95.6 103.6 111.5 97.8 92.3 88.5 98.4 87.3 98.8 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.2 93.5 102.3 112.2 97.2 91.9 88.3 97.7 86.4 98.2 92.8 91.3
2012 97.6 95.0 88.0 95.9 107.0 92.4 90.1 88.3 92.8 83.8 95.9 89.8 88.2
2013 101.2 98.2 91.1 99.1 111.9 95.5 92.6 88.8 98.6 85.9 98.3 91.6 90.3
2014 101.8 97.8 91.2 100.5 114.7 96.1 93.3 89.6 99.2 86.6 98.5 91.8 91.0
2015 92.4 88.4 83.4 p 91.5 106.5 p 87.8 90.9 90.8 90.9 83.2 94.7 86.9 p 86.3
2013          July 101.0 98.2 111.8 95.5 98.6 91.7 90.4
         Aug 101.7 98.7 91.1 99.3 113.3 96.7 92.7 88.8 98.9 85.9 98.6 91.9 90.9
         Sep 101.6 98.4 113.2 96.4 98.5 91.7 90.8
         Oct 102.5 99.0 114.1 96.8 98.9 92.1 91.1
         Nov 102.2 98.7 92.1 100.0 114.1 96.6 93.5 89.1 100.5 86.8 98.8 92.1 91.1
         Dec 103.4 99.9 115.7 98.0 99.3 92.8 91.9
2014          Jan 103.0 99.4 115.8 97.9 99.2 92.5 91.9
         Feb 103.2 99.6 92.9 102.3 116.3 98.2 93.7 89.3 100.9 87.2 99.0 92.6 92.0
         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.0 99.3 93.1 92.4
         Apr 104.2 100.3 117.0 98.4 99.2 93.0 92.2
         May 103.6 99.5 92.6 101.8 116.1 97.3 93.7 89.6 100.2 87.4 98.8 92.6 91.5
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.5 98.7 92.3 91.2
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 95.9 98.7 92.2 91.1
         Aug 101.5 97.5 90.6 99.9 114.0 95.4 93.0 89.6 98.3 86.2 98.4 91.8 90.7
         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.0 91.0 89.9
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.2 97.6 90.4 89.4
         Nov 99.0 94.9 89.0 97.9 111.9 93.2 92.9 90.0 97.3 85.6 97.7 90.3 89.5
         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.6 90.2 89.8
2015          Jan 95.2 91.0 108.9 90.1 95.7 88.2 87.5
         Feb 93.3 89.5 83.8 p 92.4 107.0 88.7 90.9 90.6 91.2 83.2 95.2 87.5 86.8
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 85.9 94.2 86.1 85.2
         Apr 89.7 86.0 102.4 84.7 94.0 85.7 84.5
         May 91.6 87.8 82.2 p 90.4 104.7 86.5 90.5 90.6 90.1 82.6 94.6 86.6 85.6
         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 87.5 94.7 86.9 86.1
         July 91.3 87.5 105.1 86.6 94.3 86.3 85.6
         Aug 93.0 89.0 83.8 p 91.9 108.1 89.0 91.1 90.8 91.3 83.5 94.9 87.2 87.0
         Sep 93.8 89.7 109.6 90.1 95.1 87.6 87.7
         Oct 93.6 89.6 109.0 89.6 95.1 87.6 87.4
         Nov 91.1 87.1 83.9 p 91.4 106.0 p 86.8 91.2 91.0 91.1 83.6 94.1 86.3 p 85.8
         Dec 92.5 88.3 108.0 p 88.3 94.3 86.7 p 86.5
2016          Jan 93.6 89.1 109.9 p 89.6 94.5 87.2 p 87.3
         Feb 94.7 90.0 p 85.4 p 92.3 111.3 p 90.8 91.7 91.3 92.0 84.4 95.0 87.6 p 87.7
         Mar 94.1 89.5 110.0 p 89.9 95.0 87.4 p 87.3
         Apr 94.8 p 90.1 110.6 p 90.2 95.4 p 87.9 p 87.6
         May 95.1 p 90.5 ... ... 111.1 p 90.7 ... ... ... ... 95.2 p 88.1 p 87.9
         June 94.7 p 90.2 110.5 p 90.3 p 95.0 p 87.9 p 87.6
         July 94.9 p 90.4 110.2 p 90.0 p 95.2 p 87.9 p 87.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November not available due to the state of emergency in the national statistical system declared2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more by the government of Argentina on 7 January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina isdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 not included in the calculation of the EER-38 CPI deflated series from February 2016.(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB The policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5Euro-area countries (from 2001 including
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, fromlia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro-area countries and
wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro-area countries and countries
countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2015 see the index attached 
to the January 2016 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2015
– Recent developments in loans to euro-  ar ea 
non- financial corporations
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2014
October 2015
– German households’ saving and investment 
behaviour in light of the low-interest-rate 
environment  
– Government personnel expenditure: devel -
opment and outlook
November 2015
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2014
– Deposit protection in Germany
January 2016
– The impact of alternative indicators of price 
competitiveness on real exports of goods 
and services
– Investment in the euro area
– The supervision of less significant institutions 
in the Single Supervisory Mechanism
February 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2016
– On the weakness of global trade
– German balance of payments in 2015
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: 
results of the 2014 survey
– The role and effects of the Agreement on 
Net Financial Assets (ANFA) in the context of implementing monetary policy
April 2016
– Stock market valuations – theoretical basics 
and enhancing the metricsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
83•

– The Phillips curve as an instrument for ana -
lysing prices and forecasting inflation in Ger -
many
May 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017 and 
an outlook for 2018
– The macroeconomic impact of quantitative 
easing in the euro area
– Structure and dynamics of manufacturing 
production depth as reflected in the financial 
statements of German enterprises
July 2016
– Evolution of the Bank Lending Survey 
since the onset of the financial crisis
– Approaches to resolving sovereign debt 
 crises in the euro area
– Bank recovery and resolution – the new 
TLAC and MREL minimum requirements
August 2016
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich   von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mar ch 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20162, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
January 20162, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 010 to 
2015, May 20162
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2012 bis 2013 , 
May 20162, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20161, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
23/2016  
Transmission of global financial shocks to EMU 
member states: the role of monetary policy and national factors
24/2016  
The payout behaviour of German savings banks
25/2016  
Flying under the radar: the effects of short-sale 
disclosure rules on investor behavior and stock 
prices
26/ 2016  
Budget-neutral labour tax wedge reductions: a  simulation-based analysis for selected euro 
area countries
27/ 2016  
International banking and cross-border effects 
of regulation: lessons from Germany
28/ 2016  
Approximating fixed-horizon forecasts using 
fixed-event forecasts
29/ 2016  
Capturing information contagion in a stress-
testing framework
30/ 2016  
How does P2P lending fit into the consumer 
credit market?
31/ 2016  
Inflation expectations, disagreement, and mon -
etary policy
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
August 2016  
86•

