Monthly Report
February 2016
Vol 68  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 12 February 2016.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
The drop in oil prices: its causes and its consequences  .......................................................  13
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  46
Housing prices in Germany in 2015  ....................................................................................  53
Effects of the fall in crude oil prices on the price projection  ................................................  57
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61
The structural development of German public finances –  
results  of the disaggregated framework for 2015  ...............................................................  62
Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake  ............................  68Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
4

The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
5

Overview
Consumption brisk, foreign 
demand sluggish
The global economy probably did not grow 
quite as fast in the final quarter of 2015 as in 
the second and third quarters, in which it had 
rebounded somewhat after a mixed start to the 
year. However, the recent deceleration does 
not reflect a regionally broad- based economic 
slowdown. It was mainly caused by a percep -
tible weakening of economic growth in the 
United States. The disappointing performance 
in the last quarter of the year should be seen 
against the backdrop of comparatively high 
volatility in the quarterly seasonally adjusted 
changes in US real gross domestic product 
(GDP). Other indicators, such as labour market 
activity, show no flattening of the upward path. 
Despite many fears to the contrary, economic 
growth in China continued virtually unabated 
according to information provided by the coun -
try’s national statistics office. Similarly, eco -
nomic activity proved robust in the euro area 
and the United Kingdom. In both economic 
areas, overall economic output grew almost as 
fast as before. By contrast, the economic situ -
ation in the major commodity- exporting coun -
tries remained difficult. The continued decline 
in the prices of many commodities is likely to 
further weigh on these countries’ economies.
According to an estimate by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2016, global 
output, measured by purchasing power parity 
exchange rates, merely rose by just over 3% on 
the year during 2015, the lowest rate of growth 
since the global financial and economic crisis of 
2008-09. This dashed expectations in many 
quarters that falling prices on the crude oil 
market would lend the global economy greater 
traction. To reflect this and other factors, the 
IMF lowered its global growth forecast for 
2016 and 2017 slightly in its regular January up -
date of the World Economic Outlook, but it is still forecasting a gradual strengthening of the 
economy in its baseline scenario.
In recent months, events on the international 
financial markets have been dominated by the 
monetary policy decisions of the central banks 
in the major currency areas. The Eurosystem, 
for instance – and later the Bank of Japan – 
took further expansionary measures, while the 
US Federal Reserve rolled back its monetary ex -
pansion policy somewhat with the first interest 
rate rise in seven years. These measures had 
been expected to varying degrees, which was 
reflected for a time in some market segments 
in considerable, yet on the whole short- lived 
reactions on the bond markets. Equities, by 
contrast, which had previously risen noticeably 
worldwide on the back of benign economic in -
dicators, came under pressure from December 
onwards. The share price slide accelerated in 
the new year as the financial markets were in -
creasingly gripped by uncertainty, emanating 
from China, about the robustness of global 
growth. These concerns were aggravated by 
falling prices on the commodity and oil mar -
kets, which some financial market participants 
interpreted as evidence of economic weakness 
rather than as a stimulus for stronger consump -
tion growth in the consumer countries. In add -
ition, low commodity prices are not only erod -
ing the revenue and, therefore, the growth po -
tential, of major emerging market economies, 
they are also putting pressure on enterprises in 
the commodity- producing and energy sectors, 
which are often saddled with substantial US 
dollar debt. Consequently, investments were 
shifted into safe assets. Since the end of Sep -
tember, both yields on government bonds and 
share prices in the major currency areas have 
dropped overall, with bank stocks being par -
ticularly hard hit. Funding conditions for enter -
prises have changed only slightly and remain 
favourable. On the foreign exchange markets, 
the euro appreciated on balance in real terms, 
amid considerable volatility.Global economy Financial 
markets Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
6

At its monetary policy meeting at the begin -
ning of December, the Governing Council of 
the ECB reviewed the degree of monetary pol -
icy accommodation – as it had announced it 
would back in October – based in part on the 
latest macroeconomic projections drawn up by 
Eurosystem staff. A majority of the Council 
were of the opinion that a further easing of 
monetary policy was necessary given the weak 
inflation dynamics and continued downside 
risks for the inflation outlook and therefore de -
cided on a further package of monetary policy 
measures. One of the Governing Council’s de -
cisions was to lower the interest rate on the 
deposit facility by 10 basis points to -0.30%. 
The main refinancing rate and the marginal 
lending rate were left unchanged at 0.05% and 
0.30%, respectively.
Besides lowering the deposit rate, the ECB 
Governing Council also extended the asset pur -
chase programme (APP). The monthly pur -
chases of €60 billion under the APP are to be 
extended until the end of March 2017, or be -
yond, if necessary, and in any case until the 
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment 
in the path of inflation consistent with its aim 
of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term.
The Council further decided to reinvest the 
principal payments on the securities purchased 
under the APP as they mature. Moreover, the 
list of assets that are eligible for regular pur -
chases by the respective national central banks 
under the public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP) was expanded to include marketable 
debt instruments issued by regional and local 
governments provided they fulfil the require -
ments for the purchase programme.
In addition, it was decided to continue con -
ducting the main refinancing operations and 
three- month longer- term refinancing oper -
ations as fixed- rate tender procedures with full 
allotment for as long as necessary, and at least 
until the end of the last reserve maintenance 
period of 2017.In January, the ECB Governing Council also an -
nounced its intention to review and possibly 
reconsider its monetary policy stance at its 
meeting in March, when the new macroeco -
nomic projections become available. The Gov -
erning Council made this announcement on 
the basis of its perception that, despite the 
continued economic recovery, there were in -
creased downside risks for inflation at the start 
of the year stemming from the heightened un -
certainty about emerging economies’ growth 
prospects, volatility in financial and commodity 
markets and geopolitical risks.
The analysis of monetary indicators continues 
to provide no indication of a growing need for 
monetary policy action. The broad M3 monet -
ary aggregate once again saw substantial 
growth in the fourth quarter. The growth was 
driven by a rise in loans to the private sector, 
which thus continued their upward trend, and 
– as in the previous quarter – by the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchases. Taken as a whole, se -
curitised lending by the MFI sector to general 
government was once again the mainstay of 
monetary growth in the final quarter of the 
year. However, the positive direct effect of the 
asset purchases on the money stock was partly 
offset by the outflow of funds from the euro 
area caused by foreign investors’ net sales of 
euro- area bonds and greater demand among 
euro- area residents for debt securities issued 
outside the monetary union. As for the money 
components, the main factor driving the 
growth in M3 was the continued strong prefer -
ence among money- holders for highly liquid 
assets, which was encouraged by the low inter -
est rate environment.
The upturn in the German economy continued 
at a solid pace in the final quarter of 2015. 
According  to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real GDP again saw quarter- on- 
quarter growth of 0.3% in the fourth quarter 
of 2015 after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. Economic growth in the second half of 
the year was therefore slightly weaker than in Monetary policy
Monetary devel-
opments in the euro area
German 
economy Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
7

the first half and matched the rise in potential 
output.
Impetus for economic growth in the fourth 
quarter came from buoyant domestic demand, 
whereas external demand was notably sub -
dued. Domestic demand was driven by brisk 
consumption, which was predominantly attrib -
utable to robust increases in employment and 
significant rises in wages. This was probably 
boosted by transfer payments and other gov -
ernment expenditure related to the influx of 
refugees. An additional stimulus was provided 
by sharply growing housing investment. How -
ever, there was only a slight rise in enterprises’ 
willingness to invest in equipment and new 
buildings. At the end of the year, the German 
economy felt the effects of failing demand 
stimuli not only from China and commodity-  
producing emerging economies, but also from 
some industrialised countries outside of the 
euro area. The expanding demand from the 
euro area and the euro’s ongoing favourable 
exchange rate were unable to make up for this.
The labour market in the final quarter of 2015 
saw a stable, strong rise in employment and 
–  following a sideways movement in the 
second and third quarters – a significant de -
cline in unemployment. The high demand for 
labour continued to be met to a considerable 
extent by immigrants, particularly those from 
other EU countries. Even so, the number of re -
ported job vacancies rose further. The largest 
increase in employment subject to social secur -
ity contributions was seen in some services in -
dustries. The public sector also witnessed its 
first notable increase in staffing levels for a long 
time, presumably to deal with the massive 
surge in refugee numbers as of late summer. It 
is unlikely, however, that the new immigrants 
will have been able to find jobs yet. According 
to the leading labour market indicators, it is 
possible that the positive employment trend 
will continue in the coming months and that 
unemployment will remain stable.Last year both actual earnings and negotiated 
wages grew at rates significantly higher than 
the average of the last ten years. In 2015 as a 
whole, negotiated wage rates including add -
itional benefits grew by 2.3% year on year. Ac -
cording to provisional data of the Federal Stat -
istical Office, actual earnings grew by 2.8%, 
thus considerably outstripping the rise in nego -
tiated wage rates. A key driver pushing wage 
drift back into positive territory (0.5 percentage 
point) was the introduction of the general 
statutory minimum wage. The slightly higher 
bonus payments outside of the agreed pay 
scales at large industrial firms probably also 
contributed to the rise in wages. In fact, real 
pay growth, as measured in terms of the in -
crease in actual earnings adjusted for the rise in 
the consumer price index, reached its highest 
level since 1992.
In particular, the slump in crude oil prices to -
wards the end of 2015 prolonged the third-  
quarter negative price trend at the upstream 
stages of the economy into the fourth quarter. 
Import prices dropped markedly in the final 
quarter of 2015 in seasonally adjusted terms, 
with the non- energy component of import 
prices declining, too. This was due to the fact 
that price reductions in intermediate goods on 
the back of falling industrial commodity quota -
tions outweighed price increases in some con -
sumer goods segments, which were probably 
linked to the euro’s persisting depreciation. The 
situation in respect of domestic sales prices for 
industrial goods was very similar. Construction 
prices expanded again moderately. Seasonally 
adjusted consumer prices in the final quarter of 
2015 remained at the prior- quarter level. Con -
sumers paid significantly less for energy, espe -
cially refined petroleum products, than they did 
in the third quarter. By contrast, non- energy 
prices continued to rise. Food products became 
dearer after stagnating in the third quarter. The 
services sector, too, showed a considerable 
price increase across all major subsectors. Given 
the currently assumed development of crude 
oil prices, the year- on- year changes in con -Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
8

sumer prices are, however, likely to be negative 
in some of the coming months.
The German economy might expand at a 
somewhat faster pace in the first quarter of 
2016 compared with the end of 2015 thanks 
chiefly to strengthening domestic dynamics. 
Greater momentum is likely to be provided by 
consumption, which is continuing to benefit 
from the buoyant labour market situation. 
Additional impetus may be expected notably 
from households’ substantial purchasing power 
gains owing to the further fall in crude oil 
prices at the turn of the 2015-16. The revival of 
construction activity also looks set to continue 
in the early part of the year. It has been buoyed 
of late by a considerable surge in demand in 
the business and public sectors, while housing 
construction continues to be bolstered by both 
the fundamentals and favourable financing 
conditions. Given the above- average level of 
capacity utilisation in broad segments of the 
economy, firms’ propensity to invest in machin -
ery and equipment should also revive. A key 
prerequisite for stronger economic growth and 
a greater corporate willingness to invest is that 
external demand picks up, following a lull in 
the second half of 2015, and thus spurs indus -
trial activity.
The public finance situation in Germany re -
mained favourable last year, with the fiscal sur -
plus increasing slightly to 0.5% of GDP . This 
improvement largely reflects the dropout of 
temporary burdens from 2014, while the struc -
tural surplus declined slightly. Although interest 
expenditure decreased further, social benefits, 
in particular, increased considerably, especially 
in the areas of the statutory retirement pension 
scheme, health care and long- term care but 
also partly owing to the influx of refugees. This 
year, the surplus is likely to be eroded and the 
government budget might be more or less bal -
anced. The expected deterioration in the fiscal 
performance is attributable to growing add -
itional expenditure on asylum seekers and the 
generally rather lax budget policy course. The 
upshot is an expansionary fiscal stance which will tend to have a procyclical impact in the 
current rather favourable German economic 
setting. The debt ratio fell until the third quar -
ter of 2015, chiefly because of nominal GDP 
growth, and could well decline further by the 
end of 2016.
The massive influx of asylum seekers poses 
tough challenges for Germany in many re -
spects. Thanks to the current favourable eco -
nomic situation, however, there is sufficient 
scope within the government budgets to ab -
sorb the associated financial burdens without 
breaching the deficit ceilings. The longer- term 
effects on government budgets are still difficult 
to gauge. Fiscal policymakers would be well 
advised to progressively restore the safety mar -
gins in future budgets following their tempor -
ary depletion. The pursuit of sound public fi -
nances and the implementation of important 
reforms are not contradictory aims. Rather, reli -
able compliance with budgetary rules creates 
trust in fiscal policy and a dependable eco -
nomic framework. For Germany, the unfavour -
able demographic outlook poses a particular 
challenge, so that for this reason, too, it would 
make good sense to swiftly reduce the debt 
ratio to below the 60% ceiling.
Central government generated a budget sur -
plus of €12 billion in 2015, due in part to one- 
off proceeds from the mobile phone frequency 
auction and bolstered by a further sharp fall in 
interest expenditure. The surplus was allocated 
in full to the new reserves to cover future add -
itional expenditure on refugees. In 2016, the 
expected funding gap in the central govern -
ment budget is to be covered by withdrawing 
€6 billion from the reserves, meaning that an -
other break-  even budget outturn should be 
possible. All things considered, the planned 
deficit appears to be amply calculated, although 
risks exist, particularly in connection with the 
costs caused by the influx of refugees. Under 
the debt brake, the ceiling of 0.35% of GDP for 
the structural funding gap was to be adhered 
to for the first time when drawing up the cen -
tral government budget for 2016. This was Public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
9

facilitated  by the fact that – in contrast to the 
EU fiscal rules that the debt brake is actually 
intended to underpin – the withdrawal from 
the reserves was recorded as budget relief, 
although  it does not actually increase the stock of net financial assets. But at the current junc -
ture it seems feasible to comply with the debt 
brake even without this accounting conveni -
ence.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
In the final quarter of 2015, the global econ -
omy presumably failed to keep up with its pace 
of growth in the second and third quarters of 
the year, a period in which it had rebounded 
somewhat following a mixed start to the year. 
However, the recent deceleration did not re -
flect a regionally broad- based economic slow -
down. Rather, it was due mainly to a marked 
weakening of economic growth in the United 
States. The disappointing performance in the 
fourth quarter of the year has to be seen 
against the relatively high quarterly volatility of 
seasonally adjusted changes in real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) in the United States. 
Other indicators, such as labour market activity, 
do not show any signs of a flattening of the 
upward trend. Despite many fears to the con -
trary, China’s growth rate remained virtually 
undented, according to information provided 
by its national statistics office. Similarly, eco -
nomic activity also proved robust in the euro 
area and the United Kingdom. In both eco -
nomic areas, aggregate economic output grew 
almost unabated. This could also be the case 
for Japan, according to short- term indicators. 
By contrast, the economic situation in the 
major commodity- exporting countries re -
mained tense. The ongoing decline in the 
prices of many commodities is likely to further 
hurt these countries’ economies.
According to an estimate by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2016, global 
output, as based on purchasing power parity 
exchange rates, merely rose by an annual rate 
of just over 3% in full- year 2015, the lowest 
growth rate since the global financial and eco -
nomic crisis of 2008-09. Expectations in many 
quarters that falling prices on the market for 
crude oil would lend the global economy 
greater traction were thus dashed. In January 
2015, the IMF had expected GDP growth of 
3½%. Although this most recent off-  target forecast is another in a series of overly optimis -
tic projections,1 what appears striking about 
the inaccurate assessment of the previous year 
is that the underlying assumption that crude oil 
prices would remain low turned out to be ac -
curate.2 There are thus many signs that the 
global economic stimulus effects of a (largely 
supply- side) decline in oil prices were over -
stated (see box on pages 13 to 15). In actual 
fact, at just under 2%, growth in the advanced 
economies strengthened only a little overall 
compared with 2014. Looking towards the 
United States, the massive cutback in invest -
ment by the oil industry was a particular drag 
on growth. Adjustment pressure on the less-  
 diversified commodity-  exporting emerging 
market economies (EMEs) was immensely more 
intense; they were constrained in their ability to 
smooth their expenditure over time. As a result 
of these developments, in conjunction with the 
gradual structural moderation of Chinese eco -
nomic growth, the real GDP growth rate in the 
emerging and developing countries taken to -
gether was only 4%, a low rate by historical 
standards.
In its regular January update to the World Eco -
nomic Outlook (WEO), the IMF, also taking into 
account experience of the previous year, re -
vised its global growth forecast downwards 
slightly, yet it is still maintaining the baseline 
scenario of a gradual firming of economic 
 activity. It expects global output (measured in 
purchasing power parity terms) to rise by only 
3½% in both 2016 and 2017. The latest out -
look for some commodity- producing countries, 
in particular, was considered to be less favour -
able than in October. In the case of Brazil, the 
downward revisions to annual average GDP Global eco-
nomic growth in Q4 presum-ably sluggish
Overall results 
for 2015 dash hopes that lower oil prices will provide a boost to the global economyIMF revises its 
global growth 
forecast down-wards slightly
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The global growth forecast 
revisions in recent years, Monthly Report, November 2014, 
pp 12-15.
2 Whereas in January 2015 the IMF had expected the oil 
price to average US$56¾ for 2015 as a whole, average 
prices ended up even being some US$6 below this assump -
tion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
11

growth rates were by more than two percent -
age points for each of the two years, which 
means that, even for 2017, aggregate eco -
nomic growth is no longer expected. Unlike 
earlier editions of the WEO, the current projec -
tion does not envisage any material acceler -
ation in growth for the US economy, either. On 
the other hand, the outlook for other econ -
omies, in the opinion of the IMF, has not 
changed significantly. Forecasts for Chinese 
GDP growth for this year were even left un -
changed for the fourth consecutive round.
The indicators for the industrial sector are also 
reflective of the currently restrained pace of global economic growth. For instance, the pro -
duction sector’s average global output for the 
October-  November period, according to infor -
mation provided by the Dutch Centraal Plan -
bureau, only edged slightly above its level from 
the third quarter. One of the reasons for the 
recent drop- off was surely the weather- induced 
slump in energy production in key northern 
hemisphere economies. However, even after 
adjustment for such temporary factors, the up -
ward trajectory of industrial output has been 
extremely flat. The same can be said of global 
trade, despite a slight revival in the second half 
of the year. Measured in November at a price- 
adjusted annual rate of 2%, the growth rate of 
goods trade remains very subdued compared 
to previous upswings.
During the reporting period, the downward 
trend in the prices of important commodities 
over the past one- and- a- half years persisted, 
with non- energy commodity prices, measured 
on a US dollar basis in terms of the HWWI 
index, once again ceding perceptible ground in 
the quarter just ended. Industrial commodities 
and food and beverages became cheaper still 
in January. At the same time, on the spot mar -
ket for crude oil, the prices for a barrel of Brent 
dropped below the US$30 mark at times. Not 
even during the global financial and economic 
crisis had the price of oil been that low. In add -
ition to resurging concerns about the economy 
in major emerging markets, supply- side factors 
such as discord within OPEC on production 
limits and the lifting of sanctions against Iran 
are likely to have put pressure on prices. Most 
recently, Brent crude oil was trading on the 
spot market at US$31 per barrel.
In the industrial countries, the renewed slide in 
crude oil market prices was reflected in falling 
consumer prices for refined petroleum prod -
ucts. Nonetheless, owing to a base effect, be -
tween September and December the negative 
annual growth rate of energy prices narrowed 
by around four percentage points to just over 
9%. The considerable price reductions from the 
last quarter of 2014 gradually disappeared from Global industrial 
sector and global trade on flat upward trajectory
Renewed sharp 
drop in crude oil prices
Base effect key 
factor in slight rise in consumer price inflationWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 5 February 2016, or 1 to 11 February 2016 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 1630405060708090100110US dollar basis, 2011 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
5060708090100110
60708090100110Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
12

The drop in oil prices: its causes and its consequences
The massive drop in the price of crude oil 
since mid-2014 has caused enormous shifts 
in income from the main oil- producing 
countries to the oil- consuming countries. 
The economy in major export countries has consequently been hit, in some cases hard. 
Conversely, falling prices have acted as a 
positive catalyst for private consumption in 
several oil- importing countries. Hopes that 
this would perceptibly stimulate the global 
economy overall have not been fulfi  lled as 
of yet.1
Economic effects in connection with oil 
price changes depend not only on whether 
the latter are expected to last, but also on 
whether the oil price swings can be attrib-
uted mainly to supply- side or demand- side 
factors.2 There is a broad consensus that oil 
prices should be seen as an endogenous 
variable, implying that both supply- side and 
demand- side determinants are to be taken 
into consideration.3 It is, however, diffi   cult 
to pin down the relative importance of 
these factors. Time series models based on 
structural vector autoregressions (SVAR) seek to explain oil price movements using 
the dynamics of oil production and general 
economic activity as an indicator of de-
mand. Changes in expectations are also in-corporated. In particular, changes in inven-
tories of crude oil and crude oil products serve as an indicator of what is known as 
speculative demand.4
However, such models have not yet been able to uniquely identify, in particular, the 
causes of last year’s price movements. First, it is not clear what variables are suitable as 
indicators of global real economic activity and can thus be used to identify demand shocks. The suitability of some frequently 
used measures, such as sea freight rates, is doubtful, as these measures also refl  ect industry- specifi  c developments and may themselves be strongly infl  uenced by oil prices. Second, the speculative demand component cannot be clearly assigned to either fi  nal demand or supply. Inventory 
build- up in expectation of rising oil prices 
may refl  ect anticipated developments on 
the supply side, the demand side or a com-
bination of both. This model framework is 
therefore of limited use when it comes to 
making a clear distinction between supply- 
side and demand- side drivers of oil price 
fl  uctuations. Moreover, the model does not 
explicitly account for possible structural changes to the price setting mechanism, 
say a changed role for the Organization of 
the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). 
General equilibrium models appear better 
suited to this end.5
With such a lot of model uncertainty, the 
current debate tends to be grounded more 
on anecdotal approaches based on an ob-
servation of production and consumption 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The slowdown in global 
economic growth and the decline in commodity 
prices, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp 16-17.
2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Potential impacts of 
the fall in oil prices on the real economy, Monthly 
Report , February 2015, pp 12-14.3 See also L Kilian (2009), Not all oil price shocks are 
alike: disentangling demand and supply shocks in the 
crude oil market, Vol 99, American Economic Review, pp 1053-1069.
4 Structural shocks are identifi  ed on the basis of 
assumptions  that are largely theoretically substanti-ated. See L Kilian and D Murphy (2014), The role of 
inventories and speculative trading in the global mar-
ket for crude oil, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 
Vol 29, pp 454-478.5 See, for instance, A Nakov and G Nuno (2013), Saudi Arabia and the oil market, Economic Journal, Vol 123, pp 1333-1362. An estimate using this model fi  nds the reasons for the decline in crude oil prices that started 
back in mid-2014 mainly on the supply side. See 
C Manescu  and G Nuno (2015), Quantitative effects of 
the shale oil revolution, ECB Working Paper Series 
No 1855.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
13

quantities as well as the global economic 
environment. Data from the US Energy In-
formation Administration (EIA) suggest that 
the steep drop in the price of oil since mid-
2014 was preceded by a sharp increase in 
global supply (emanating in particular from 
the United States, with OPEC failing to compensate by cutting production). The rapid technological progress made in oil production was an important factor. By contrast, the pace of demand growth has 
changed little. According to the EIA, global 
oil consumption has grown fairly steadily 
since 2011. After expanding by 1% in 2013, 
consumption probably rose by 1¼% in 
2014. In its January 2016 Short- Term Energy 
Outlook, the EIA even expects a further 
slight acceleration of 1½% in both 2015 
and 2016. The slight acceleration in growth 
rates for crude oil consumption could be 
the result of lower oil prices stimulating de-
mand. It should be noted, however, that 
demand for oil has, on the whole, proved inelastic to price changes in the past, at 
least in the short term.6
Attention needs to be paid not only to the 
price sensitivity of demand for oil but also 
to its income elasticity. According to calcu-
lations by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), annual growth in global real gross 
domestic product (GDP), measured at mar-
ket exchange rates, has been between 
2½% and 3% since 2011. The latest growth 
rates for oil consumption (according to EIA 
data) are in line with this steady moderate 
upward movement. If the log of global oil 
consumption and the log of global eco-nomic output are plotted against each 
other in a scatter chart, the recent observa-
tion points are unremarkable by historical 
standards. By contrast, consumption is seen 
to have declined sharply following the second oil crisis at the beginning of the 1980s. Later price surges caused the rela-tionship between the economy and con-sumption to fl  atten. Conversely, however, 
falling prices cause no upward shifts, which 
suggests that the impact on oil demand changes depending on whether prices are 
rising or falling.
Given that oil price reductions probably 
have little effect on demand, the burden of 
balancing the market will fall overwhelm-
ingly on oil supply. That is why attention is regularly focused on what the oil- producing 
countries are doing. Given this state of 
affairs , it is remarkable that global produc-
6 Bundesbank studies found a short- term price elasti-
city of just -0.02 for a long observation period. These 
results are at the lower end of common estimates. 
However, account must be taken of empirical evidence 
suggesting that the price elasticity has probably de-
clined over time and is potentially not symmetrical in 
terms of the direction of the price change. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Price elasticity of demand for 
crude oil in the short term, Monthly Report, June 2012, 
pp 34-36; and J Hamilton (2001), Nonlinearities and the macroeconomic effects of oil prices, Macroeco-
nomic Dynamics, Vol 15, pp 364-378.Crude oil production and consumption
8788899091929394959697Million barrels per day, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Source:  EIA  Short-Term  Energy  Outlook,  January  2016,  and 
Bundesbank  seasonal  adjustment.  1 Includes  production  of 
crude oil, condensates, liquid gas, biofuels, other liquid fuels 
and processing gains. 2 Estimated consumption based on deli-
veries of crude oil products.
Deutsche BundesbankGlobal production1
Global consumption 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
14

tion has so far been cut back only very little. 
Though crude oil production in the United 
States has declined somewhat and invest-
ment in the oil industry has even more than 
halved in real terms since the spring of 
2014, this has done very little to reverse the 
steep rise in production over the last four 
years. Russia, too, is still pumping large quantities of crude oil. Production has re-
cently been perceptibly curbed only in the 
North Sea and in Nigeria and Mexico.
The oversupply that has characterised the 
oil market since mid-2014 has resulted in a 
continued build- up of inventories. In the 
United States alone, inventories of crude oil 
and petrol mounted by more than one- 
quarter between the beginning of 2014 and 
the end of 2015, and were still growing 
steadily at the beginning of this year. Mean-
while, storage capacity appears to be get-
ting tight worldwide. This is contributing to 
instability on the oil market. In addition, 
production is likely to be expanded in Iran 
now that the embargo has been lifted.
Given the oil glut and the fairly restrained yet steady growth of the global economy 
and oil consumption, the sharp drop in the price of crude oil since mid-2014 can prob-ably be attributed largely to supply- side fac-
tors. The effects that this will have on the 
global economy, however, are less clear. Current developments appear to suggest an  asymmetry in the effects of oil price changes. Thus, a decline in the price of crude oil does not stimulate the global economy to the same degree as rising prices hurt it.
7 Heightened uncertainty, 
lower investment and enforced  structural change could be factors. Nonetheless, cheaper crude oil considerably boosts real income for households in commodity- importing  countries and could potentially 
stimulate the economy in those countries.7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The slowdown in global 
economic growth and the decline in commodity 
prices, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp  16-17; 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Potential impacts of the fall in 
oil prices on the real economy, Monthly Report, Febru-
ary 2015, pp 12-14; Deutsche Bundesbank, The price 
of crude oil and its impact on economic activity in the 
industrial countries, Monthly Report, June 2012, 
pp 27-49.Global oil consumption and economic output, 1973-2015
Sources: EIA, IMF and Bundesbank calculations. 1 IMF WEO 
Update,  January  2016,  and  EIA  Short-Term  Energy  Outlook, 
January 2016. 2 Aggregated on the basis of market exchange 
rates; data linked from the October 2015 WEO (from 1980 on-
wards) and the September 2002 WEO (prior to 1980).
Deutsche Bundesbank40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110120 35607080901001102007 = 100, log scale
Oil consumption
Global economic output 2197920151
2014
20092007
2000
1990
1986Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
15

the comparison with the previous year. That 
was also a factor behind the rise in the head -
line inflation rate from -0.2% in September to 
+0.5% at the end of the period under review. 
At the same time, core inflation, which ex -
cludes food and energy products, picked up 
slightly, reaching +1.4% by December.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, real gross domestic product (GDP), 
according to official estimates, picked up by 
6¾% on the year in the final quarter of 2015. 
A similar increase was recorded for 2015 as a 
whole, indicating that the pace of growth of 
the Chinese economy has slackened very little 
compared with 2014. Although investment, a 
major component of aggregate activity, seems 
to have lost steam, this was largely offset by 
a surge in consumption.3 This would indicate 
that the government has made progress in its 
efforts to reduce the lopsidedness of the coun -
try’s economic structure (rebalancing). In the 
past year, Chinese foreign trade figures showed 
a decline; after adjustment for price variations, 
goods exports are likely to have recorded a 
small increase, if at all, and goods imports will 
have probably even contracted perceptibly. 
Imports  of machinery and transport equip -ment, in particular, were down. However, im -
ports stabilised over the course of the year. All 
in all, the Chinese economy does not appear to 
be heading towards a slump, although consid -
erable medium- term downside risks still exist, 
specifically regarding the high and, at last 
report , increasing corporate sector debt. Con -
sumer price movements remained quite calm 
in  the past year. Headline inflation stood at 
+1.4%; excluding food and energy, inflation 
was barely any higher.
India’s economic growth was able to maintain 
the torrid pace of the previous year. Real GDP 
was up by 7½% in 2015. On the expenditure 
side, private consumption lent an even greater 
boost to growth than previously. Gains in 
households’ real purchasing power owing to 
subsiding inflation were a major support. Meas -
ured in terms of the consumer price index (CPI), 
inflation shrank from 6.6% in 2014 to 4.9%. 
The main factors behind this development 
were the easing of price pressures in the local 
food markets and lower fuel prices.
The severe recession kept Brazil in its grip in the 
third quarter of 2015. Output has now fallen by 
nearly 6% since the latest cyclical peak in early 
2014. The economy has been suffering under 
the effects of the sharp drop in prices on inter -
national commodity markets and the pro -
nounced political uncertainty. In the quarter 
ended, for which no national accounts data are 
yet available, the contraction could have decel -
erated somewhat, however, as indicated by a 
certain tendency for real retail sales to have sta -
bilised. Irrespective of the weak economy, infla -
tion has picked up once again; consumer price 
inflation rose in the final quarter of the year to 
10.4%. This means that, in the year ended, the Gradual moder-
ation of growth continuing in ChinaEconomic growth in India has maintained its rapid pace
Brazil still mired 
in recessionEconomic growth by groups of countries
Source: IMF.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015420246810
––+++++Year-on-year percentage change in real GDP
Advanced
economiesEmerging and developing economies
e
3 China’s National Bureau of Statistics does not report any 
figures on the individual expenditure components of GDP , 
but only publishes a breakdown of GDP growth into contri -
butions by consumption (including government consump -
tion), gross investment (including stockpiling) and net ex -
ports. According to these statistics, in 2015 around two-  
thirds of economic growth was attributable to consump -
tion, and one- third to investment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
16

central bank clearly missed its target of keeping 
inflation between 2.5% and 6.5%.
According to the official flash estimate, Russia’s 
economy contracted last year by 3¾%. Al -
though no separate data for the fourth quarter 
are available yet, judging by the cyclical indica -
tors, the contraction appears to have con -
tinued. The falling oil prices are the main factor 
weighing on the economy. Oil companies 
themselves have proven extremely robust thus 
far, with oil production last year climbing to a 
new all- time high. However, owing to shrinking 
revenues from taxes on energy exports, general 
government has been forced to cut back its 
spending considerably. In addition, households 
have been suffering under the effects of the 
rouble’s depreciation owing to falling oil prices. 
Consumer price inflation consequently jumped 
to nearly 16% in 2015. Food prices were up by 
as much as one- fifth; the ban on food imports 
from western countries imposed by the Russian 
government was an additional factor.
United States
The economic upswing in the United States lost 
steam in autumn 2015. Seasonally adjusted real 
GDP , according to the initial estimate, was up 
by only just under ¼% from the third quarter, 
in which – in line with its average over the un -
steady first half of the year – it had risen by a 
measured ½% on the quarter. The weak finish 
to the year is attributable in part to retarding 
factors in inventory movements, which had al -
ready constrained GDP growth in the summer 
months. A correction to that effect had been 
expected given the preceding strong accumula -
tion of inventory stocks. Since price- adjusted 
goods and services exports failed to match 
their level from the previous quarter, moreover, 
net exports once again held back the economy. 
In addition, private final domestic demand was 
not able to maintain the lively pace of growth 
from the second and third quarters of 2015. 
This was chiefly because private consumption 
grew at only a moderate rate while, at the same time, corporate investment was down on 
the previous quarter. In this context, further 
cutbacks in investment by the oil and gas in -
dustries were a major factor. By contrast, pri -
vate housing construction continued its recov -
ery.
This all in all disappointing performance should 
be seen against the fact that quarterly GDP 
data in the USA fluctuate relatively sharply. 
Periods of stagnation such as most recently and 
in the first quarter of 2015, or even setbacks 
such as in the first quarter of 2014 must conse -
quently not be equated with an economic 
slump. The strong employment growth in the 
final quarter of 2015 is another indication that 
the US economic upswing is still intact. At the 
beginning of 2016, employment continued to 
grow, albeit at a diminished pace, and the 
standardised unemployment rate fell to a new 
cyclical low of 4.9%. In the past few months, 
CPI inflation has also picked up somewhat. 
Headline inflation climbed to 0.7% in Decem -
ber, while core inflation rose to 2.1%. These 
develop ments were among the main reasons 
why the US Federal Reserve, in December 2015, 
raised the target range for its federal funds rate 
by 25 basis points for the first time since mid-
2006.Russian economy  
continuing to 
contract
Weak finish 
to the yearFurther improve-ment in labour market situationEmployment growth and business cycles in the United States
8006004002000200400600
––––+++
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankUS NBER
recessionsMonthly employment growth in thousands,
seasonally adjusted, quarterly averages
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
17

Japan
The Japanese economy did not appear to be 
heading for a change of pace towards the end 
of the year, following a third quarter in which, 
according to revised data, it showed tepid 
growth, thus managing to avoid a technical re -
cession.4 Although industrial output recovered 
somewhat in the past quarter, on the demand 
side, private consumption appeared to be 
heading for a renewed slump, which was re -
flected in, among other things, a perceptible 
decline in goods imports. As, at the same time, 
goods exports rose considerably, net exports could have given a boost to GDP growth by 
way of calculation. However, looking at the na -
tional accounts, the foreign trade statistics data 
should not necessarily be taken at face value. It 
is also questionable whether, as in the preced -
ing quarter, inventory changes will have had 
dampening effects on GDP growth. Irrespective 
of the volatility of quite a few economic indica -
tors, the fact that, even in Japan, the labour 
market is continuing to recover is a sign of con -
tinued GDP growth. On average over the autumn   
months, the unemployment rate hit a new cyc -
lical low (3.2%). The inflation rate for the basket 
of consumer goods excluding energy and food, 
at 0.8% in December, was accordingly slightly 
lower than three months earlier. The persistently 
sluggish price movements encouraged the Bank 
of Japan to loosen its monetary policy reins even 
further at the end of January.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, economic growth re -
mained solid. After adjustment for the usual 
seasonal variations, real GDP picked up in au -
tumn by ½% on the period, according to a pro -
visional estimate, and thus even grew slightly 
more strongly than in the third quarter. This 
was due mainly to the persistently robust 
growth in the real gross value added of the ser -
vices sector, which forms the backbone of the 
UK economy. Manufacturing and construction 
output stagnated towards the end of the year, 
following a drop in the preceding quarter. Each 
of the three aforementioned economic areas 
contributed individually to the deceleration of 
GDP growth from 3% in 2014 to 2¼% in 2015. 
Fittingly, the labour market lost steam. None -
theless, the unemployment rate fell to a new 
cyclical low of 5.1% by November. At the same 
time, annual Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) inflation excluding energy and un -
processed food picked up in the past few Economic 
 activity unlikely to have picked up noticeably by the turn of the yearContinuation of solid growthAn international comparison of standardised unemployment rates
*
Source: national data. * Number of unemployed as a percent-
age of the labour force.  1 Centred three-month moving aver-
age.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 16789101112%, seasonally adjusted
Euro area56789 United Kingdom15678910United States
3456 Japan
4 As this issue of the Monthly Report went to press, no 
official estimate for Japanese GDP for the fourth quarter of 
2015 was available yet.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
18

months, though it, too, remained subdued in 
December (+1.0%). Against this background, 
the Bank of England has not raised its policy 
rates to date.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),5 the eco -
nomic upswing persisted in autumn. In the four 
countries which have so far published initial 
seasonally adjusted national accounts data, 
real GDP even grew strongly on the period. Ac -
cording to the available indicators, the Czech 
and Croatian economies, too, appear to have 
continued their expansion. On average for 
2015, this country group’s aggregate GDP was 
expanded by 3½%, as against +2¾% a year 
earlier. The primary reason for accelerated 
growth was that private consumption con -
tinued its resurgence against the background 
of solid wage growth and an increase in em -
ployment. The average unemployment rate for 
2015 as a whole dropped to 7.5%. In addition, 
households’ purchasing power benefited from 
the flat price trajectory. Owing to energy prices, 
in particular, consumer prices fell by 0.5% in 
the past year. In the fourth quarter, too, aver -
age annual HICP inflation among this group of 
countries stood at -0.5%. However, even ex -
cluding energy and unprocessed food, prices in 
2015, despite robust wage and demand 
growth, rose by a paltry 0.5%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Towards the end of 2015, the steady but still 
only muted economic upswing continued in 
the euro area. According to initial data pro -
vided by Eurostat, real GDP went up by a sea -
sonally adjusted ¼% between the third and 
fourth quarters, thus maintaining the previous 
quarter’s growth rate. Aggregate output was 
up by 1½% on the year. In the fourth quarter, 
economic growth is likely to have been sup -
ported mainly by domestic demand, but also by foreign demand. Although the growth rate 
of private consumption presumably dropped 
off slightly compared with the previous quarter, 
at the same time exports may well have again 
shown somewhat stronger growth in the quar -
ter ended.
Real GDP grew at a rate of 1½% for full- year 
2015, its fastest growth rate since 2011. Since 
economic output grew faster last year than es -
timated potential output, aggregate capacity 
underutilisation has presumably continued to 
decline. This is also indicated by survey-  based 
data on capacity utilisation in key sectors of the 
economy. In the manufacturing sector, in Janu -
ary it was again up perceptibly from its October 
level; it outperformed its long- run average for 
two consecutive quarters for the first time since 
the crisis broke out in 2008.Acceleration of 
growth in the past year
Growth 
 supported by domestic and foreign demandGDP growth for 2015 as a whole at highest mark since 2011Real GDP in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15949698100102104Seasonally adjusted
–6–4–20+2+4Lin scale
Year-on-year percentage change2010 = 100, log scale
%
5 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
19

The positive underlying trend dynamics of pri -
vate consumption presumably continued un -
abated in the final quarter of 2015. Although, 
due to a decline in consumer confidence in the 
meantime, price- adjusted retail sales virtually 
remained stuck at the previous quarter’s levels, 
seasonally-  adjusted new passenger car regis -
trations jumped. All in all, the growth rate of 
private consumption may have tailed off 
slightly.
The perceptible rise in real disposable income 
has presumably continued to impact positively 
on private consumption. On average over the 
first three quarters of 2015, real disposable in -come was up by 2¼% on the year, not least on 
the back of improved employment figures and 
extremely consumer- friendly price trends. Over 
that period, the saving ratio barely budged; real 
income gains were thus converted more or less 
proportionally into increased consumption.
Indicators of euro-  area investment activity dis -
play a mixed picture towards the end of the 
year. Construction investment presumably 
picked up perceptibly. One sign of this is that 
average construction output (both general con -
struction and civil engineering) was up over the 
October- November period by a seasonally ad -
justed ¾% from the previous quarter, possibly 
attributable in part to the weather conditions. 
On the other hand, capital goods production 
was down markedly in the fourth quarter, 
which could point to a fall in investment in ma -
chinery and equipment.
Following a subpar performance a quarter earl -
ier, exports appear to have rebounded some -
what in the fourth quarter, though they failed 
to recover the strong growth rate of the first 
half of 2015. The available data show that, on 
average over October- November, exports were 
up by a seasonally and price- adjusted 1¼% 
from the previous quarter. It was not only intra- 
euro- area trade which showed a marked in -
crease (+1¾%). Exports of goods to non- euro- 
area countries, especially to EU countries out -
side the euro area, picked up as well. Over the 
same period, imports were up by 1¾% after 
price adjustment. External trade prices are still 
being influenced to a great degree by sharply 
falling commodity prices. Export and import 
values were each therefore up by a mere ½%; 
the trade balance remained virtually un -
changed.
Industrial activity remained restrained in the last 
quarter of 2015, too. Although output of inter -
mediate goods picked up slightly on the period 
after seasonal adjustment, at the same time, 
consumer goods output declined slightly, while 
capital goods output fell markedly. Owing, 
amongst other factors, to the mild weather Dynamics of 
 private consump -
tion have sub-sided somewhat
Perceptible rise 
in real dispos-
able incomeRise in construc-tion investment
Exports probably 
back up  somewhat
Industrial activity 
still restrained2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 201597100103106Retail sales (price-adjusted)
2010 = 100
2,0002,2002,4002,6002,8003,000
New passenger car 
registrations
(Quarterly totals)Scale reducedNumber
(thousands)
8590100110120 2010 = 100
Goods exports1
Goods imports1Seasonally adjusted, quarterly averages, log scaleEconomic indicators for the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Nomin-
al export and import data according to foreign trade statistics 
(intra and extra trade). Price-adjusted using the producer price 
index (exports) or the import price index.
Deutsche BundesbankOct-
Nov
90100110120Industrial outputDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
20

conditions, energy production dropped sharply. 
At last report, industrial output was up by ¾% 
on the year.
The moderate upward underlying macroeco -
nomic trend is visible in most of the euro area. 
In France, real GDP was up in the fourth quar -
ter by ¼% after seasonal adjustment, although 
private consumption dropped off from the pre -
vious quarter. Factors could have included not 
only a weather- induced decline in expenditure 
on energy but also the November 2015 attacks 
in Paris. By contrast, corporate investment was 
up sharply, presumably due also to tax incen -
tives. In addition, according to provisional na -
tional accounts data, there was a perceptible 
build- up of inventories. On the whole, in 2015 
economic activity picked up the pace markedly; 
GDP was up by 1% following an increase of 
only ¼% in 2014. Aggregate output in Italy ex -
panded only minimally in the last quarter of the 
year. Following three years of GDP contraction, 
the Italian economy stabilised, reporting aver -
age GDP growth of ½% for the year. Spain saw 
a continuation of the dynamic upward eco -
nomic trend, supported by domestic and for -
eign demand alike. Real GDP in the fourth 
quarter was up by ¾% after seasonal adjust -
ment, and by 3¼% over the entire year ended. 
In the rest of the euro area, the quarterly 
change in the pace of economic growth was 
minimal; only in Greece and Finland did GDP 
continue to contract.
The upward trajectory of euro- area economic 
activity will presumably persist in the first quar -
ter of 2016. As before, domestic demand is 
continuing to benefit from favourable financing 
terms, higher employment, rising disposable in -
comes and favourable price trends. However, 
foreign trade, particularly exports to non- euro- 
area countries, could lose steam. At last report, 
survey indicators were showing a certain damp -
ening of economic agents’ expectations, 
though these still remained positive.
The gradual improvement in the labour market 
continued in the fourth quarter. In December, the standardised unemployment rate fell to 
10.4%, one percentage point below its level 
one year earlier. Third- quarter employment was 
up by a seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the quar -
ter and by 1.1% on the year. Even so, the an -
nual percentage increase in hourly labour costs 
contracted further during the third quarter to 
1.1%.
In the final quarter of 2015, euro- area con -
sumer prices fell slightly after seasonal adjust -
ment compared to the third quarter, in which 
they had moved sideways. The main reason 
was that crude oil prices continued to drop, 
leading to a sharp reduction in energy prices. 
By contrast, the prices of the other compon -
ents of the basket of goods went up, albeit, on 
the whole, less strongly than in the two previ -
ous quarters. This was especially the case for 
services, for which the upward trajectory of 
prices flattened markedly, but also for non-  
energy industrial goods. Food prices went up 
quite sharply. Annual headline HICP inflation Positive eco-
nomic trend in most euro- area countries
Pace of growth 
tailing off slightly at the current endSlowly declining unemployment rate
Consumer prices 
down slightlyReal GDP in selected euro-area countries
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 152010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
9698100102104106
9496981001021049698100102104106
Italy
SpainFranceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
21

rose slightly to 0.2%; excluding energy, it 
climbed to 1.1%.
For 2015 as a whole, the lower crude oil prices 
were the dominant element in consumer price 
developments. Owing to plummeting energy 
prices, HICP inflation dropped down to zero, 
following a very low rate of 0.4% a year earlier. 
The average increase in the prices of the other 
components, at 0.9% for 2015, was somewhat 
stronger on the year, yet at the same time per -
ceptibly lower than the annual average since 
1999.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, in Janu -
ary 2016 seasonally adjusted euro- area con -sumer prices were down only slightly on the 
month (-0.1%), even though consumers once 
again paid significantly less for energy. In fact, 
industrial goods prices rose quite sharply, and 
even the prices of services rose slightly. On the 
other hand, food prices remained virtually un -
changed. Annual HICP inflation excluding en -
ergy rose to +1.1% from December, and head -
line HICP inflation was up quite considerably to 
+0.4%, since energy prices had dropped even 
further a year earlier. Should crude oil prices 
move along the current forward path in the 
coming months, headline HICP inflation could 
nonetheless temporarily return to negative ter -
ritory.Consumer prices 
unchanged in 2015 owing to decline in energy pricesNon- energy 
industrial goods 
prices up quite 
sharply in 
J anuaryDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council, at its 
meeting on 3  December 2015, once again 
assessed  the strength and persistence of the 
factors that are currently slowing the return of 
inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% in the 
medium term, and subsequently approved a 
further package of monetary policy measures. 
One decision was to lower the interest rate on 
the deposit facility by 10 basis points to -0.30%. 
The interest rates on the main refinancing oper -
ations and the marginal lending facility, mean -
while, were left unchanged at 0.05% and 
0.30% respectively.
The Governing Council’s decisions were motiv -
ated in part by the results of the latest Eurosys -
tem staff projections, completed in November 
2015, which indicated continued downside 
risks to the inflation outlook and slightly weaker 
inflation dynamics than previously expected. 
According to these staff projections, the per -
sistence of low inflation rates reflects economic 
slack and headwinds from the external environ -
ment. The majority of the members of the ECB 
Governing Council were therefore of the opin -
ion that further monetary accommodation was 
needed in order to secure a return of inflation 
rates towards levels that are below, but close 
to, 2% and thereby to anchor medium- term in -
flation expectations.
Besides lowering the deposit facility rate, the 
Governing Council also decided to extend the 
term of the asset purchase programme (APP). 
The monthly purchases of €60 billion under the 
APP are now intended to run until the end of 
March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any 
case until the Governing Council sees a sus -
tained adjustment in the path of inflation con -
sistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.Another measure adopted at the meeting was 
to reinvest the principal payments on the secur -
ities purchased under the APP as they mature. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council decided 
that euro- denominated marketable debt instru -
ments issued by regional and local govern -
ments in the euro area would be added to the 
list of assets that are eligible for regular pur -
chases by the respective national central banks 
under the public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP).
As regards monetary refinancing operations, 
the Governing Council also decided to con -
tinue conducting the main refinancing oper -
ations and three- month longer- term refinan -
cing operations as fixed rate tender procedures 
with full allotment for as long as necessary, and 
at least until the end of the last reserve main -
tenance period of 2017.
According to the Governing Council, the down -
side risks to the inflation outlook increased 
again at the beginning of 2016 despite the 
continued economic recovery. This assessment 
prompted the Governing Council, at its first 
policy meeting in the new year, to conclude 
that heightened uncertainty over emerging 
market economies’ growth prospects, volatility 
in financial and commodity markets, and geo -
political risks raise the risk that euro- area infla -
tion dynamics might be weaker than expected. 
The Governing Council therefore made an an -
nouncement on 21 January that it will review 
and possibly reconsider its monetary policy 
stance at its meeting in March, when the new 
macroeconomic projections become available.
On 5 February, the Eurosystem held assets in 
the amount of €557.3 billion as part of the 
PSPP , and the PSPP portfolio had an average 
residual maturity of eight years. The outstand -
ing amounts purchased to date under the third 
covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3) 
and the asset- backed securities purchase pro -ECB Governing 
Council makes further cut to deposit rate
Governing 
Council modifies term of APP and …… other APP 
parameters
Full allotment 
extended until at least  end-2017
Monetary policy 
stance to be reviewed in March
Purchase 
volumes  still in line with announced volume Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
23

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 28  October 2015 and 26  January 2016 saw a marked increase in euro- area 
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors (see the table below). The fi  gure in 
the December 2015-January 2016 reserve 
period averaged €596.8 billion, which was 
€39.3 billion up on its average level in the 
September- October 2015 reserve period, 
though it did fl  uctuate within a broad corri-dor between €551.6 billion and €647.3 bil-lion over the period under review. One fac-tor driving the stronger average demand for liquidity was the €20.4 billion net rise in the volume of banknotes in circulation, which is 
a typical seasonal phenomenon, especially 
in the run- up to Christmas. Another was 
the decline in the combined total of net for-
eign assets and other factors – which are 
taken together to allow for liquidity- neutral 
valuation effects – by €31.7 billion overall, 
causing liquidity to be absorbed in the same amount. Liquidity was provided, on the 
other hand, by the €12.7 billion net decline 
in government deposits to an average of 
€82.5 billion in the December 2015-January 
2016 reserve period. The minimum reserve 
requirement in that reserve maintenance period stood at €113.3 billion, which was largely on a par with the fi  gure in the 
September- October 2015 period.
One of the decisions which the ECB Gov-erning Council took at its monetary policy meeting on 3 December 2015 was to cut 
the deposit facility rate by 10 basis points to -0.30%. The main refi  nancing rate at which 
all tender operations are currently being 
allotted , however, remained unchanged at 
0.05% (see page 23 for details of the ECB 
Governing Council’s other monetary policy 
decisions). On the whole, the outstanding tender volume barely changed during the period under review (see the chart on 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2015/2016
28 Oct to
8 Dec9 Dec to26 Jan
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  
central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  4.1 – 16.3
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  1.7 + 11.0
3 Net foreign assets
1 –  6.9 –  0.6
4 Other factors 1 – 22.6 –  1.7
Total – 31.9 –  7.6
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  4.1 +  5.5
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  2.8 +  7.6
(c) Other operations + 87.5 + 81.1
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –  0.0 +  0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 20.3 – 23.5
Total + 60.3 + 70.8
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 28.5 + 63.3
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.2 –  0.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
24

page 26), climbing by only just over €6 bil-
lion on balance to an average of just under €539 billion in the December 2015-January 2016 reserve period. The relatively low take- 
up of the sixth targeted longer- term refi  -nancing operation (TLTRO) in mid- Decem-ber 2015, at €18.3 billion, partly contrib-uted to this slight growth. This raised the 
overall volume allotted under the TLTROs to 
just €418 billion, roughly speaking. At an average of around €52 billion in the De-
cember 2015-January 2016 period, refi  nan-
cing volumes in the three- month tenders were just under €18 billion down on the average for the September- October 2015 
period. Demand for main refi  nancing oper-
ations hovered between €60.5 billion and €89.0 billion in the two reserve mainten-
ance periods under review.
Liquidity continued to be provided mainly 
by the Eurosystem’s purchase programmes, 
which boosted the balance sheet holdings 
of securities to an average value of €812 bil-
lion in total in the December 2015-January 
2016 reserve period, eclipsing the aggre-
gate liquidity needs stemming from autono-
mous factors and the minimum reserve re-
quirement. During the course of the two 
reserve maintenance periods under review, 
the balance sheet holdings of the three pro-
grammes making up the asset purchase 
programme (APP) climbed by €147.9 billion 
(PSPP), €20.0 billion (CBPP3) and €1.7 bil-
lion (ABSPP). As at 5 February 2016, these 
holdings stood at €557.3 billion (PSPP), €152.9 billion (CBPP3) and €17.7 billion (ABSPP). Maturities and end- of- quarter 
valuation adjustments, on the other hand, 
continued to diminish the balance sheet holdings of securities accumulated under 
the since- terminated Eurosystem asset pur-
chase programmes, with holdings as at 5 February 2016 standing at €19.8 billion 
(CBPP1), €9.1 billion (CBPP2) and €122.0 bil-lion (SMP).Purchases under the APP were a notable 
factor driving the continued increase in ex-
cess liquidity in the period under review. 
This grew to an average level of €640 bil-
lion in the December 2015-January 2016 
reserve  period and was up by €136 billion 
on the average in the September- October 2015 reserve period. Excess liquidity occa-sionally experienced spells of heightened 
volatility lasting just a few days, primarily as 
a result of swings in autonomous factors (notably government deposits with the 
Euro system).
The extremely generous liquidity supply meant that overnight rates in the period Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche BundesbankSep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
2015 20160.30.20.100.1
–––+Daily data
€ bn%
0100200300400500600700
Excess liquidity1Spread over the deposit facility rate
Eonia
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket)Eonia
Stoxx GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket)
Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rate
01020Basis
pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
25

under review continued to move in line 
with the deposit facility rate, and the reduc-
tion in the latter on 9 December 2015 was 
no exception (see the chart on page 25). Eonia was running at an average rate of -0.23% in the December 2015-January 2016 reserve period, 7 basis points up on the deposit facility rate (previous reserve maintenance period: 6 basis points). The reference rate for secured overnight de-posits –  GC Pooling Overnight (ECB bas-
ket) – was lower than Eonia throughout the 
period under review, averaging -0.29% in the December 2015-January 2016 reserve 
period. As in the previous period, this was 
just 1 basis point up on the deposit facility 
rate, even though the latter had been cut. 
Since Eonia and GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket) responded almost identically to the 
reduction in the deposit facility rate by almost  exactly following suit, the spread between the two benchmark rates re-mained unchanged at 6 basis points on average in both reserve maintenance periods under review . The high volumes of 
excess liquidity meant that end- of- month pressures ceased to have an impact on 
secured  GC Pooling Overnight (ECB basket) 
rates in the period under review, while the 
end- of- month hikes in Eonia in October and 
November 2015 were marginal at best. Only at the end of the calendar year did Eonia show a relatively clear, albeit short- 
lived and seasonal increase of 8 basis points on 30 December 2015 compared with one day previously, though turnover was admit-
tedly very low. Average Eonia turnover, which had already been very weak in the 
September- October 2015 reserve period at 
€15.9 billion, amounted to just €10.0 billion 
in the October- December 2015 period and 
to €12.4 billion in the December 2015-Janu-ary 2016 period. GC Pooling Overnight (ECB 
basket) turnover likewise diminished, aver-
aging €6.3 billion in the two periods under 
review, compared with €8.8 billion in the 
September- October 2015 period.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP) and public sector purchase programme (PSPP). 2 Current 
account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility
80060040020002004006008001,0001,2001,400
––––+++++++
July August September October November December January February
2015 2016Current account holdings
in excess of the reserve requirementThree-month tendersPurchase programmes1
Targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs)Marginal lending facility
Excess liquidity 2
Main refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
26

gramme (ABSPP) came to €152.9 billion and 
€17.7 billion respectively. In sum, the volume of 
securities purchased under the APP is thus in 
line with the previously announced average 
monthly volume of €60 billion.
The sixth of a total of eight targeted longer-  
term refinancing operations (TLTROs) was allot -
ted on 11 December 2015. With excess liquidity 
climbing from an already very high level, and 
wholesale funding available at low cost in the 
matching maturity bracket of up to three years, 
55 institutions took up a total volume of €18.3 
billion. The allotted volume was in line with 
market expectations.
Demand for regular refinancing operations 
surged temporarily on account of the usual 
year- end effects, but the ample liquidity levels 
meant the upturn was much flatter than in 
recent  years. The Eurosystem’s total monetary 
policy refinancing volume peaked at just under 
€560 billion before falling back to a little less 
than €526 billion at the end of January, which 
is roughly where it stood at the end of the last 
reporting period in October.
The period under review saw the APP pur -
chases drive excess liquidity levels still higher to 
around €674 billion at last count, in a trend 
pattern observed in recent months that looks 
set to continue for the remainder of this year 
on the back of continued APP purchases.
Among short- term money market rates, the 
period under review saw the Eonia rate dip to 
a fresh low of -0.253%, a decline which largely 
reflected the 10-bp cut in the deposit facility 
rate. Abundant excess liquidity levels meant 
that the temporary upturn at the turn of the 
year was milder than it had been one year earl -
ier. The secured overnight rate (Stoxx GC Pool -
ing), which was running at -0.291% when this 
report went to press, was likewise roughly 
10 basis points down on its level prior to the 
cut in the deposit facility rate, meaning that it, 
too, moved broadly in lockstep with the policy 
rate. In effect, then, the deposit facility rate is acting as a cap on the downside potential in 
money market rates. Similarly, the unsecured 
three- month Euribor also continued its trend 
decline to mark a new all- time low of -0.169% 
at the current end, sending the spread be -
tween the three-  month Euribor and Eonia 
– which had briefly hovered around the 1-bp 
mark amid expectations of a cut in the deposit 
facility rate – back up to just under 10 basis 
points.
Forward rates in the money market initially 
responded  to the Governing Council’s 3  De -
cember meeting by spiking higher after market 
expectations of a stronger cut in the deposit 
facility rate that had partly been priced into for -
ward rates were dashed. Eonia swap and for -
ward rates have been back on a downward 
path recently, steepening their descent after 
the announcement of the Governing Council’s 
decisions on 21 January in a possible indication 
of rebounding expectations that a further cut 55 banks 
borrow  €18.3 billion in sixth TLTRO
Recourse to 
regular refinan-cing operations stable overall
Significant 
growth in excess liquidity persists
Short- term 
money market rates follow policy  rate downwardsMarket expect -
ations regarding further cut in deposit rateMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-month Euribor less 
three-month  Eonia  swap  rate.  • Average  1  to  10  February 
2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 20160.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
050Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
27

in the deposit facility rate is on the cards before 
the end of 2016.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 remained 
on a robust growth path in the autumn quar -
ter, propelled by an appreciable rise in loans to 
the private sector, which thus continued their 
upbeat trend, and – as in the previous quar -
ter – the Eurosystem’s asset purchases. On bal -
ance, the MFI sector’s securitised lending to 
general government once again stood out as 
the main counterpart driving monetary growth 
in the last three months of the year. On the 
other hand, the Eurosystem’s asset purchases 
simultaneously had a negative effect on M3 
growth, as asset- shedding by non- euro- area 
residents and a shift by euro- area investors into 
non- euro-  area assets impacted the money 
stock negatively. The chief money component 
fuelling the expansion of M3, meanwhile, was 
the continued strong preference among 
money- holders for highly liquid assets, a stance 
which was spurred by the interest rate constel -
lation.
Overnight deposits were the chief beneficiary 
here, attracting continued strong demand pri -marily among households as a result of the 
relatively narrow and diminishing interest rate 
premiums offered by other deposit vehicles. 
The inflow into overnight deposits of non-  
financial corporations, meanwhile, was some -
what smaller than it had been one quarter earl -
ier. Demand from the non- financial private sec -
tor for short-  term time deposits eased again 
noticeably, but by less than it had done in the 
third quarter. Aggregate inflows were once 
again up slightly on the quarter, but a base 
effect  caused the annual M3 growth rate to 
contract marginally to 4.7%. All things con -
sidered, the year 2015 as a whole saw the 
money stock move sideways at a robust level.
Despite the net inflows seen in the reporting 
quarter, a base effect prevented the annual 
growth rate of loans to the euro- area private 
sector (adjusted for sales and securitisation) 
from continuing its recovery, stagnating at 
0.4% at the end of December. That is admit -
tedly well short of the annual M3 growth rate, 
but the shortfall can be explained arithmetically 
by the increase in securitised lending to general 
government and the reduction in MFI longer-  
term financial liabilities.
Growth in loans to the euro- area private sector 
in the fourth quarter was mainly propelled by 
loans to the non- financial private sector and, to Monetary devel-
opments marked by APP and interest rate constellationOvernight deposits still driving strong 
M3 growth
Growth in 
money stock still far stronger than loan growthConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2015 Q4 2015 Q3
Central government deposits – 12.0 22.0
Monetary aggregate M3 125.1 119.3
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 129.8 143.3
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) –  8.6 – 32.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 3.9 8.3
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 53.7 – 37.3
of which
Capital and reserves 40.4 18.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 94.2 – 55.4Assets 2015 Q4 2015 Q3
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 5.7 54.9
Loans 21.7 –  7.8
Loans, adjusted 1 16.5 –  2.6
Securitised lending – 16.0 62.6
Credit to general government in the euro area 70.9 112.1
Loans – 17.4 – 10.2
Securitised lending 88.4 122.3
Net external assets – 35.1 – 63.9
Other counterparts of M3 17.8 0.9
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
28

a lesser extent, by increasing (rather than con -
tracting, as in the previous two quarters) lend -
ing to the financial corporations sector. Loans 
to non- financial corporations in all four major 
euro- area countries continued to stabilise in 
the quarter under review, some to a greater 
extent  than others (see the chart on page 30). 
While banks in Germany and France ramped up 
their lending activity discernibly, and Spain, 
too, saw its first increase in five years, in Italy, 
net redemptions were slightly up on the quar -
ter, but the upward movement seen in recent 
quarters remained intact.
In the euro area as a whole, loans to non-  
financial corporations, which only returned to 
expansion mode in net terms in the first half of 
2015, contracted slightly on balance in the 
fourth quarter, just as they had done one quar -
ter earlier. Stronger medium and longer- term 
lending was eclipsed by the substantial net 
redemptions  of short- term loans. However, a 
country breakdown reveals that the drop in 
short- term lending was down to statistical one- 
off effects in the Netherlands,1 just as it had 
been one quarter earlier, which probably meant 
that in the reporting quarter, the reported 
figures  understate the actual loan dynamics. 
The annualised growth rate for loans to non-  
financial corporations in the euro area shrugged 
off these one- off effects and took another 
small step on the path to recovery, closing the 
quarter under review with a marginally positive Loans to non- 
financial corpor-ations in four major countries still on the rise, …
… one- off effect 
in a smaller core country causes downward bias in euro- area developmentsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Year-on-year percentage change. 2 In percent-
age points. 3 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, an 
increase curbs M3 growth. 4 Adjusted for loan sales and secur-
itisation. 5 Non-monetary financial corporations. 6 Non-finan-
cial corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 201563036912
––++++
–6–30+3+6+9+12
30369
–+++Seasonally adjusted, end-of-quarter data
... monetary aggregates
... counterparts
Growth contribution by sector 2of which
Loans to the private sector 4Growth rate 1 of M3 and the
growth contributions 2 of the ...
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial
liabilities3
Net external assets
Credit to the
private sector 4
Financial
corporations 5
Non-financial
corporations 6
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Growth rate1Securitised lending to
general government
1 Much of the negative outflow seen in the quarter was 
probably down to notional cash pooling by euro- area non- 
financial corporations with bank accounts in the Nether -
lands. Cash pooling is the process of moving the cash held 
by various enterprises (eg members of a multinational 
group) into a single bank account as a way of optimising 
liquidity management. Notional cash pooling means that 
the enterprises in question each continue to operate their 
bank accounts. The bank operating these accounts treats 
them as a single bank account, but it is not allowed to net 
out the resulting receivables and liabilities, thereby extend -
ing that bank’s balance sheet. As a result, the amounts that 
would be netted in effective (ie genuine) cash pooling also 
cause an upward bias in the monetary series; movements 
based on actual transactions would normally be many 
times smaller. Further details can be found in De Neder -
landsche Bank, DNB expands statistics on monetary finan -
cial institutions, Statistical News Release, 27 October 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
29

growth rate of 0.3% thanks to an improved 
showing in the first half- year.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) carried out in 
the fourth quarter suggested that credit de -
mand from the non- financial corporations sec -
tor was continuing to pick up. Although the euro- area banks surveyed said that they had, 
on balance, eased their standards for business 
loans only marginally, they also reported that 
demand among non-  financial corporations for 
bank credit had soared in the final quarter of 
2015 with a vibrancy last seen in the fourth 
quarter of 2006. The banks attributed this de -
mand primarily to the low general level of 
interest rates and, to a lesser extent, to the 
funding which businesses needed for their in -
vestment, inventories and working capital.
Growth in loans to euro- area households 
stalled in the quarter under review at a moder -
ate annualised growth rate of 1.4% in Decem -
ber 2015. With interest rates mired at historic -
ally low levels, household demand for credit 
was yet again fuelled chiefly by loans for house 
purchase, although consumer credit made an -
other distinctly positive contribution. As in the 
preceding quarters, loans for house purchase 
were up across the euro area as a whole, but 
developments in the individual countries were 
rather more mixed. While Germany in particu -
lar saw continued strong loan growth, many 
periphery countries experienced a decline – not 
least as a result of the ongoing need for house -
holds to deleverage in some of these countries. 
For the euro area as a whole, the banks sur -
veyed in the BLS reported yet another surge in 
household demand for loans for house pur -
chase, along with a slight easing of credit 
standards.
Compared to loans for house purchase, the rise 
seen in consumer credit over the past few 
quarters was spread much more broadly across 
the euro area, probably in a reflection of the 
ongoing pick- up in private consumption in the 
euro area. This view is backed by the renewed 
sharp upturn in consumer credit volumes indi -
cated by the BLS. The BLS respondents con -
tinue to mainly attribute this upturn to strong 
consumer spending habits, besides the robust 
consumer confidence and low interest rates. 
Credit standards in this segment remained vir -
tually unchanged.Credit demand 
from non- financial corpor-ations continu-ing to reboundDistinct rise in loans to house-holds driven by loans for house purchase
Growth stable in 
consumer creditLoans to non-financial corporations*
60402002040
–––++€ billion; quarter-on-quarter change, seasonally adjusted and 
adjusted for loan sales and securitisation
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Non-financial 
corporations. The implementation of ESA 2010 means that as 
from  December  2014,  holding  companies  of  non-financial 
groups have been assigned not to the non-financial corpora-
tions  sector  but  to  the  financial  corporations  sector  in banks’monthly balance sheet statistics.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro areaFrance
Italy
Spain
Germany
Securitised lending of MFIs to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 20151000100200300400
–++++€ billion, year-on-year change
Eurosystem
Euro-area MFIs excluding the Eurosystem
Entire MFI sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
30

As mentioned above, monetary growth was 
driven not only by loans to the private sector, 
but predominantly by the large expansion in 
securitised lending to general government, 
which once again represented the main coun -
terpart supporting M3 (see the table on 
page  28). The somewhat lower quarter- on- 
quarter growth is attributable to commercial 
banks reducing their holdings of domestic gov -
ernment bonds to a considerably greater ex -
tent in the fourth quarter than in the preceding 
quarters (see the chart on page 30). However, 
the bulk of the Eurosystem’s asset purchases to 
date have ultimately originated from holders 
outside the domestic banking sector. The re -
duction of securitised lending by euro-  area 
banks affected both government bonds and, to 
a noticeable extent, debt securities in the 
domestic  private sector. This contrasted with 
only minor equity inflows.
While securitised lending to general govern -
ment in the euro area from the MFI sector as a 
whole mainly supported monetary growth 
from the launch of the PSPP , there were net 
outflows of funds from the euro area to non-  
residents in the same period. The contribution 
to M3 growth by the MFI sector’s net external 
assets had, therefore, become increasingly 
negative since mid- year (see the chart on 
page 29). As a result of the ongoing current account surpluses, euro- area non- banks in the 
reporting quarter continued to record  inflows 
of funds from abroad which, taken in isolation, 
fuelled monetary expansion. However, the in -
flow of funds arising from trade in goods and 
services was again more than outweighed by 
outflows from portfolio transactions. These 
outflows were probably attributable to PSPP-  
induced capital movements, in particular, al -
though additional factors such as the monetary 
policy decisions by the Eurosystem and the US 
Federal Reserve (Fed), too, are likely to have 
had an impact on securities transactions with 
non- residents in the final quarter. For example, 
non- resident investors continued to sell gov -
ernment bonds issued in the euro area and, to 
a marked extent, also bonds of the non-  
financial private sector. Moreover, the outflows 
from securities transactions were, above all, 
driven by the sustained high demand from 
domestic  investors in the non-  bank sector for 
debt securities issued outside the euro area. 
One factor behind this is likely to have been the 
substitution of domestic securities sold to the 
Eurosystem under the APP with foreign secur -
ities.
MFI longer- term financial liabilities, which had 
at times been the largest supporting M3 coun -
terpart in the preceding quarters, slowed down 
perceptibly in the reporting quarter as well. Eurosystem 
securities pur-chases drive monetary growth, …
… but also 
capital  exports from portfolio investmentBalance sheet assets of euro-area banks*
Source: ECB. * Including money market funds. 1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20153,0002,0001,00001,0002,0003,0004,000
–––++++€ billion, year-on-year change1
Claims on the 
non-monetary private 
sector in the euro area
Claims on general 
government in the euro area
Claims on other MFIs
in the euro areaTotal assets
Other assets, including 
financial derivatives from the trading portfolioClaims on the Eurosystem
Claims on the rest of the worldDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
31

Against the backdrop of the flat yield curve, 
long- term time deposits and long- term bank 
debt securities, in particular, continued to de -
cline. Moreover, the consistently significant net 
redemptions of bank debt securities held by the 
money- holding sector are likely to have been 
driven by the liquidity currently provided by the 
Eurosystem at favourable conditions and by 
inflows  of deposits, rendering market- based 
funding unattractive by comparison. The Euro -
system’s CBPP3, too, is likely to have spurred 
the reduction in bank debt securities held by 
the money- holding sector.Euro- area commercial banks’ total assets fell 
noticeably in 2015 (see the chart on page 31). 
Disregarding the marked outflows from finan -
cial derivatives that affected both sides of the 
balance sheet in equal measure, the decline on 
the liabilities side was mainly attributable to the 
lower issuance of bank debt securities. The 
assets side reflected the reduction in claims on 
non- residents and – as part of the APP – on 
general government in the euro area. The latter 
applied, above all, to banks in France, Italy and 
Spain, which scaled back their holdings of do -
mestic government bonds. Credit institutions in 
France and Germany, in particular, reduced 
their external claims. The continued decline in 
interbank claims in the euro- area is probably 
attributable to the financial institutions’ gener -
ally comfortable liquidity   position, which is re -
flected, amongst other things, in the banks’ 
claims on the Eurosystem, which rose discern -
ibly.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
Once again, there was a distinct rise in deposit 
business in Germany in the fourth quarter of 
2015. As in the previous quarters, this was 
attributable  solely to the development of short- 
term bank deposits. Long- term deposits de -
clined considerably after they had risen percep -
tibly in the previous quarter owing to a large-  
volume securitisation transaction. Besides 
overnight deposits, for the first time in six quar -
ters, short- term time deposits contributed to 
the positive development of deposits in the 
reporting  quarter. In view of the heightened 
uncertainty in the capital markets, this relatively 
liquid and safe form of deposit was apparently 
seen again as a comparatively attractive invest -
ment alternative.
From a sectoral perspective, households con -
tinued to make the greatest contribution to the 
sustained build- up of overnight deposits. Non- 
financial corporations, too, expanded their vol -Further decline 
in longer- term financial liabil-ities due to shrinking long- term forms of investmentBanks’ asset items discernibly lower in 2015
Deposit growth in low- interest- rate setting still dominated by build- up of  overnight deposits …
… and driven mainly by the non- financial private sectorInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015012345% pa, monthly data
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2up to 2 years
over 2 years
up to 3 monthsDeposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsDeposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
32

ume of overnight deposits and, for the first 
time in just under two years, increased their 
short- term time deposits markedly, whereas 
their remaining bank deposits continued to 
stagnate. The increase in liquid bank deposits 
benefited from the interest rate gap narrowing 
further compared with other forms of deposit 
(see the chart on page 32), households’ rising 
disposable incomes and non- financial corpor -
ations’ high levels of liquidity.
Compared with the previous quarter, financial 
corporations in the reporting quarter likewise 
showed somewhat greater interest in more 
liquid  bank deposits. However, on balance, 
financial  corporations slimmed down their de -
posits held with domestic banks in the report -
ing quarter by again considerably reducing 
long- term time deposits. Consequently, the 
development  of deposits in this sector is likely 
to have continued to be driven by the search 
for higher- yielding forms of investment.
Following a significant expansion in the preced -
ing quarter, banks’ lending business with the 
domestic non- bank sector weakened discern -
ibly in the final quarter of 2015. This was due, 
above all, to banks reducing their holdings of 
securities issued by private and sovereign en -
tities, which they had stocked up on markedly 
in the preceding quarter. Moreover, the decline 
in unsecuritised loans to the public sector 
accelerated , not least reflecting the public sec -
tor’s lower funding needs as a result of its cur -
rently favourable budget situation.
By contrast, as in the previous quarters, banks 
recorded a noticeable increase in lending to the 
domestic private sector, which was essentially 
due to yet another considerable rise in loans to 
households. The increase in lending to this sec -
tor has been characterised by the trend of ris -
ing demand for housing loans since 2010. In 
the reporting quarter, too, the sound income 
and asset situation of households combined 
with the lack of attractive investment alterna -
tives helped stimulate demand for housing 
and, thus, also for housing loans. In addition, the interest rate level remains exceptionally 
low. The interest rate on long- term loans for 
house purchase stood at 2.0% at the end of 
the reporting quarter and was, therefore, close 
to its historic low of May 2015 since the intro -
duction of harmonised MFI interest rate statis -
tics in 2003.
Indications of further determinants are pro -
vided by the latest BLS results, which suggest 
that, besides the low general interest rate level, 
demand by households for housing loans was 
additionally supported by households’ persist -
ently positive outlook regarding the housing 
market and house price developments. By con -Deposit business 
with financial corporations still characterised by search for yield
Discernibly less 
lending business with domestic non- banks on balance
By contrast, 
continued increase in loans to the private sector due mainly to vibrant demand for loans for house purchaseLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
Changes in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Item2015
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 33.1 25.7
With agreed maturities
of up to 2 years – 3.8 8.4
of over 2 years 12.9 – 15.1
Redeemable at notice
of up to 3 months 1.8 1.2
of over 3 months – 4.4 –  4.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 2.6 –  5.5
Securitised lending 5.1 –  2.1
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 13.8 12.6
of which to households 3 11.7 10.6
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4, 5 2.0 2.1
Securitised lending 9.3 –  1.3
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Corpor-ations and quasi- corporations. 5 As from the implementation of 
ESA 2010, holding companies of the non- fi  nancial corporations 
sector (eg management holding companies with predominantly fi  nancial shareholdings) have been reclassifi  ed from the non-
fi  nancial corporations  sector to the fi  nancial corporations sector 
(as other fi  nancial intermediaries) in banks’ balance sheet statis-tics. Moreover, those entities and enterprises which are non- 
market producers (eg public utilities) and have been counted as 
non- fi  nancial corporations thus far have now been reallocated 
to the general government sector (as off- budget entities).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
33

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respond-ents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2016 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 20161.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 161.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
60300306090
––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
34

trast, taken in isolation, the fact that house -
holds drew on own funds and took out loans 
with other banks to make purchases exerted a 
dampening effect on the borrowing require -
ments vis- à- vis credit institutions participating 
in the BLS.
The lending policy of BLS respondent banks did 
not counteract the vibrant demand for loans 
for house purchase. Credit standards for hous -
ing loans remained unchanged, while margins 
even narrowed somewhat on balance. Based 
on the credit standards which have either re -
mained unchanged or, in some cases, been 
tightened in this segment over the last few 
years, the respondent institutions did not take 
on higher lending risks by lowering their min -
imum requirements vis- à- vis potential borrow -
ers. However, the favourable economic climate 
suggests that it is likely that a greater number 
of credit applicants met the banks’ unaltered 
requirements or more households showed 
interest in borrowing funds, as a result of which 
banks were able to grant a larger amount of 
loans. Nevertheless, the current growth in 
housing loans granted to households, with an 
annual rate of 3.5%, remained moderate on 
the whole and, for a prolonged period of time 
since 1981, fell distinctly short of the long- term 
average by historical standards.
According to the BLS results, demand for con -
sumer credit in the fourth quarter of 2015 did 
not have as much traction as in the previous 
quarters. According to the bank managers sur -
veyed as part of the BLS, the lending business 
of other banks, amongst other things, had a 
dampening effect in this segment, whereas the 
low general interest rate level and consumers’ 
robust propensity to purchase fuelled demand. 
Overall, aggregated across all reporting banks 
in Germany, these favourable underlying condi -
tions were reflected in a noticeable increase in 
consumer credit to households. This was con -
sistent with the banks participating in the BLS 
reporting that they had adjusted their lending 
standards in a similar way to those in the hous -
ing loan segment. The standards for consumer credit remained unchanged, whereas margins 
were tightened slightly.
A distinct rise was also recorded in lending to 
non- financial corporations, which in Germany 
continued to exhibit a strong preference for 
long- term loans. However, unlike in the two 
previous quarters, there was also demand from 
non- financial corporations for medium- term 
loans, albeit to a much lower extent. Non-  
financial corporations’ demand for loans in the 
reporting quarter was fuelled by the increase in 
borrowing costs in the capital market and a 
simultaneous rise in borrowing requirements. 
The latest BLS results generally underpin this 
assessment. According to the banks participat -
ing in the BLS, the demand for bank loans by 
non- financial corporations gained a great deal 
of momentum in the fourth quarter. The re -
spondent bank managers mainly attributed this 
substantial expansion to the quarter- on- quarter 
increase in financing needs for fixed investment 
purposes. The low interest rate level, too, Virtually no 
change in  German banks’ lending policy on loans for house purchase
Marked increase 
in consumer creditDistinct rise in lending to non- financial corpor-ations due to low interest rates and heightened investment activityLoans of German banks toselected sectors
1 Year-on-year rate of change. 2 Non-monetary financial cor-
porations.  3 Corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  4 As  from 
the implementation of ESA 2010 in December 2014, holding 
companies of non-financial groups are no longer counted as 
belonging to the sector of non-financial corporations but are 
now allocated instead to the financial corporations sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 20152.01.51.00.500.51.01.52.02.5
––––+++++Growth contributions in percentage pointsSeasonally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, end-of-quarter data
HouseholdsFinancial corporations 2, 4
Non-financial corporations 3, 4Growth rate 1 in %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
35

served to stoke demand. For example, at the 
end of December, domestic enterprises paid 
interest amounting to 2.6% for small- volume 
and 1.4% for large- volume loans in the short-  
term segment, while interest on long- term 
loans stood at 2.0% and 1.8% respectively of 
late. Additional positive stimulus to demand for 
loans was exerted, according to the BLS, by the 
financing needs of enterprises for refinancing, 
restructuring and renegotiating. By contrast, 
taken in isolation, enterprises’ recourse to alter -
native sources of funds had a dampening effect 
on demand. However, the respondent banks’ 
credit standards remained virtually unchanged 
in the final quarter. Lending standards there -
fore remained unchanged on balance and only 
margins fell markedly.
The BLS conducted in the fourth quarter con -
tained ad hoc  questions on the banks’ funding 
conditions, the impact of the new regulatory 
and supervisory activities (including the capital 
adequacy requirements defined in the CRR/
CRD IV and the requirements resulting from the ECB’s comprehensive assessment) and on the 
banks’ participation in the TLTROs from 2014 to 
2016. Against the backdrop of the situation in 
the financial markets, German banks again 
reported  a marginal improvement in their fund -
ing situation compared with the previous quar -
ter. Regarding the new regulatory and supervis -
ory activities, the second half of 2015 saw the 
banks reduce their risk- weighted assets further 
on balance and significantly strengthen their 
capital position again. As had been the case in 
the preceding TLTROs, the surveyed institutions 
showed only muted interest in the December 
2015 TLTRO. Those banks which did participate 
cited the attractive TLTRO terms as the main 
reason for doing so. They stated that the bor -
rowed funds were to be used chiefly for lend -
ing, in keeping with these monetary policy 
operations ’ objective. All in all, the TLTROs have 
led to a slight improvement in the participating 
banks’ financial situation, although institutions 
are not expecting any impact on their credit 
standards.Further improve-
ment in banks’ capital positionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in the international financial 
markets in recent months were shaped by the 
monetary policy decisions of the central banks 
of the major currency areas. For instance, the 
Eurosystem – and later, the Bank of Japan – 
took further expansionary monetary policy 
measures, while the Federal Reserve unwound 
its monetary easing somewhat by making the 
first interest rate hike in seven years. The re -
spective institutions’ measures had been ex -
pected to varying degrees. In the bond markets 
this was reflected in the, in part, considerable 
yet largely short- lived market reactions. Equi -
ties, by contrast, which had previously received 
a marked boost from friendly economic indica -
tors worldwide, came under pressure from De -
cember onwards. The drop in equity prices 
continued at an accelerated pace in the new 
year, when uncertainty emanating from China 
about the robustness of global growth increas -
ingly took hold of the financial markets (for 
more on the global and European setting, see 
pages 11 to 22). These concerns were aggra -
vated by the slump in prices in the commodity 
and oil markets, which some financial market 
participants saw as evidence of an economic 
slowdown rather than as a stimulus to con -
sumption growth in the consumer countries. 
What is more, low commodity prices erode the 
revenue and, therefore, the growth potential 
of major emerging market economies and put 
pressure on enterprises of the commodity-  
producing and energy sector, which are often 
saddled with substantial US dollar debt. Hence, 
there were shifts towards safe haven invest -
ments. Yields on government bonds and share 
prices in the major currency areas dropped 
overall from end-  September 2015 onwards. 
The decline in bank share prices was especially  
sharp. Funding conditions for enterprises 
changed only slightly and remain favourable. 
On the foreign exchange markets, the euro appreciated  on balance in effective terms, des -
pite substantial volatility.
Exchange rates
Foreign exchange market rates were driven pri -
marily by market participants’ expectation that 
the monetary policy stance on either side of 
the Atlantic was likely to diverge further. 
Against this background, from mid- October, 
the euro lost ground to the US dollar, and at 
the end of November fell to its lowest level 
since March 2015 at just under US$1.06. Clear 
signals sent out by the ECB that it intended to 
ease monetary policy further put the euro 
under pressure during that period. The strain 
on the euro against the US dollar was com -
pounded by surprisingly upbeat US labour  mar-
ket data.
Within a short time, however, the single cur -
rency again appreciated significantly against 
the dollar to around US$1.09 after the meas -
ures adopted by the ECB Governing Council in 
early December fell short of market expect -
ations. Thereafter, the euro- dollar exchange 
rate moved within a corridor of US$1.07 to 
US$1.10 on the back of mixed economic data 
from the euro area and the United States. Mar -
ket participants had largely priced the Fed’s 
mid- December interest rate hike into their 
expectations , so that it did not have a lasting 
effect on the euro- dollar rate. Surprisingly weak 
US economic data in early February gave the 
euro a further significant lift. Thus, the euro 
appreciated  1.3% on balance against the US 
dollar compared with the end of September, 
and stood most recently at around US$1.13.
Despite unexpectedly weak economic data 
from Japan, the euro initially continued to lose 
value against the yen, dropping to an exchange 
rate of around ¥130 by the end of November. 
Market participants’ disappointment over the Financial 
markets  reflect monetary policy decisions and global economic uncertainty
Euro up against the US dollar, …
… down against 
the yen and …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
37

scope of the ECB’s measures to loosen monet -
ary policy caused only a short- lived counter-  
movement. However, a surprisingly positive 
economic outlook (Tankan report) and cautious 
words from the Japanese central bank’s Gov -
ernor Kuroda regarding further measures to 
ease monetary policy quickly led to a continu -
ation of the euro’s depreciation. At the begin -
ning of January, the euro slipped to around 
¥127. When the Japanese central bank unex -
pectedly introduced negative interest rates 
towards  the end of the reporting period, the 
euro briefly made distinct gains against the 
yen. As this report went to press, the euro was 
trading at around ¥127, which is 5.5% below 
its value at the end of September.
The euro’s performance against the pound 
sterling in the past few months was character -
ised by two phases. Initially, market expect -
ations regarding the expansion of quantitative 
easing in the euro area shaped market activity 
and pushed the euro down to around £0.70 by 
mid- November. Isolated weak economic fig -
ures from the United Kingdom and the Bank of 
England’s reticence about raising interest rates 
then spurred the euro. Moreover, the euro-  
sterling exchange rate was buoyed by uncer -
tainty about whether the United Kingdom will 
remain in the European Union. All in all, the 
single currency rose to a value of £0.79. The 
euro is therefore trading 6.6% higher against 
the pound sterling than at the end of the third 
quarter of 2015.
After the turn of the year, market participants 
also shifted their focus towards the currencies 
of emerging market economies and commodity- 
exporting countries. Worries over the develop -
ment of China’s economy and the drop in oil 
prices heightened investor uncertainty with 
regard  to these countries. Although the euro 
had already appreciated against these curren -
cies over the last two years – in some cases, 
considerably – it has posted further, relatively 
strong gains from the beginning of the year. 
These gains have been particularly pronounced 
against the Mexican peso (14.2%).… stronger 
against the pound sterling
Focus on curren-
cies of emerging economies and commodity- exporting countries Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A S OND J FM
2014 2015 20161.201.30
1.001.101.20
120130140150
0.700.750.80
859095100105Daily data; log scale
US$
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: ¥133.73
 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange 
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange 
rate: 103.13 1
Euro exchange rate against selected currencies
1 Positive figures indicate an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16Percentage change against end of 20151
As at: 11 February 2016
MXN
RUBINRAUD
NZD
ZARCNYCADTRY14.2
12.7
7.8
7.5
6.6
6.1
5.6
4.8
4.6 TurkeyCanadaChinaSouth AfricaNew ZealandAustraliaIndiaRussian FederationMexicoDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
38

Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro appreciated by 2.4% 
overall compared with the end of September 
2015. The single currency was thus latterly 
trading 6.8% below its level at the launch of 
monetary union. Viewed in real terms, ie taking 
into account the inflation differentials between 
the euro area and the major trading partners, 
the effective euro exchange rate fell by about 
2% in the period under review.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Yields in the international bond markets experi -
enced major fluctuations from the end of Sep -
tember 2015 onwards. On balance, they fell 
somewhat less heavily in the euro area than in 
the USA. However, interest rates on US ten-  
year Treasuries quickly advanced by 40 basis 
points to just under 2.4% by mid- November 
before moving sideways amid fluctuations until 
the end of the year. The main reason for this 
development was that market participants con -
sidered a first interest rate hike to be increas -
ingly likely following the meeting of the Federal 
Open Market Committee at the end of Octo -
ber. Subsequently, their expectation became 
entrenched given the, in some cases, surpris -
ingly upbeat indicators on the state of the US 
economy. Factors that served to drive down 
interest rates, such as the expectation of fur -
ther monetary policy steps by the Eurosystem, 
proved to be somewhat short- lived and were 
largely restricted to the euro area. When, on 
16 December 2015, the Federal Reserve raised 
its policy rate target range for the federal funds 
rate for the first time in seven years – as had 
been widely anticipated  –, the response in 
bond markets around the world was tempered.
At the turn of the year, global factors returned 
to centre stage. This was triggered by poorer-  
than- expected economic data from China, 
which caused prices to fall first in Chinese stock 
markets then on a number of other stock ex -
changes. Investors were less concerned about the actual slump in Chinese stock prices, how -
ever. China’s equity capital markets are too in -
significant as instruments for corporate finan -
cing or for investment. What worried market 
participants most was the economic state of 
the emerging markets as a whole, particularly 
as the plunging commodity and oil prices put a 
severe strain on general government and enter -
prises in a large number of these countries. The 
high level of uncertainty prompted investors to 
shift funds into safe assets, with highly rated 
bonds in the major currency areas the main 
beneficiaries. Towards the end of the observa -
tion period, yields fell once again, this time 
after the Bank of Japan unexpectedly eased its 
monetary policy stance. Following the an -
nouncement, the interest rate on ten- year Jap -
anese government bonds dropped by 15 basis 
points and for a while stood at an all- time low 
of below zero basis points. Yields on US ten-  
year Treasuries shed 40 basis points on balance 
from the end of the third quarter of 2015, 
while yields on Japanese ten- year sovereigns Effective euro 
exchange rate up on balance
Yields in inter-
national bond markets shaped first by monet -
ary policy, …
… then by 
global factorsBond yields in Germany and the USA
1 Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16012345
–10+1+2Monthly data
%
Percentage
points Yield spread between
US and Germangovernment bondsYield on ten-year government bonds
outstanding
 1
USA1
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
39

contracted by a further 35 basis points from a 
very low level.
All in all, yields on ten- year Bunds likewise fell 
from the end of September 2015, by 45 basis 
points. Up to the beginning of November, the 
rather close interest rate linkage with the 
United States had meant that, despite expect -
ations that the very loose monetary policy 
stance in the euro area would continue, they 
largely mirrored the increase in US interest 
rates. In November, expectations gradually 
grew that the ECB Governing Council would 
decide in December to greatly expand the 
expansionary  measures already in place. As a 
result, ten- year yields fell sharply in Germany 
and moved away somewhat from US interest 
rates. The diverging development of yields is 
also reflected in the spread between same-  
maturity Treasuries and Bunds, which widened 
briefly to 180 basis points. It was therefore just 
short of 40 basis points higher than at the end 
of the third quarter of 2015. Following the announce ment on 3  December 2015 of the 
Governing Council’s decisions regarding the 
bundle of expansionary measures (explained on 
page 23), yields on Bunds rapidly rose by 20 
basis points to over 0.6%. Market participants’ 
expectations about the Eurosystem’s additional 
expansionary stimuli had clearly been over -
blown, and their correction produced a consid -
erable market reaction. The subsequent decline 
in German yields was somewhat weaker than 
that in US interest rates. The high degree of 
uncertainty surrounding yield developments 
was also reflected in the implied volatility of 
options on Bund futures, which at times was 
well above the five- year average (6.1%).
Yields on bonds issued by other euro- area 
countries dropped less significantly than those 
on Bunds. For example, as this report went to 
press, GDP- weighted ten- year euro- area bonds 
(excluding Germany) were yielding 1.4%; this 
was 10 basis points below their level at the end 
of September. In contrast to the general de -
cline, yields on Greek government bonds 
climbed by 330 basis points to stand most 
recently  at 11.6%. This was due to the fact that 
the Greek parliament had not yet passed the 
reforms negotiated in connection with the 
third assistance programme. For this reason, a 
loan tranche of €1 billion under the ESM rescue 
package could only be paid with a delay in 
Decem ber, and subject to the provision that 
the measures were actually implemented. It is 
crucial to the sustainability of public finances in 
Greece that the agreed pension reform is 
adopted by parliament. Risk premiums also 
rose substantially in Portugal, with Portuguese 
ten- year government bonds yielding 4.1%. This 
was attributable, on the one hand, to worries 
about the political stability of the country after 
it was only possible to form a minority govern -
ment. On the other hand, support being given 
to a financial institution is putting a burden on 
the Portuguese government budget.
The German yield curve derived from yields on 
Federal securities shifted downwards from the 
end of September. Short- term yields, which Federal bond 
yields fall, tooWider yield spreads in the euro area
Yield curve of Bunds shifted downwardsYield spreads between euro-area government bonds with ten-year residual maturities and comparable German Bunds
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankJF M A MJ JASO N DJF
2015 201601234Percentage points, daily data
681012141618
Greece
ItalySpain Portugal
IrelandEnlarged scale:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
40

react more strongly to monetary policy deci -
sions, were squarely in negative territory and 
below the deposit facility rate, which had been 
cut to -30 basis points on 3 December. Most 
recently, two- year paper yielded -55 basis 
points, an all- time low, and negative yields 
were again recorded for maturities up to eight 
years. This would suggest that market partici -
pants are expecting the expansionary monetary 
policy with negative interest rates to persist 
over the longer term. Moreover, they are not 
ruling out the possibility of a further deposit 
rate cut.
At mid- February 2016, yields on European cor -
porate bonds were, on balance, at a level simi -
lar to that at the end of September. European 
BBB- rated bonds with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years most recently yielded around 
2.8%. But because of the decline in safe inter -
est rates, the yield spread over Bunds rose by 
50 basis points. The increase was much greater 
in the case of financial corporations than for 
non- financial corporations. The larger spreads 
are likely to be a reflection of portfolio shifts in 
favour of safe Bunds, pointing to heightened 
risk aversion among market participants. How -
ever, the financing conditions for enterprises 
remain significantly more favourable than the 
five- year average.
In the euro area, the five- year forward inflation 
rate in five years derived from inflation swaps 
fell slightly on balance from the end of Septem -
ber 2015 and last stood at just over 1.4%, 
although  it had briefly risen to 1.8%. However, 
it decreased again, particularly from the end of 
December 2015, on the back of safe haven 
flows and the drop in oil prices. Market- based 
inflation expectations in other major currency 
areas developed in much the same way. This 
suggests that global factors (such as the slump 
in oil prices) are more likely the main drivers 
behind the recent renewed fall in market- based 
inflation measures. However, survey-  based 
measures of inflation expectations in the euro 
area for six to ten years ahead were most 
recently  somewhat higher at 2.0%. The infla -Financing condi-
tions for enter-prises remain favourable
Declining for-
ward inflation rates in major currency areasYield curve on theGerman bond market
*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.60.40.200.20.40.60.8
–––++++
Residual maturity in years30 September 2015
11 February 201630 December 2015%
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the USA
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the USA) realised over the 
next five or ten years. 1 Barrel of Brent (for delivery in one 
month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 162.42.73.0
1.82.12.4Weekly averages
US$%
80100120
25406080
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate in five years 
based on swaps
Consensus inflationexpectations in6 to 10 years
USAEuro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1
Spread between US and euro-area
forward inflation ratesPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$1.51.82.12.4
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
41

tion risk premiums, which can be approximated 
by estimating the difference between the 
survey- based and the market- based inflation 
expectations, have been in negative territory 
for some time now.
Gross issuance on the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2015 was well down on 
the previous quarter. Overall, German borrow -
ers issued paper worth €314 billion, compared 
with €358½ billion in the previous three 
months. Net of redemptions and changes in 
issuers ’ own holdings, domestic issuers scaled 
back their capital market borrowing by €61½ 
billion. Foreign debt instruments totalling €9 
billion were sold on the German bond market 
in the fourth quarter. On balance, the volume 
of bonds circulating in Germany therefore 
shrank by €52½ billion.
In the quarter under review, domestic credit 
institutions  reduced their capital market debt 
(€63½ billion), as they usually do towards the end of the year. In particular, other bank debt 
securities, which can be structured flexibly, 
were redeemed (€51 billion), and the volume of 
debt securities issued by specialised credit insti -
tutions likewise saw a decline (€11½ billion). 
There were also net redemptions of public 
Pfandbriefe and mortgage Pfandbriefe (€½ bil -
lion in each case).
In the fourth quarter of 2015, domestic enter -
prises redeemed bonds worth €7 billion net. 
On balance, this applied, above all, to long-  
term paper. In particular, other financial institu -
tions trimmed their borrowing in the capital 
market (€6 billion).
The public sector issued debt instruments total -
ling €9½ billion net in the quarter under re -
view. The Federal government and the reso -
lution agency classified as part of central gov -
ernment mainly issued ten- year bonds (€22 
billion). This contrasted with net redemptions 
of five- year Federal notes (€9 billion), Federal 
Treasury discount paper (€6 billion) and two-  
year Federal Treasury notes (€1½ billion). State 
governments issued debt securities with a value 
of €3 billion net.
In the fourth quarter of 2015, debt securities 
were mainly purchased by the Bundesbank, 
which added debt securities worth €36½ bil -
lion net to its portfolio under the Eurosystem 
purchase programmes; the majority of these 
were German government bonds. Domestic 
non- banks bought bonds worth €14 billion 
net; they stepped up their acquisition of for -
eign securities. By contrast, foreign investors 
and domestic credit institutions disposed of 
fixed- income securities amounting to €54½ bil -
lion and €48½ billion net respectively.
In the fourth quarter, the international equity 
markets were upbeat until the end of Novem -
ber; they then declined significantly, however. 
Positive sentiment indicators gave rise to opti -
mism among investors in the euro area at the 
beginning of the fourth quarter. The expect -
ation of many market participants – which later Net redemptions 
of domestic debt securities
Credit institu-
tions’ capital market debt on the declineNet redemption 
of corporate 
bonds
Net public 
sector  issuance
Purchases of 
debt securities
Global equity 
markets upbeat at first, …Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 12.3 76.5 2.1
Credit institutions – 12.8 12.4 – 48.4
of which
Foreign debt securities 7.4 3.8 –  1.1
Deutsche Bundesbank –  1.6 35.8 36.6
Other sectors 26.7 28.3 13.8
of which
Domestic debt securities 7.5 5.4 3.6
Non-residents – 10.2 – 18.2 – 54.6
Shares
Residents 6.9 7.1 7.0
Credit institutions 4.9 – 14.5 1.6
of which
Domestic shares 4.7 –  7.0 0.3
Non-banks 2.0 21.6 5.4
of which
Domestic shares –  5.8 13.9 –  2.7
Non-residents 2.8 –  5.3 5.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 40.4 14.7 30.6
Investment in retail funds –  1.6 7.3 11.0
of which
Equity funds –  4.4 2.9 6.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
42

proved to be excessive – with regard to the fur -
ther loosening of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy stance in December helped push up 
stock market prices further. Export- oriented 
European enterprises also benefited from the 
depreciation of the euro. At the same time, 
equity prices were bolstered by better- than-  
expected US labour market data. The widely 
anticipated US policy rate hike was largely in -
terpreted as a sign of confidence in the US 
economy.
But from December onwards, stock markets 
subsequently experienced – with a slight time 
lag – sharp equity price losses. Euro- area equity 
prices already came under pressure following 
the ECB Governing Council’s decision on 3 De -
cember. The drop in prices was probably partly 
attributable to the – at least, briefly – simultan -
eous rise in government bond yields, which in -
creased the discount factor and reduced the 
present value of future corporate earnings, 
making exposure to equities less attractive. 
After the turn of the year, the steep slide in 
Chinese  equity prices put international stock 
markets under pressure. In addition to the 
weak economic indicators mentioned above, 
growing uncertainty among Chinese investors 
is also likely to have contributed to the slump in 
equity prices, causing stock market trading to 
be suspended temporarily by a protection 
mechanism which has since been removed 
again. Aggravated in part by the plummeting 
oil and commodity prices, equity prices plunged 
on the stock markets of other major emerging 
economies as well. As prices fell in the inter -
national stock markets, uncertainty among 
market participants – as gauged by the implied 
volatility of options – rose appreciably and al -
most reached levels previously seen in August 
2015, when the global equity markets also 
underwent a correction.
Overall, European equities as measured by the 
broad- based Euro Stoxx were most recently 
trading 12.3% below the level at the end of 
September. US (S&P 500) and Japanese shares 
(Nikkei) fell by 4.7% and 9.6% respectively. Bank shares sustained heavy losses in the euro 
area in particular, but also in the United States 
(-31.7% and -18.2% respectively). The weak 
performance of financials was probably also 
due to investors’ fears that loans to the energy 
sector and to key emerging market economies 
might be at risk. Moreover, growing uncer -
tainty in the euro area about the volume of 
non- performing loans put downward pressure 
on a number of banks in the periphery.
The price- earnings ratio, based on 12-month 
earnings expectations, was latterly at roughly 
the same level as the end of September, at 13.1 
for the Euro Stoxx and 14.9 for the S&P 500, … then experi-
ence sharp price losses
Heavy price 
losses for bank share pricesEquity risk premium  down slightlyEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Ex-
pected future volatility calculated using the prices of options 
on the Euro Stoxx.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro Stoxx
Banks
Monthly, lin scale
Price/earnings ratio based on
12-month earnings expectationsEuro StoxxEnd of December 2008 = 100, weekly averages,
log scale
Price indices
5075100150200250
81012141618
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 16Standard &
Poor's 500
Standard &
Poor's 500
Euro Stoxx
Weekly averages
Implied volatility of Euro Stoxx 1%
1020304050Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
43

and somewhat exceeded the respective five-  
year average. However, any comprehensive 
assess ment of valuations needs to look beyond 
short- term earnings expectations and include 
expected long- term real interest rates as well. A 
dividend discount model that takes these vari -
ables into account reveals that the equity risk 
premium for the Euro Stoxx latterly stood at 
9.0%, which is somewhat below its level at the 
end of September. Compared with the five-  
year average (8.8%), this indicates a moderate 
aversion to risk on the part of stock market par -
ticipants.
In the quarter under review, €2½ billion net 
was raised in the German stock market. The 
volume of foreign shares in the German market 
rose by €9½ billion over the same period. On 
balance, equities were purchased mainly by 
resident non- banks (€5½ billion) and foreign 
investors (€5 billion). Domestic credit institu -
tions increased their exposure to equities by 
€1½ billion. Both categories of domestic buyer 
invested predominantly in foreign shares.
In the final quarter of 2015, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of €41½ 
billion, compared with €22 billion in the previ -
ous quarter. The vast majority of the new funds 
went, on balance, to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€30½ billion). Of the 
various asset classes, it was above all mixed 
security- based funds (€15 billion) which at -
tracted inflows of funds, although equity funds 
(€9 billion), bond funds (€7½ billion), funds of 
funds (€6 billion) and open- end real estate 
funds (€4 billion) were also in demand. Only 
money market funds redeemed their own 
shares, to the tune of €½ billion net. The out -
standing volume of foreign mutual fund shares 
in Germany rose by €4½ billion in the period 
under review. German non- banks, which in -
clude insurers, for example, were virtually the 
sole net buyers of mutual fund shares, adding 
shares worth €46 billion net to their portfolios. 
The lion’s share of this paper was issued by 
domestic  mutual funds. Non- resident investors 
acquired mutual fund shares for €½ billion net, Low level of 
stock market funding
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2014 2015
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I Current account + 65.0 + 62.5 + 72.9
1 Goods 1 + 58.6 + 66.9 + 64.8
2 Services 2 –  7.3 – 16.4 –  5.7
3 Primary income + 24.7 + 18.9 + 23.8
4 Secondary income – 11.0 –  6.8 – 10.1
II Capital account –  0.7 +  0.7 –  0.8
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 57.9 + 62.5 + 69.8
1 Direct investment + 22.4 +  6.0 + 25.1
Domestic investment 
abroad + 16.5 + 17.6 + 31.0
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country –  6.0 + 11.6 +  5.9
2 Portfolio investment + 46.2 + 51.8 + 70.0
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 35.5 + 32.0 + 20.9
Shares
3 +  3.3 +  1.4 +  7.6
Investment fund shares 4+  6.1 +  4.6 +  4.6
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  1.5 +  0.3 –  1.7
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 28.8 + 31.8 +  9.3
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 20.5 + 25.8 +  5.6
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  2.7 –  5.8 –  0.6
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 10.7 – 19.8 – 49.1
Shares 3 +  2.9 –  5.3 +  4.9
Investment fund shares –  3.5 +  3.6 +  0.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 +  6.4 – 23.4 – 32.6
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 +  7.8 – 23.1 – 18.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 – 16.7 +  5.2 – 21.9
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  7.0 +  2.4 +  5.5
4 Other investment 10 – 16.1 +  3.8 – 30.6
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 + 31.2 + 17.9 – 11.2
Enterprises and  households
12 – 20.6 – 14.3 – 23.2
General government +  8.7 +  3.4 –  1.1
Bundesbank – 35.4 –  3.2 +  4.9
5 Reserve assets 13 –  1.7 –  1.5 –  0.3
IV Errors and omissions 14 –  6.4 –  0.7 –  2.2
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
44

while domestic credit institutions sold shares 
for €½ billion net.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €70 billion in 
the fourth quarter of 2015, net capital exports 
were likewise recorded in the field of direct in -
vestment; these amounted to €25 billion.
This was chiefly prompted by resident owners 
providing a relatively high level of funding to 
affiliated enterprises abroad (€31 billion) during 
that period, bolstering their equity capital in 
particular (€23 billion). On top of this, intra-  
group lending rose by €8 billion over the same period. Direct investment originating in Ger -
many in the fourth quarter of 2015 was mainly 
focused on European enterprises, key target 
countries being the Netherlands (€6½ billion), 
the United Kingdom (€5 billion), Luxembourg 
(€4 billion), Sweden (€2 billion) and Belgium 
(€2 billion).
Foreign investors for their part augmented their 
direct investment in Germany by €6 billion 
between  October and December 2015; this 
increase  was primarily the result of higher dir -
ect investment loans (€4 billion). Moreover, 
they provided domestic enterprises with add -
itional equity capital of €2 billion. The largest 
inflow of funds originated from the Nether -
lands (€14½ billion), Switzerland (€5 billion) 
and the United Kingdom (€4 billion).Capital exports 
in direct invest -
ment
German direct 
investment abroadForeign direct investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
45

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The upturn in the German economy continued 
at a sound pace in the final quarter of 2015. 
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real GDP again saw quarter- on- 
quarter growth of 0.3% in the fourth quarter 
of 2015 after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. Economic growth in the second half of 
the year was therefore somewhat weaker than 
in the first six months and matched the rise in 
potential output. Aggregate capacity utilisation 
in the reporting period thus remained in the 
upper range of normal capacity utilisation. Im -
petus for economic growth in the fourth quar -
ter came from buoyant consumption activity 
and housing construction, whereas external 
demand had a marked dampening effect.Domestic demand continued to be driven by 
consumption activity in the fourth quarter as 
well, which was chiefly due to sharp increases in 
employment and significant rises in wages. 
Added to this was fresh impetus from transfer 
payments and other government expenditure 
related to the influx of refugees. This was further 
boosted by sharp growth in housing investment. 
However, there was only a slight increase in en -
terprises’ willingness to invest in machinery and 
equipment and in new buildings. At the end of 
the year, the German economy was feeling the 
effects of a lack of demand stimuli not only from 
China and commodity- producing emerging 
economies, but also from some major industrial 
countries outside the euro area. This was not 
offset by demand from the euro area and the 
euro’s ongoing favourable exchange rate.
German enterprises’ export business suffered a 
further setback in the final quarter of 2015, 
with exports of goods showing a marked de -
cline on the quarter in price and seasonally ad -
justed terms. According to the regionally and 
sectorally disaggregated figures available up 
until November, almost the entire range of Ger -
man export products was affected by weaker 
external demand. Trade in consumer and cap -
ital goods suffered perceptible losses. Further -
more, intermediate goods were only in margin -
ally stronger demand. Whereas exports to 
other euro-  area countries probably showed a 
slight increase and exports to other EU coun -
tries are likely to have expanded quite substan -
tially, sales to countries outside the EU saw 
clearer losses than in the third quarter. Exports 
to the United States contracted again following 
exceptionally strong growth in the first half of 
the year, but it was, above all, trade with the 
emerging market economies that was perform -
ing much less favourably. The marked decline 
in exports to China that has been apparent 
since the beginning of the year showed no 
signs of abating. In October and November, ex -
ports to China were down by more than one- Sound economic 
growth also in 2015 Q4 …… sustained 
by domestic 
components, …
… whereas 
ex ternal demand had a marked dampening effect
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015949698100102104106108110
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
46

tenth on the year, with sales of motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts contracting by just 
over one- quarter. Moreover, the upturn in ex -
ports to OPEC countries, which are suffering 
from the slump in crude oil prices, went into 
reverse resulting in a considerable decline.
There is likely to have been no more than 
limited growth in investment in machinery and 
equipment in the fourth quarter of 2015. Given 
the uncertainties surrounding future develop -
ments in demand, especially on the major 
international sales markets, enterprises held 
back on any expansion or upgrading of their 
machinery. The number of new vehicle registra -
tions does, however, suggest that there was an 
increase in purchases of commercial vehicles.
By contrast, construction investment saw a sig -
nificant increase. This is indicated by the fact 
that output in the main construction sector re -
corded a sharp seasonally adjusted increase on 
the quarter. This is likely to have been due, in 
particular, to a strong pick- up in demand for 
housing construction in the third quarter. Invest -
ment in commercial and public buildings prob -
ably made only little headway, however, since 
there had been a lack of stimuli from these seg -
ments in the second and third quarters of 2015.
Private consumption was still pointing upwards 
and also proved to be a mainstay of growth in 
the final quarter of the year. Even so, the im -
petus was probably not as strong as in the third 
quarter. Households’ real income was still 
benefiting, in particular, from the positive de -
velopments on the labour market and in earn -
ings. The additional demand effects resulting 
from the further crude oil price- related gains in 
purchasing power at the end of the year are 
likely to have still been comparatively weak, 
however. Business in the hotel and restaurant 
sector and in the retail sector continued to be 
exceptionally good. The mild weather probably 
had a dampening effect on the demand for 
winter clothing. Purchases of heating oil were 
deferred for the time being, seeing as inventor -
ies had already been heavily stocked up at the end of the summer, although the mild autumn 
weather along with the expectation of further 
price reductions may also have played a part in 
this. In point of fact, demand was focused 
more on consumer durables. The greater num -
ber of new motor vehicle registrations by 
households indicates a rise in passenger car 
sales. There were also more purchases of furni -
ture and furnishings, although this is likely to 
have been in connection with the pick- up in 
demand for apartments and houses.
Imports of goods continued their upward trend 
in the reporting period, albeit at a much slower 
pace, and were up only slightly on the level of Probably only 
small growth in investment in machinery and equipment
Steep growth 
in housing  construction investment
Continued 
upward  movement in consumption
Little overall change in imports90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015Oct-
Nov
8090100110120130
Oct-
Nov
120
8090100110Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
47

the previous quarter after adjustment for price 
and seasonal variations. This is likely to have 
been due essentially to the strong decline in 
energy imports, however. By contrast, demand 
for foreign capital goods was still on a clear 
upward course. There was little additional de -
mand for foreign- manufactured intermediate 
and consumer goods.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output failed to gain any momentum 
in the final quarter of 2015 either and was, on 
balance, down perceptibly on the quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The production of 
intermediate goods remained sluggish. A sub -
stantial decline was also recorded in the capital 
goods sector. Output in the automotive indus -
try, in particular, was cut back sharply owing to 
a considerable drop in demand in the previous 
quarter. The scandal surrounding the manipula -
tion of exhaust emissions at Volkswagen is un -likely to have had a significant negative impact 
on output in the automotive industry as a 
whole; this is suggested by the fact that the 
intake of new orders recovered from its earlier 
decline, even after the scandal had become 
known to the general public. Manufacturers of 
machinery and equipment made a further 
sharp cutback in production. Output in a num -
ber of consumer goods branches also declined, 
while there was a further increase in the pro -
duction of food and clothing.
Seasonally adjusted construction output 
showed a substantial increase on the third 
quarter. This was due to considerably higher 
output in the main construction sector. This 
contrasted with a decline in the finishing trades, 
the data for which are, however, highly suscep -
tible to revision. Energy production contracted 
strongly during the reporting period.
In the wake of buoyant consumption activity, 
service providers were clearly expanding their 
business activity in the final three months of 
the year, too. The industry- related services sec -
tors are likely to have felt the slower pace of 
industrial output, however. A further drop in 
sales was recorded in wholesale trade, for in -
stance. According to the Ifo Institute, the still 
very positive assessments of the business situ -
ation by business-  related service providers do, 
however, point to a continuing high level of 
 activity in this economic sector. Furthermore, 
some sectors, such as transport, are likely to 
have especially benefited from the recent fall in 
fuel prices. Retail sales and the hotel and res -
taurant sector were still performing exception -
ally well. Turnover remained at roughly the 
same level as in the previous quarter, and 
motor vehicle sales posted a strong increase.
Employment and  
labour market
The labour market in the final quarter of 2015 
was characterised by a continuing strong rise in 
employment and – following a sideways move -Marked cutback 
in industrial  outputConstruction activity ex -
panded sharply, 
energy produc-
tion contracted
Continued clear 
upward trend in services sector activity
Labour market 
in very good 
shapeOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
48

ment in the second and third quarters – a fur -
ther significant decline in unemployment. The 
high demand for labour was still being met to 
a considerable extent by immigrants, particu -
larly those from other EU countries. Even so, 
the number of reported job vacancies saw a 
further rise. The considerably stronger influx of 
refugees since the late summer of 2015 along 
with the necessary care, assistance and admin -
istration is likely to have induced additional de -
mand for labour. So far, however, it will have 
hardly been possible for the new arrivals them -
selves to have taken up employment.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany rose by 123,000, or 0.3%, in 
the fourth quarter of 2015. Employment sub -
ject to social security contributions grew at an 
even faster pace. According to the initial fig -
ures of the Federal Employment Agency, in Oc -
tober and November alone the number of such 
workers was up by an estimated 149,000 per -
sons (or 0.5%) compared with the average of 
the third quarter. The strongest gains in em -
ployment were recorded in a number of ser -
vices sectors (business- related services, the 
health and welfare sector, transportation and 
storage and in the hotel and restaurant sector). 
The public sector also witnessed its first signifi -
cant increase in staffing levels for a long time, 
most likely to deal with the surge in the num -
bers of refugees. Employment growth in the 
manufacturing sector was below average. A 
slight acceleration was discernible in the con -
struction sector again at the end of the period 
under review following the relatively cautious 
recruitment policy adopted in the second and 
third quarters of last year. The number of per -
sons in work in other major forms of employ -
ment, such as those working exclusively in low- 
paid part- time jobs as well as the self- employed, 
continued to decline.
Although detailed immigration figures are avail -
able only with a relatively large time lag, the 
data available so far emphasise the fact that a 
considerable part of the additional demand for 
labour is still being met by immigrants, especially nationals of other EU member states: the num -
ber of employees in November 2015 was up by 
a total of 520,000 on the same month last year. 
According to an initial estimate, during this 
same period, there was an increase of 223,000 
in the number of non- German EU workers alone 
who are registered with the Federal Employ -
ment Agency as being in employment subject to 
social security contributions or working in low-  
paid part- time jobs,1 and the data published by 
the Federal Statistical Office so far for the first six 
months of 2015 point to a further slight increase 
in the net inflow of EU nationals compared with 
2014. The unemployment rate among non- EU 
citizens residing in Germany has fallen slightly in 
the past 12 months.
Only a small number of the refugees that have 
been coming to Germany since the late summer 
are likely to have been able to gain a foothold 
in the labour market so far. According to the 
Federal Employment Agency, the number of 
employees (excluding self- employed persons) 
holding a nationality of the main countries of 
origin2 increased by no more than 20,000 on 
the year in November. Besides other barriers, 
such as a lack of language skills and other quali -
fications in the case of many refugees, as well 
as legal hurdles, the long processing times for 
asylum applications and the current backlog are 
an obstacle to taking up employment.3
Unemployment went down during the fourth 
quarter of 2015 after remaining virtually un -
changed in the second and third quarters. The Steep rise in 
employment continued in Q4
Additional 
demand for labour still being met to a consid-erable extent by strong immigra-tion from the EUI
nflux of refugees  
has barely impacted on the labour market to date
Fall in 
unemployment in Q4
1 See IAB, Zuwanderungsmonitor Januar 2016, Aktuelle 
Berichte des Instituts für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsfor -
schung, Nuremberg.
2 According to the IAB’s definition, these are the Middle 
Eastern countries of Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and 
 Pakistan and the African countries of Eritrea, Nigeria and 
Somalia. See IAB (2016), op cit.
3 Having made around 283,000 asylum decisions (first and 
repeat applications) in 2015, the number of applications 
recorded by the German Federal Office for Migration and 
Refugees (Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge, BAMF) 
was more than twice as high as in 2014. At year- end 2015, 
however, there were still over 364,000 asylum applications 
waiting to be processed. In addition, according to rough 
estimates by the BAMF, there are still around 300,000 refu -
gees who have already arrived in Germany, but who have 
not yet been able to submit an asylum application.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
49

seasonally adjusted unemployment rate fell by 
0.1 percentage point to 6.3%, with a decline 
both in the number of more short- term un -
employed persons drawing unemployment 
benefits and in – to a lesser extent – the num -
ber of persons registered as out of work receiv -
ing basic social security payments. Registered 
unemployment showed a further significant fall 
in January 2016 and the seasonally adjusted 
unemployment rate went down to 6.2%.
According to the leading labour market indica -
tors, it is possible that the positive development 
in employment will continue in the coming 
months. The Ifo employment barometer, which 
surveys the employment plans of trade and in -
dustry over the coming three months, fell 
slightly in January. It should be borne in mind, 
however, that the index had previously reached 
its highest level in four years. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s BA-  X job index, which con -
tains information on both the existing number 
of reported vacancies and their dynamics, stood 
at its highest level since its introduction. Growth 
in vacancies for unsubsidised positions subject 
to social security contributions was reported, 
above all, in sectors in which employment had 
been especially marked of late. The IAB labour 
market barometer declined, however, and is 
now broadly in neutral territory. This indicates 
that registered unemployment is unlikely to 
change significantly over the next three months.
Wages and prices
Negotiated rates of pay, including additional 
benefits, rose by 2.3% on the year in the fourth 
quarter of 2015, which was somewhat weaker 
than in the third quarter. Even so, the increase 
was somewhat larger than in the first half of 
the year, when months with a pay freeze in 
some sectors and a special factor in retail trade 
were still having a dampening impact.4 Actual 
earnings are also likely to have grown more Outlook for 
employment remains positive
Increase in 
negotiated pay 
rates somewhat 
higher in second 
half of 2015Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Jan40.541.041.542.042.543.0
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.031.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct-
Nov
4 In January 2015, collective back payments in the retail 
sector caused a negative base effect on the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
50

strongly than negotiated wages in the final 
quarter of 2015.
In 2015 as a whole, the 2.3% year- on- year rise 
in negotiated rates of pay, including additional 
benefits, was markedly smaller than that re -
corded in 2014 (2.9%). In addition to the low 
incremental pay increases agreed by the social 
partners in previous years, this was due chiefly 
to the moderate new agreements, principally in 
the services sector, during the past year. Ac -
cording to provisional data of the Federal Stat -
istical Office, the increase in actual earnings, at 
2.8%, was somewhat stronger than in the pre -
vious year, however, and significantly steeper 
than the rise in negotiated wages. The reason 
for the wage drift moving back into positive 
territory (0.5 percentage point) was the intro -
duction of the general statutory minimum 
wage. The slightly higher bonus payments out -
side the agreed pay scales at large industrial 
firms probably also had the effect of increasing 
wages. Last year, increases in actual earnings 
and negotiated wages were both significantly 
above the average rates of increase for the past 
ten years. In fact, real wage growth, as meas -
ured by the increase in actual earnings adjusted 
for the rise in the consumer price index, 
reached its highest level since 1992. The trade 
unions’ wage demands in the 2016 pay round 
so far, which average 5%, are slightly lower 
than last year.
It was, above all, the slump in crude oil prices 
towards the end of 2015 that led to the nega -
tive price trend at the upstream stages of the 
economy in the third quarter continuing into 
the final quarter of the year. The prices of the 
non- energy components were also pointing 
downwards overall, however, even though sig -
nificant inflationary pressure was discernible for 
some categories of goods. Consumer prices 
were unchanged on the whole in seasonally 
adjusted terms, but showed a further increase 
if energy is excluded.
Seasonally adjusted import prices showed a 
 noticeable decline in the final quarter of last year, which was mainly due to the steep de -
crease in energy prices. There was a decrease 
even if energy is excluded, however. In this in -
stance, price reductions for intermediate goods 
on the back of falling industrial commodity 
prices outweighed price increases for some 
consumer goods segments, which were prob -
ably connected with ongoing depreciation of 
the euro. A very similar pattern emerged for 
domestic sales of industrial goods. Export sales 
prices also declined somewhat, but far less 
strongly than import prices, which led to a fur -
ther improvement in the terms of trade.
There was a further moderate increase in con -
struction prices. As in the previous four quar -
ters, the year- on- year change amounted to 
+1.6%. Upward price pressure persisted in the 
real estate market in the final quarter. Accord -
ing to the Association of German Pfandbrief  
Banks ( Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken  – 
vdp), prices of owner- occupied housing rose by 
4.4% on the year. More detailed comments on Significantly 
stronger growth in actual earn-ings in 2015 than in negoti-ated wages
Prices declining 
at the upstream stages in Q4 2015, even if energy is excluded, but consumer price inflation risingPrices at the upstream stages still being shaped by fall-ing commodity prices
Moderate rise 
in construction prices2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 201500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
51

housing price developments last year may be 
found on pages 53 to 56.
Seasonally adjusted consumer prices in the final 
quarter of 2015 remained at their prior- quarter 
level. Consumers paid significantly less for en -
ergy, especially refined petroleum products, 
than they did in the third quarter. If energy is 
excluded, prices continued to rise, however. 
Food prices went up again after showing no 
movement in the third quarter. The rise in the 
prices of other goods was extremely modest on 
average. However, this masks the fact that it 
was, above all, consumer durables, such as fur -
niture, which showed sharp price increases, 
which probably had to do with the continued 
depreciation of the euro. The annual rate of 
change in prices of these goods, which is nega -
tive on a multi- year average, rose to more than 
1%. The services sector saw significant price in -
creases across all major subsectors. By contrast, 
rents continued to go up only moderately. The 
annual rate of consumer inflation rose to 
+0.3% according to the national Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) and to +0.2% as measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP), since prices had fallen sharply at the 
end of 2014. Excluding energy, the rates for 
both the CPI and the HICP went up from +1.1% 
to +1.3%.
On an average of 2015, consumer prices barely 
increased due to the effect of falling energy 
prices. The annual rate of inflation as measured 
by the CPI stood at +0.2% (HICP +0.1%), while 
prices excluding energy rose by +1.2% (HICP 
+1.1%). One factor behind the relatively small 
increase in the indices excluding energy was 
weak food price inflation, probably due in part 
to an excess supply of some products. By con -
trast, the 1.2% rate of increase in the prices of 
industrial goods excluding energy – also due to 
the euro's depreciation – was clearly above the 
long- term average. The increase in the costs of 
services (excluding rents), at 1.3%, was weaker 
than in the previous year. In this instance, the 
impact of the introduction of the minimum 
wage was offset by price reductions for travel Consumer 
prices, excluding energy, continue to edge up slightly
On an average 
of 2015, con-sumer price inflation barely moved, mainly due to declining energy pricesExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 169295100105110
97100105110
97100105 105110115
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Jan97100105110
JanDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
52

Housing prices in Germany in 2015
Last year saw a further sharp increase in 
residential property prices with housing 
price infl  ation being regionally more broadly based than in earlier years. The price effect of the continuing strong demand for hous-ing, which was given an additional stimulus 
by the further improvement in fi  nancing conditions, again outweighed the price- 
dampening impact of the increasing expan-
sion of the housing stock last year. Meas-
ured in terms of the economic and demo-
graphic fundamentals that determine 
prices, housing is probably still being valued exceptionally highly in urban regions.
According to calculations based on data from bulwiengesa AG, housing prices in German towns and cities went up by 6% 
on average in 2015, following a marked fall in the rate of increase from 7½% to 5½% in 
2014.1 This means that price dynamics in 
2015 were approximately as strong as on an average of the fi  ve preceding years. In 
the past year, the increase in the prices of 
freehold apartments, at 6½%, was stronger 
than for semi- detached and single- family 
houses. As in 2014, prices for the latter two 
types of housing went up at a rate of 5%, 
which was faster than on an average of the years since the onset of the upswing on the housing market. This was due to the accel-eration in infl  ation from 4¾% to 5% in the 
case of semi- detached houses. The degree 
of infl  ation for apartments increased par-ticularly in towns and cities where apart-ments were previously judged to be rela-tively unattractive, while the pace of price 
rises in the case of semi- detached housing 
picked up chiefl  y in regions already showing 
above- average price infl  ation. Bulwiengesa 
data also show prices of multiple- family 
dwellings in towns and cities in 2015 again increasing at a rate higher than the annual average since the onset of the housing mar-ket boom.
Price increases in the housing markets con-
tinued to converge between the towns and 
cities. Increases in the price of housing in 
large cities, at a rate of 6¼%, were notice-ably weaker than on an average of the fi  ve 
preceding years and thus more or less as 
strong as for towns and cities overall.
The convergence of price dynamics be-
tween the urban housing markets and the 
comparatively sharp growth in the prices of 
semi- detached and multiple- family houses 
are refl  ected in the results of geographically more broadly defi  ned indicators. According to data supplied by the Association of Ger-
man Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher 
Pfandbriefbanken, vdp), the price index for owner- occupied housing, which also covers rural areas, showed an increase of 4½% in 2015, compared with 3¼% in 2014. In Ger-many as a whole, there was a 4% increase in the cost of buying a freehold apartment, up from 3% the previous year, while house 
price infl  ation rose from 3% to 4¾%. The 
rate of infl  ation for multiple- family houses, 
at 7¼%, was considerably up on its average since 2010 of 5¼%. According to the com-posite index published by Hypoport AG, in-fl  ation for residential property went up from 
2¾% in 2014 to 5½% in 2015. The house 
price index of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce 
shows that the annual rate of price increase on an average of the fi  rst three quarters of 
2015 was 5% compared with 2½% in the 
year before.
1 Price data for housing in the 127 towns and cities in 
2014 has been adjusted upwards by ¼ percentage 
point in line with the latest supplied data.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
53

The rise in rents for new lettings of existing 
apartments in towns and cities in 2015, at 
3¼%, was more or less as sharp as in 2014, 
whereas there was a further marked decline 
in the rate of increase for rents for newly 
constructed apartments. In the major cities, 
rent adjustments in both categories of housing were signifi  cantly smaller than in 
the year before, which may also be due to the introduction of the new cap on rent in-
creases, which had entered into force in 
some cities during the previous year.2
The ongoing positive outlook for incomes and employment was among the factors ensuring a continuing strong demand for housing. While the macroeconomic price- to- income ratio has shown a marked in-crease over the past three years, there is 
likely to have been a further improvement 
in the affordability of residential property 
owing to the low fi  nancing costs of acquir-ing it.
3 The average rate for mortgage loans 
declined during the past year by more than ½ percentage point to below 2%. Adjusted 
for the longer- term expected rate of infl  a-
tion, the interest rate has gone down by 
2½ percentage points since 2009 to an all- 
time low. Technically, roughly one- fi  fth of 
infl  ation in urban housing since 2009 could 
2 The new cap on rent increases applies, in whole or in 
part, in Berlin, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am 
Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart as well as in many small and medium- sized towns and municipal-
ities.3 While the ratio of the vdp index for owner- occupied 
housing and disposable household income has in-
creased by around 6% over the past three years, the 
annual cost of the interest rate service of a mortgage 
loan with an interest lock- in period of between fi  ve 
and ten years given a hypothetical maturity of 30 years 
has decreased by more than one- tenth as a percent-
age of households’ income. Besides the price- to- 
income ratio, the Bundesbank publishes further indica-
tors for the German housing market online at http://
www.bundesbank .de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Enterprises _and_households/System_of_indicators/system_of_indicators .html.Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price data provided by bulwiengesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 20152010 = 100, annual values, log scale
95100105110115120125130135140145
95100105110115120
95100105110115120125
95100105110115120
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG
composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
quarterly7 major cities127 towns and citiesTotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
54

be due to the exceptional decline in the 
interest rate level.4
The expansion of the supply, which showed 
a further increase last year, was probably in-
suffi   cient to markedly dampen the price and rent effects of the considerable pres-sure exerted by the demand for housing. Overall, more dwellings are again likely to have been completed in 2015 than in the year before (245,000 units). Scheduled 
housing construction last year, with around 
300,000 building permits granted, is likely 
to have been 6¾% up on the previous 
year’s level. Permits for the construction of dwellings in new single- family and multiple- family housing increased at much the same pace as permits for apartments, which had 
shown substantially more dynamic growth 
in the preceding years.
In future, the strong infl  ux of refugees is also likely to be refl  ected in both the de-
mand for and the supply of housing, albeit with overall moderate effects on the rate of 
housing infl  ation. Provisional calculations indicate that rents and house prices could increase more strongly by a total of ½ to 
1 percentage point over the next two years 
than in a hypothetical scenario without an 
infl  ow of refugees.5 A factor in this context 
will also be where persons who are granted refugee status are going to settle in the me-
dium to long term.6 If a disproportionately large number of immigrants move to met-
ropolitan areas where the housing markets 
are already tight, rent and price pressures might increase there. Clues as to the re-
gional distribution of persons granted refu-gee status are provided by the place of resi-
dence chosen by earlier immigrants, al-
though this shows that the number of non- 
German nationals living in German towns 
and cities is no larger than in other areas.7 
4 Following a re- estimation of the econometric model 
used for analysing residential property prices, it is pos-
sible to fi  nd evidence of a statistically signifi  cant im-pact of mortgage rates. The contribution that the interest rate level makes to increases in the price of owner- occupied housing results from a comparison 
with a hypothetical scenario in which mortgage rates 
have remained unchanged since 2009. See F Kajuth, 
T A Knetsch and N Pinkwart, Assessing house prices in 
Germany: Evidence from an estimated stock- fl  ow 
model using regional data. Deutsche Bundesbank, Dis-cussion Paper No 46/ 2013.
5 The simulation results are based on updated esti-
mates of the impact of socioeconomic and demo-graphic variables on house prices as well as on esti-
mates of the expected development of GDP per capita, the population fi  gure, refugee migration and the sup-
ply of housing per inhabitant in line with the latest 
macroeconomic projections for the German economy. See F Kajuth, T A Knetsch and N Pinkwart (2013), loc 
cit, and Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for the Ger-
man economy – macroeconomic projections for 2016 and 2017, Monthly Report, December 2015, pp 13-32.6 At present, mandatory residence for asylum seekers 
is required only for a period of three months. Recog-
nised asylum seekers are free to choose their place of residence.
7 The town- country distribution of resident non- 
German nationals has remained virtually unchanged on balance since 2010. The relative weight of the major cities in the choice of non- German nationals’ 
place of residence has increased by 1 percentage point since then.Regional population distribution and labour market situation in 2013
as a percentage of each population group
Populationin towns 
and cities 1outside towns and cities in major cities
2outside major cities
Population distribution
Non-German nationals 50 50 23 77
German nationals 31 69 11 89
Employment rate
Non-German nationals 79 85 81 83
German nationals 90 93 90 92
Source: Regional database of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce. 1 Municipal districts. 2 More than 500,000 inhabitants.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
55

services, with the indirect effects of the lower 
crude oil prices likely to have played a part in 
this. The substantial rise in rents for new let -
tings that has been evident for some time now 
was not reflected in the CPI’s rent sub- index in 
2015 either  .
The ongoing decline in crude oil prices led to a 
fall in consumer prices in January. By contrast, 
prices of other goods and services went up. 
Owing to the base effect in the energy com -
ponent, annual inflation as measured by the 
CPI increased to +0.5% (HICP +0.4% according 
to the estimate). Inflation was thus markedly 
below the rate expected in the December pro -
jection, chiefly because of the decline in crude 
oil prices. See the box on pages 57 and 58 for 
an update of the inflation rate assumed at that 
time, taking into consideration the changes in 
crude oil prices. Given the trajectory of crude 
oil prices that is now assumed, negative infla -
tion rates are thus possible in the coming 
months.Orders received and outlook
The German economy, sustained chiefly by a 
faster pace of domestic activity, might be ex -
panding somewhat more strongly in the first 
quarter of 2016 than at the end of 2015. Con -
sumption is likely to be providing greater mo -
mentum. Additional impetus may be expected 
primarily from households’ substantial gains in 
purchasing power owing to the further decline 
in crude oil prices at the turn of 2015-16. The 
pick- up in construction activity looks set to 
continue in the early part of the year. This has 
been buoyed of late by a considerable surge in 
demand from enterprises and the public sector, 
while housing construction is being boosted by 
the fundamentals in conjunction with favour -
able financing conditions. Given that capacity 
utilisation levels are already higher than normal 
in many sectors of the economy, firms’ propen -
sity to invest in machinery and equipment 
should also increase.Price inflation, 
excluding energy, con-tinues in JanuaryStronger  domestic demand leads to somewhat sharper eco-nomic growth at beginning of 2016 , …The regional population distribution of non- 
German nationals is also consistent with the 
fact that rural areas show, for example, a more favourable relationship between the 
employment rate of non- German nationals 
and housing rents than the towns and cities 
do.8 The town- country ratio was neverthe-
less higher in the case of non- German na-
tionals than for native inhabitants, although 
the labour market situation in the cities tended to appear poorer for immigrants 
than for the native population. Possible rea-
sons why towns and cities are especially 
 attractive for immigrants might be, for ex-
ample, the available urban public infrastruc-
ture, personal networks of contacts, and 
lower linguistic and cultural barriers. For the 
current wave of immigrants, the signifi  -cance of these factors could be greater than for the more labour- market- oriented 
immigrants of earlier years.All things considered, the increase in the 
price of residential property during the re-
porting year is likely to be greater than is suggested by the dynamics of the demo-graphic and economic fundamentals. Ac-
cording to the latest estimations, the rele-
vant upward price deviations in towns and 
cities still amount to between 10% and 20%. In this context, freehold apartments in the major cities continue to show the 
steepest overvaluations.
8 According to the latest fi  gures of the Federal Statis-
tical Offi   ce, which relate to 2013, the employment rate of non- German nationals in rural districts was roughly 
6 percentage points higher than in towns and cities, whereas bulwiengesa data show housing for rent in rural districts as 13% cheaper on average than in 
towns and cities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
56

Effects of the fall in crude oil prices on the price projection
In the December 2015 macroeconomic pro-
jections it had been expected that the rate of consumer price infl  ation in Germany – as measured by the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices (HICP) – would rise to 1.1% in 
2016 and to 2.0% in 2017, compared with 
an actual outcome of 0.1% in 2015.1 In 
mathematical terms, the projected develop-
ment of energy prices accounted for one- 
half of this increase. This was due chiefl  y to 
the assumed  future development of crude oil prices derived from the forward quota-tions at the projection’s cut- off date, with 
the price of crude oil being an important de-
terminant of consumer prices for energy.2 
Crude oil prices have, however, fallen by 
almost  30% since then, latterly standing at 
around US$35 per barrel of Brent crude oil 
(see chart below). This was due to the abun-dant supply of crude oil, together with sub-dued demand (see the box on pages 13 to 15). 
The forward quotations for crude oil were 
also signifi  cantly lower of late than assumed  
in the December projection round. It had originally been anticipated that crude oil 
prices in the current year, at just over US$52, 
would largely remain at the 2015 level on average (roughly US$50). Judging by the 
current price path for crude oil, however, it is likely to be around 30% lower. Based on forward quotations, which are currently just 
shy of US$45 (instead of US$57½), it is now 
expected that crude oil prices in 2017 will 
also be signifi  cantly lower than had been 
assumed  in the December projection. Ex-
change rate infl  uences do not materially 
alter this picture, as the US dollar- euro ex-
change rate currently corresponds, by and 
large, to the level assumed in the projection.
Fluctuations in crude oil prices generally have a rather swift and clearly noticeable 
impact on consumer prices for energy prod-ucts (direct effects). This is especially true of 
heating oil and fuel, which together ac-count for almost one- half of the HICP’s 
energy  component. The effect of such fl  uc-tuations on the prices of the other forms of energy (gas, electricity, and district heating) is less direct and weaker, not least because 
other cost factors, such as the renewable 
energy (EEG) levy, also play a role. Overall, it is likely that a 30% drop in the price of oil 
would lead to a decline of just over 6% in 
energy prices in the fi  rst year and a further 1½% in the second year.
3 After three years, 
however, the effect on the year- on- year rate of increase would be virtually zero. Owing to the rather high weighting of 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for the German 
economy – macroeconomic projections for 2016 and 
2017, Monthly Report, December 2015, pp  13-32. 
These results were fed into the macroeconomic projec-
tions for the euro area published by the ECB in Decem-
ber. For more information, see ECB, December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area.2 The cut- off date for the technical assumptions for oil 
prices and exchange rates, among other things, was 
12 November 2015; the projection was completed on 19 November 2015.3 The impact of a change in crude oil prices starting at 
a higher price level is greater than an equivalent per-
centage change starting at a lower price level. The de-scribed results are based on an oil price level of €55 per barrel, which is slightly higher than the starting level of the crude oil price assumptions in the December pro-jection.Price of oil
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 201730405060708090100110Per barrel of Brent in US dollar
Forward quotations from
1-9 February 2016Assumption of the projectionin December 2015Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
57

energy  in the HICP’s basket of goods, at 
12%, this would therefore result in the an-
nual HICP infl  ation rate declining by 0.8 per-
centage point in the fi  rst year and by 
0.3 percentage point in the second year.
In addition to the direct effects, oil price fl  uctuations can also give rise to indirect effects . The latter have an impact on the 
price changes of all the goods and services in the HICP basket of goods which are not directly attributed to the energy component 
and which are consolidated in the HICP excluding  energy. As energy is used –  in 
some form or other – in almost all produc-tion processes and in the provision of many 
services, fl  uctuations in the price of crude oil also have an effect on pricing in these sectors. However, as the components of 
the HICP excluding energy are affected to a 
lesser (albeit to a very different) extent by 
crude oil price fl  uctuations than the energy 
component and sometimes with a consid-
erable time lag, the values for the indirect 
effects  are signifi  cantly lower than those of direct effects and their impact sets in slightly later.
Indirect effects – like direct effects – are a 
temporary phenomenon for the rate of in-
fl  ation. If the temporarily lower infl  ation 
rate resulting from the fall in crude oil prices leads to an adjustment in infl  ation expect-
ations or wages, one speaks of second- round effects. It is empirically diffi   cult to disentangle these second- round effects 
from indirect effects, as both would be cap-tured by changes in the HICP excluding en-ergy. That said, second- round effects would 
lower the core rate for a longer period of 
time and would be coupled with a marked 
decline in infl  ation expectations and thus 
signifi  cantly dampened wage growth. There are no indications of this in Germany at the present time.
All in all, based on mechanical simulation 
calculations using the Bundesbank’s macro-economic model, a negative oil price shock of 30% could, all other things being equal, 
lead to a fall in annual HICP infl  ation ex-
cluding energy in Germany of 0.1 percent-
age point in the fi  rst year and a further 0.2 percentage point in the second year.
4 
The effect would then tail off in the third 
year.
If one were to update the December 2015 
projections accordingly, using the signifi  -
cantly lower oil price path from 1 to 9 Feb-ruary 2016, the rate of infl  ation for the HICP 
in 2016 would be ¾ percentage point 
lower, at around just ¼% (see chart above). 
This is due primarily to the clearly stronger 
negative effect of the energy component compared with the December projection, which is likely to have an even stronger 
dampening effect than in 2015 and 2009. 
The impact of these direct effects in 2017 
will probably be only minor. Together with 
the indirect effects, however, it is to be ex-pected that the HICP growth rate would be 
¼ percentage point lower than in the De-
cember projection, thus standing at 1¾%.
4 The macroeconometric model is a key instrument for 
generating the projection baseline and for accompany-
ing simulation calculations. It is a traditional macro 
model with Keynesian properties in the short term and 
neoclassical properties in the long term. The model 
calculations assume an isolated oil price shock.Updated HICP projection for Germany *
* In line with the crude oil price path in euro from 1-9 February 
2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 151.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
––++++++Year-on-year change in % and contributions in percentage points
Projection
2017UpdatedDecember 2015
2016Energy
Excluding energyHICPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
58

German industry’s exports are likely to benefit 
from the ongoing economic recovery in major 
industrial countries, but the outlook for exports 
to emerging market economies has deterior -
ated. The purchasing power gains made by 
crude oil importers are being offset by corres -
ponding losses in revenue in the crude oil-  
producing countries. These losses are likely to 
dampen private and public sector spending in 
the crude oil- exporting emerging market econ -
omies. Investment budgets, in particular, are 
likely to be cut. Furthermore, the individual sec -
tors of German industry are being affected to a 
varying extent by the fall in the price of oil and 
the shift in demand impulses from countries 
producing commodities to those importing 
them. There are also doubts with regard to the 
effects of the ongoing macroeconomic restruc -
turing process taking place in China.
The ensuing uncertainty, which has also af -
fected financial markets, is likely to have damp -
ened primarily the business outlook in industry 
recently. The still quite positive expectations for 
exports and output as well as increased orders 
in the fourth quarter suggest that industrial ac -
tivity will overcome the slowdown in the next 
few months and slowly pick up momentum on 
the back of moderate demand impulses at 
home and abroad. The more domestically ori -
ented sectors of the economy were signifi -
cantly less influenced. Optimism remained very 
pronounced in the services, construction and 
retail sectors, despite the recent gloom.
New industrial orders were showing a distinct 
improvement at the end of last year. Following 
the major contraction in the third quarter, in -
dustry posted a seasonally adjusted growth in 
orders of 1%. Excluding orders of other trans -
port equipment, which were at a relatively low 
volume in the quarter under review, the in -
crease was, in fact, almost twice as strong. Im -
petus did not come solely from domestic de -
mand, which had been weak previously; in -
flows of export orders also recovered signifi -
cantly following their marked decline in the 
third quarter.… but height -
ened risks for 
the external  setting …
… dampening 
optimism for 
the time being, 
above all in 
industry
New demand 
stimuli from 
home and 
abroadDemand for industrial goods and 
construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 2015758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
59

The consumer goods sector saw a substantial 
increase in orders in the fourth quarter. Orders 
received by manufacturers of intermediate 
goods, including, not least, the chemicals in -
dustry, also increased considerably following a 
lengthy period of stagnation. By contrast, cap -
ital goods orders gained very little momentum. 
However, this was also due to the relatively low 
volume of major orders, particularly in the 
other transport equipment sector, and, exclud -
ing this more volatile component, there was a 
marked rise in the case of capital goods, too. In 
the automotive industry, orders from non- euro- 
area countries recovered to a large extent fol -
lowing their slump in the third quarter and 
were strengthened by domestic impulses; over -
all, however, they were still well down on their 
high level in the second quarter. By contrast, 
manufacturers of machinery and equipment 
not only saw a sharp fall in domestic orders; 
there is also a lack of demand from the euro 
area at present, which ultimately could not be 
offset by the surge in orders from non- euro-  
area countries.
Construction activity is also likely to have 
gathered significant pace. There has been a dis -
tinct strengthening of the upward movement 
in demand for residential construction, which is 
being underpinned by the favourable outlook for incomes, very positive financing conditions 
and strong immigration. The figures available 
up until November show a strongly increased 
pace of growth in permits for residential con -
struction in the second half of the year com -
pared with the average of the previous six 
months. Orders in residential construction like -
wise picked up strongly. Following a period of 
stagnation lasting almost one and a half years, 
commercial construction saw a marked surge 
in orders in the fourth quarter. This is likely to 
ensure a high level of capacity utilisation in the 
short term and beyond. Demand for public sec -
tor construction also showed a clear increase.
The underlying conditions for buoyant con -
sumption activity are still in place. In line with 
this, consumer sentiment, as surveyed by mar -
ket research institution Gesellschaft für Kon -
sumforschung  (GfK), has been stable and posi -
tive for several months. Furthermore, the as -
sessment of the economic outlook showed a 
further improvement at the turn of 2015-16. 
According to the GfK, this is mainly related to 
the positive labour market situation and has 
also led to brighter income expectations. The 
recent crude oil price- related gains in purchas -
ing power are likely to have played a part, too. 
This has also led to a further increase in con -
sumers’ existing high propensity to purchase.Consumer and 
intermediate goods benefit, but mixed  picture for  capital goods
Residential con-
struction more buoyant, consid-erable stimuli from industrial and public sec-tor constructionConsumption still important provider of stimulus for eco-nomic growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
The public finance situation in Germany re -
mained favourable last year, with the fiscal sur -
plus rising slightly to 0.5% (2014: 0.3%) of 
gross domestic product (GDP), according to 
provisional data for 2015. This improvement 
reflects   cyclical developments as well as tem -
porary effects – primarily the dropout of bur -
dens owing to tax- related court rulings that 
had impacted on the 2014 figures. By contrast, 
the structural surplus, which is adjusted for 
these factors, declined slightly and amounted 
to ½% of GDP (see the box on pages 62 and 
63).1 The revenue ratio was unchanged at 
44½%. The considerable increase in tax rev -
enue bolstered the ratio, while the Bundes -
bank’s profit, amongst other things, fell. The 
expenditure ratio dropped to 44%, reflecting 
the favourable economic situation, the expiry 
of temporary effects  and the decline in interest 
expenditure. In contrast to this, social benefits, 
in particular, increased considerably. According 
to (provisional) data, this rise was attributable 
only to a minor extent to the high numbers of 
incoming refugees, as the influx has not yet 
had a major impact on social benefits over the 
year as a whole and also affected other ex -
penditure categories (especially other operating 
expenditure). Overall, marked increases in pen -
sion expenditure  (partly on account of the 2014 
pension benefits package) and in the areas of 
healthcare and long-  term care were more sig -
nificant.
The debt ratio had fallen to 71.9% by the third 
quarter of 2015. Roughly two- thirds of the de -
crease compared with the end of 2014 (74.9%) 
was attributable to nominal GDP growth in the 
ratio’s denominator. Aside from this, central 
and state government, in particular, have scaled 
back their gross debt. This was also aided – to 
a minor extent  – by a further decline in the 
liabilities  of government- owned bad banks.This year, the surplus is likely to be eroded and 
the government budget might be more or less 
balanced. Although –  from today’s perspec -
tive – the cyclical trend remains positive and 
the interest expenditure ratio is likely to fall a 
little further, various fiscal policy measures will 
weigh on the balance (tax cuts and additional 
spending, inter alia,  on infrastructure, educa -
tion, research and the housing allowance). 
Moreover, expenditure related to the influx of 
refugees will also grow. This expenditure may 
have risen by ¼% of GDP in 2015 (compared 
with 2014) and could climb by another ¼% of 
GDP in 2016, although there is considerable 
uncertainty surrounding the estimates.2 A fur -
ther decline in the debt ratio looks to be on the 
cards.
The massive influx of asylum seekers poses 
tough challenges for Germany. Thanks to the 
current favourable economic situation, how -
ever, there is sufficient scope within the gov -
ernment budgets to absorb the associated 
financial  burdens without breaching the deficit 
ceilings. The longer- term effects on govern -
ment budgets are still difficult to gauge, and 
their scale will also hinge significantly on policy 
decisions in other areas – for example, on inte -
gration measures in Germany, on the allocation 
of refugees throughout the European Union 
(EU) and on tackling the root causes of migra -
tion. Fiscal policymakers would be well advised 2015 surplus 
slightly higher owing to drop-out of tempor-ary burdens
Declining debt 
ratioContraction of 
surplus in 2016
Good starting 
position creates financial leeway in the short term, …
* The section entitled “General government budget” con -
cerns the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. The 
subsequent more detailed reporting on the budgets of cen -
tral, state and local government and of the social security 
funds is based on the figures as defined in the govern -
ment’s financial statistics (which are generally in line with 
the budget accounts).
1 In terms of the level of the balance, temporary effects 
and cyclical influences were largely negligible in 2015, fol -
lowing pressure on the 2014 balance mainly from tempor -
ary burdens.
2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The current influx of 
refugees – projected impact on the labour market and pub -
lic finances, Monthly Report, December 2015, pp 24-28. 
Expenditure in this connection can only be partially identi -
fied. This is also the case in the provisional annual result for 
2015, which is still based to a large extent on estimates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
61

The structural development of German public fi  nances – 
results  of the disaggregated framework for 2015
According to provisional data, Germany’s 
general government budget posted a mod-
erate surplus of 0.5% of gross domestic 
product (GDP) in 2015.1 The fi  scal outturn 
thus improved slightly on the 2014 surplus 
of 0.3% of GDP . The “disaggregated frame-
work” for analysing public fi  nances2 can 
separately identify and estimate, fi  rst, the role played by cyclical infl  uences and spe-cifi  c temporary effects and, second, other effects –  referred to here as structural 
changes – in the revenue and expenditure 
ratios and their major determinants. The main developments in 2015 are presented 
below.3
The improvement in the fi  scal balance owed 
something not only to a slightly positive 
cyclical infl  uence, but also to clearly delin-
eated temporary one- off effects. While tax 
refunds resulting from court rulings had 
weighed signifi  cantly on Germany’s general 
government budget in 2014, revenue from 
an auction of mobile phone frequencies 
provided a little budget relief in 2015.4 Con-
sequently, the structural surplus ratio (the 
ratio of the fi  scal balance, adjusted for cyc-
lical and temporary effects, to nominal trend GDP) deteriorated marginally. The 
level of the structural surplus was more or 
less equivalent to the unadjusted value.
The structural revenue ratio remained un-changed, with a 0.3 percentage point de-
crease in the ratio of non- tax receipts being 
offset by an increase in the structural tax and social contributions ratio. Non- tax re-
ceipts were pushed down inter alia by wan-
ing interest income and a smaller Bundes-bank profi  t. Tax and social contributions were mainly affected by one- off develop-
ments (residual: +0.2 percentage point). For instance, wage tax receipts and revenue 
from real estate transfer tax (recorded as a 
structural fi  gure) rose more than the rate implied by the change in the underlying 
macroeconomic reference variables.
The unadjusted expenditure ratio fell by 
0.3 percentage point in 2015, whereas the structural ratio rose slightly, chiefl  y because 
of the adjustment for the aforementioned 
temporary one- off factors. Interest expend-iture fell again on the back of the benefi  cial funding terms and the reduction in the debt ratio.
5 The structural ratio of other expend-
iture (primary expenditure) went up by 0.3 percentage point overall. On balance, this increase was largely driven by signifi  -cant increases in social payments, which 
were related to a rise in spending on statu-tory pensions and long- term care as well as 
government outlays on refugees, amongst 
other factors.
1 As defi  ned in the national accounts.
2 For a more detailed description of the framework, 
including the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical component used in the Eurosystem, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for 
analysing public fi  nances: Germany’s fi  scal track record 
between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 
2006, pp 61-76.
3 These results are subject to amendments arising 
from revisions to the national accounts fi  gures or to 
estimates of the macroeconomic outlook.
4 Tax refunds owing to court rulings are recorded in 
the national accounts as government spending (capital transfers) at the time of the fi  nal ruling (accrual basis). 
Signifi  cant tax refunds were reported in 2014. Pro-
ceeds from the auction of mobile phone frequencies 
are recorded in the national accounts as sales of non- 
produced assets and hence as negative government 
spending. The amounts are recognised when the fre-
quencies enter into effective use, which means that the total proceeds of €5.1 billion will be allocated 
to 2015 (€0.5 billion), 2017 (€3.8 billion), 2018 (€0.2 
billion) and 2019 (€0.6 billion).5 The change in the interest expenditure ratio for 2015 
is not shown in disaggregated form as the debt ratio 
outturn is not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
62

To sum up, Germany’s public fi  nances re-
corded a moderate surplus in 2015, both in 
unadjusted and structural terms. Distinctly 
increasing social payments meant that the 
structural balance worsened slightly overall, 
despite falling interest expenditure.
The structural fi  scal ratio has signifi  cantly improved, by 1¼ percentage points, since the fi  nancial and economic crisis of 2008-
09, which only manifestly impacted on the German general government account from 
2009 onwards. On balance, the improve-ment is the result of a lower interest bur-den, which is attributable to the decreased 
average rate of interest on government 
debt.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Total 
2009 to 
2015
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 – 3.1 – 1.0 3.3 0.9 0.0 0.4 0.2 0.7
Cyclical component 1 – 1.6 0.2 0.9 0.0 – 0.5 0.0 0.1 – 0.9
Temporary effects 1 0.2 – 1.0 1.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 0.3 0.3
Fiscal balance – 1.5 – 0.3 1.3 0.9 0.4 0.6 – 0.2 1.3
Interest payable – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 1.2
Owing to change in average interest rate – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 1.5
Owing to change in debt level 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.3
Primary balance – 1.7 – 0.4 1.4 0.7 0.1 0.4 – 0.3 0.1
Revenue – 0.9 – 0.2 1.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.4
Taxes and social contributions – 1.0 – 0.4 0.8 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1
Fiscal drag 2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.6
Decoupling of macroeconomic refer-
ence variables from GDP – 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.2
Legislative changes – 0.3 – 0.6 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 – 1.1
Residual – 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.4
of which profi  t-related taxes 3 – 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.3
Non-tax revenue 4 0.2 0.2 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 0.4
Primary expenditure 0.8 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.3 0.3
Social payments 5 0.2 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.1
Subsidies 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1
Compensation of employees 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.0
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6
Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0
Other expenditure 6 – 0.2 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.3
Memo item
Pension expenditure 7 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.0 0.1 – 0.5
Healthcare expenditure 8 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.7
Labour market expenditure 9 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.8
Long-term care expenditure 10 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. 1 Year- on- year change in the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 In this context, the term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the overall revenue effect of bracket creep in 
income taxation and the impact of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 3 Assessed income tax, 
corporation tax, local business tax, investment income tax. 4 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 
5 Including other current transfers to households. 6 Other current transfers payable to corporations and the rest of the world, 
other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 7 Spending by the statutory pension insurance 
scheme, on recipients of civil servant pensions as well as payments by the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways 
Fund. 8 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 9 Spending 
by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the reintegration payment paid to central government from 2008 to 2013) and central government expenditure on unemployment welfare benefi  t (II) and on labour market reintegration measures. 
10 Spending by the public long-term care insurance scheme.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
63

to gradually restore the safety margins in future 
budgets after making use of them (in the form 
of moderate structural surpluses in the budget 
plans).3 The pursuit of sound public finances 
and the implementation of important reforms 
are not contradictory aims. Rather, reliable 
compliance with budgetary rules forms a de -
pendable basis for fiscal policy and creates an 
anchor of confidence. For Germany, the un -
favourable demographic outlook poses a par -
ticular challenge. For this reason, too, it would 
make good sense to reduce the debt ratio to 
below the 60% ceiling before the associated 
burdens increase distinctly. In this way, public 
finances can also be made more robust against future interest rate hikes and are better pre -
pared for unexpected new challenges as well.
As a result of the additional spending on asy -
lum seekers and the generally rather lax budget 
policy course, Germany’s fiscal stance is expan -
sionary in 2016. As things now stand, the na -
tional and EU deficit ceilings will be complied 
with nonetheless, albeit by a tighter margin 
than before. Calls for an additional fiscal stimu -
lus in Germany are not convincing. Fiscal policy 
already tends to have a procyclical impact in 
the current rather favourable German eco -
nomic setting. Further easing would appear 
risky, also in terms of compliance with the fiscal 
rules. An economic stimulus would be unlikely 
to help increase underlying growth in Germany 
or to tackle weak growth in other countries.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue4 rose significantly in 2015 by 4½% 
(see the chart on page  65 and table on 
page 66) and was thus broadly in line with the 
November forecast made by the Working Party 
on Tax Revenue Forecasting. Receipts from 
income- related taxes climbed by an above-  
average 5½%. This was chiefly driven by the 
dynamic rise in wage tax receipts (+6½%), 
which was mainly bolstered by ongoing stable 
wage developments in conjunction with pro -
gressive taxation as well as the growing num -… but renewed 
build- up of safety margins advisable going forwardExpansionary fiscal stance, but budget limits nonetheless maintained
Clear tax 
revenue  growth in 2015
Further dynamic 
increase in wage tax receiptsGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties.
Deutsche Bundesbank434445464748
5432101
–––––+As a percentage of GDPExpenditure 
Revenue 
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015Fiscal balance383940 Taxes and social contributions 1
3 It would not be advisable to radically soften the fiscal 
policy stance, including in connection with the current 
influx  of refugees. Caution thus appears necessary with 
regard  to achieving large- scale future relief for public 
finances  through additional tax and contribution receipts. 
Developments in this area are highly uncertain, and labour 
market integration is likely to be far more time- consuming 
and cost- intensive than for a targeted labour market-  
oriented inflow, for instance.
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the last quarter recorded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
64

ber of employees.5 The retroactive increase in 
the basic income tax allowance will not have 
an impact on cash flows until the start of 2016. 
At 4%, growth in revenue from profit- related 
taxes was roughly on a par with the previous 
year’s figure. Revenue from assessed income 
tax continued to rise dynamically, albeit some -
what less strongly than in previous years. Cor -
poration tax revenue receded slightly, though 
at a relatively high level, while revenue from 
non- assessed taxes on earnings (mainly invest -
ment income tax on dividends) was somewhat 
higher than in 2014, probably because of larger 
profit distributions. Marked growth was also 
recorded in receipts from withholding tax, 
which – given the further drop in the interest 
rate level – could be attributable to higher in -
come from tax on capital gains. Revenue from 
specific excise duties, which are largely volume- 
related, rose at a below- average rate (+1%). 
The slight decline in energy tax receipts was a 
contributing factor here. Income from turnover 
tax grew by 3½% and was thus broadly con -
sistent with the relevant macroeconomic refer -
ence variables.
According to the official tax estimate of 
November  2015, growth in tax revenue (includ -
ing local government taxes) is expected to be 
only moderate in 2016, at 2%. The underlying 
growth in the macroeconomic reference vari -
ables for tax revenue is forecast to be roughly 
the same as in 2015, but the impact of legisla -
tive changes is expected to reduce revenue 
growth distinctly. In particular, revenue short -
falls will be caused by income tax relief (raising 
the basic income tax allowance and the child 
tax allowance  as well as a rightward shift in 
other tax brackets) and the increase in child 
benefit. Furthermore, extensive tax refunds are 
anticipated on account of court rulings, some 
of which were already made some time ago.6
Central government budget
In 2015, the central government budget re -
corded a high surplus of almost €12 billion, which was used in its entirety to fill up the new 
reserve for future additional expenditure re -
lated to refugees. In 2014, the budget had still 
posted a slight deficit (see the overview on 
pages 68 and 69 for an explanation of the vari -
ous budget data, including the balance and net 
borrowing). Revenue rose considerably by 4½% 
(€15½ billion). In addition to a marked increase 
of €10½ billion in tax revenue, this was attrib -
utable, in particular, to proceeds of €4½ billion 
from the frequency auction7 in spring 2015. 
Growth in expenditure was distinctly weaker 
(1%, or €3 billion). However, it should be noted 
that €4½ billion in capital had been injected 
into the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) in 
2014 and interest expenditure continued its 
steep decline in 2015, falling by €5 billion. In 
this favourable setting, two supplementary Below- average 
rise in receipts from consumption- related taxes
Dampened 
revenue  rise expected in 2016High surplus in 2015 owing, not least, to proceeds from frequency  auction and sharp fall in interest ratesTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 201501234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
5 This was additionally boosted by a disproportionately low 
increase in deduction amounts (child benefit and subsidies 
for supplementary private pension plans).
6 These predominantly relate to rulings by the Federal 
Fiscal  Court of 25 June 2014 (I R 33/ 09) and 30 July 2014 
(I R 74/  12) on section 40a of the Act on Asset Manage -
ment Companies (Gesetz über Kapitalanlagegesellschaften) 
and STEKO (section 8b (3) of the Corporation Tax Act ( Kör-
perschaftsteuergesetz )) (see also Bundestags- Drucksache  
18/ 5560) as well as the European Court of Justice ruling of 
20 October 2011 on the taxation of dividends paid to EU/
EEA companies (C-284/ 09). In the national accounts, how -
ever, the effect of the tax refunds is recognised at the time 
of the rulings in 2011 and 2014, increasing expenditure.
7 The auction brought in a total of €5.1 billion. For some 
of the frequency bands, further payment dates are sched -
uled for the middle of this year and the next.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
65

budgets were used to pay €3½ billion to the 
new Fund to promote municipal investment 
and €1½ billion to the Energy and climate fund 
for the advance financing of expenditure.
In a target/actual comparison, the surplus was 
still €7 billion higher than planned in the 
second supplementary budget of November 
2015. Revenue exceeded the amount envis -
aged in the budget by €4½ billion. Tax receipts 
were €1½ billion higher than planned, which 
mainly corresponded to the last tax estimate’s 
upward revision of tax revenue expectations, 
which was published shortly after the budget 
approval. Non- tax receipts also saw an increase 
of €3 billion, owing, not least, to a portion of 
the revenue from the frequency auction that 
had not been specified in the second supple -
mentary budget, higher proceeds from finan -
cial transactions and refunds from the EU which 
were recorded as token entries in the budget.8 
On the expenditure side, the authorised vol -
ume was undershot by €2½ billion on balance. Lower expenditure chiefly related to various 
transfer payments. In the area of military pro -
curements, too, the budgeted amounts were 
not used in full. Minor relief was still provided, 
amongst other things, by interest and calls on 
guarantees.
For the structural result as defined in the debt 
brake rules, the Federal Ministry of Finance re -
ported a surplus of 0.1% of GDP in its January 
Monthly Report (see the overview on pages 68 
and 69 for information on how this is calcu -
lated). The assignment of the core budget’s 
high surplus to the new refugee reserve was 
thus recognised in a different way to that used 
in the European budgetary surveillance rules 
which also have to be observed under the debt Result is €7 
 billion better than planned in autumn 2015 Reserve transac-tion recorded in a way that opens up leeway  under debt brakeTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2015 
as a whole
1,2,3Q4
2014 2015 2014 2015
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 593.0 620.3 + 27.2 + 4.6 + 4.5 164.1 166.9 + 2.8 +  1.7
of which
Wage tax 168.0 178.9 + 10.9 + 6.5 + 6.6 47.6 49.8 + 2.2 +  4.6
Profi  t-related taxes 4 90.9 94.4 +  3.5 + 3.8 + 4.2 22.2 21.5 – 0.7 –  3.3
Assessed income tax 45.6 48.6 +  3.0 + 6.5 + 6.7 11.8 12.5 + 0.6 +  5.4
Corporation tax 20.0 19.6 –  0.5 – 2.3 + 4.6 5.1 3.8 – 1.2 – 23.9
Investment income 
tax5 25.2 26.2 +  1.0 + 3.8 – 0.4 5.3 5.2 – 0.2 –  3.2
Turnover taxes 6 203.1 209.9 +  6.8 + 3.4 + 3.1 52.3 54.1 + 1.8 +  3.5
Energy tax 39.8 39.6 –  0.2 – 0.4 + 0.2 15.2 15.2 + 0.0 +  0.2
Tobacco tax 14.6 14.9 +  0.3 + 2.1 + 0.2 4.7 5.0 + 0.3 +  7.3
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2015. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Tax revenue including (still estimated) local govern-ment taxes was €12.2 billion above the November 2014 estimate, which formed the basis for the 2015 central government plan drawn 
up at the end of 2014. Excluding the effect of legislation passed since the estimate, the government projects that tax revenue would have 
been revised upwards by €13.2 billion. 4 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 5 With-
holding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 Token entries are budget items for revenue, possibly 
accompanied  by spending authorisations, for which no 
amount is given. Spending is then permitted in line with 
the amounts actually received concerning the respective 
revenue items. In this case, however, the inflows were only 
matched by a limited volume of related additional expend -
iture on balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
66

brake and moreover, for example, to that used 
for the Energy and climate fund, the surplus of 
which was likewise assigned to a reserve. 
Otherwise, a structural surplus ratio of 0.6% 
would even have been achieved. This proced -
ure means that additional scope will be created 
when funds are withdrawn from the reserve in 
future.
The central government budget for 2016 was 
adopted by the Bundestag at the end of No -
vember, again with no net borrowing. How -
ever, a €6 billion withdrawal from the refugee 
reserve was planned in order to cover add -
itional expenditure on refugees. From the 
present perspective, it is fair to assume that at 
least some of the budget relief that material -
ised at the end of last year will continue. 
Although  the more favourable result of last 
Novem ber’s tax estimate was already incorpor -
ated into the final budget deliberations for 
2016, very cautious calculations were made for 
the interest expenditure estimates, for instance . 
The funding advantages that have already been 
realised and the persistence of extremely fa -
vourable capital market conditions for central 
government suggest that the projected in -
crease of €3 billion on the actual 2015 figure 
might not materialise. Moreover, it remains to 
be seen how much of the budgeted amounts 
for military equipment, which are distinctly 
higher than the previous year’s result, is actu -
ally used. Finally, fairly cautious estimates have 
been made for guarantees and envisaged re -
payments from the EU, for example, in 2016 as 
well.
There are also risks in other areas, however. For 
example, further perceptible strains are antici -
pated from aid payments for asylum seekers’ 
countries of origin or their neighbouring coun -
tries. In addition, the planned growth in spend -
ing on unemployment benefit II (welfare- related 
benefit) of just 1½% – thus roughly in line with 
the increase in benefit payments at the start of 
the year – seems to be calculated tightly given 
the foreseeable rise in the number of recog -
nised refugees eligible to claim. The central government budget would be faced with bur -
dens that are more difficult to overcome if the 
influx of refugees, which is experiencing a sea -
sonal lull at present, does not subside substan -
tially over the course of the year as apparently 
assumed. Another item not covered in the 
budget is compensation payments that may 
have to be made to operators of nuclear power 
plants that were shut down by government 
order, if the Federal Constitutional Court should 
so decide following the oral proceedings an -
nounced for March.
All in all, however, the planned deficit seems to 
be generously calculated, provided that the 
migration  of asylum seekers develops as the 
government has so far anticipated and no 
court rulings that place a strain on the budget 
are issued. The balances of the relevant off-  
budget entities are also likely to be rather cau -
tiously estimated. The ceiling for the structural 
funding gap under the debt brake of 0.35% of 
GDP to be applied for the first time is thus likely Underlying 
 conditions for the 2016 budget somewhat improved, …
… but 
 considerable risks also existOverall compli-ance with debt brake as things standCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
2015
20142013Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201320152014€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
67

Key central government budget data 
in connection with the debt brake
1 Balance
The fi  nancial balance is the difference be-
tween the core budget’s revenue and ex-penditure as defi  ned in the government’s 
fi  nancial statistics (cash data).
2 Coin seigniorage
Coin seigniorage is the revenue generated 
by central government by issuing regular 
coins. It is one way of funding a defi  cit 
(and, in this respect, is a type of borrowing). Coin seigniorage increases Maastricht debt.
3  Transfers to and withdrawals 
from reserves 
These constitute another way of funding 
the budget balance. Reserves are fi  rst 
formed from surpluses and can then subse-
quently be depleted. Reserve fl  uctuations have an impact on net borrowing but do 
not affect the balance in the government’s 
fi  nancial statistics or the Maastricht defi  cit (defi  cit in the national accounts). Changes 
in reserves ultimately correspond to the for-
mation and depletion of fi  nancial assets and therefore resemble fi  nancial transac-tions in this respect. Unlike fi  nancial rela-
tionships with off- budget entities incorpor-
ated within the framework of the debt 
brake rules and fi  nancial transactions, they 
affect the reference variable used by the Federal Ministry of Finance for the debt brake (see 8). Reserve withdrawals to the 
benefi  t of central government’s core budget were last recorded in 1975.
4 Net borrowing
This corresponds to revenue from borrow-
ing less expenditure for repayments (4 = 
1 + 2 + 3). The term “balanced budget” de-
notes a budget with no net borrowing.
5 Balance of fi  nancial transactions
Revenue from the realisation of fi  nancial 
assets (loan repayments, disposal of partici-€ billion
Item2014 2015 2016
Actual BudgetSupple-
mentary 
budget in 
MaySupple-mentary 
budget in 
NovemberProvisional actual Budget
 1 Balance
1 –  0.3 –  0.3 –  0.3 4.7 11.8 –  6.4
 2 Coin seigniorage 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3
 3 Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) 
reserves – – – –  5.0 – 12.1 6.1
 4 Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) – – – – – –
 5 Balance of fi  nancial transactions –  2.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.9 0.1
 6 Cyclical component in the budget 
procedure –  5.9 –  5.0 2 –  1.0 3 0.0 4 –  1.2 0.3
 7 Balance of incorporated off-budget 
entities –  0.8 – – – 4.5 –  5.4
Energy and climate fund –  0.1 – – – 1.9 –  0.4
Flood assistance fund –  0.7 – – – –  0.9 –  3.5
Fund to promote municipal investment – – – – 3.5 –  1.5
 8 Structural net borrowing (–)/
repayment (+) 7.5 3.6 –  0.4 –  1.4 3.8 –  5.8
 9 Structural balance 7.2 3.3 –  0.7 3.3 15.6 – 11.9
10 Structural balance adjusted for updated 
estimate of potential output 4.0 . . . 16.1 – 10.9
11 Ceiling – 26.6 – 18.6 – 18.6 – 18.6 – 18.6 – 10.2
1 The government’s fi  nancial statistics (cash data) show a defi  cit for 2014 amounting to the level of coin seigniorage. By con-trast, had there been no additional ad hoc transfers to the Investment and repayment fund at budget outturn, there would 
have been a slight surplus. 2 Simplifi  ed procedure applied: adjusted to the spring 2015 projection. 3 Simplifi  ed procedure 
applied : adjusted to the autumn 2015 projection. 4 Simplifi  ed procedure applied: adjusted to the national accounts fi  gures published in mid-January 2016. This is roughly equivalent to the Bundesbank’s current estimate of central government’s cyclical component calculated using the disaggregated cyclical adjustment method.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
68

pating interests, capital repayments) less 
expenditure  on fi  nancial assets (granting of 
loans, acquisition of participating interests, 
capital injections). Financial transactions are 
excluded from the Maastricht defi  cit. In an 
apparent move to ensure that the national 
debt brake complies with European rules, a 
clause was inserted into the Basic Law 
(Grundgesetz) stating that fi  nancial transac-
tions are to be factored out when calculat-
ing the ceiling for central government’s structural funding gap (see 11). However, distinguishing these from non- fi  nancial 
transactions (eg capital injections without a market return, or dividends from capital re-serves) is sometimes diffi   cult in practice.
6  Cyclical component in the budget 
procedure 
When calculating the ceiling for the struc-
tural funding gap under the debt brake, 
cyclical factors are to be factored out (Art-
icle 115 of the Basic Law; see 11). Federal 
Government essentially uses the European Commission’s cyclical adjustment proced-ure, which is also applied under EU fi  scal rules. While the calculation made when 
drawing up the budget is based on a fully 
updated estimate of potential output, a simplifi  ed procedure is subsequently used 
(including when drawing up supplementary 
budgets).1 Here, the cyclical component 
from the Budget Act (Haushaltsgesetz) is adjusted for the estimated budgetary im-
pact of the (expected) change in growth in 
nominal gross domestic product (GDP) be-
tween the point at which the budget was 
drawn up and the point at which the calcu-lation is made.
7  Balance of incorporated off- budget 
entities
Under central government’s debt brake, the 
balances (not the net borrowing) of the off- budget entities that were founded as from 2011 and are authorised to borrow are fac-
tored into the limit imposed by the ceiling 
(see 8). Also incorporated are entities that are pre- funded from the central govern-ment budget and whose surpluses when 
they are topped up are recognised in cen-
tral government’s structural result (eg Fund to promote municipal investment).8 Structural net borrowing
Structural net borrowing (8 = 4 – 5 – 6 + 7) 
is the Federal Ministry of Finance’s refer-
ence variable for gauging compliance with 
central government’s debt brake ceiling.
9 Structural balance
Within the scope of the government’s 
fi  nancial  statistics, the structural balance 
represents the reference variable that most 
closely approximates to the cyclically ad-
justed Maastricht defi  cit. Unlike in the case 
of structural net borrowing, coin seignior-
age and changes in reserves are disregarded (9 = 8 – 2 – 3).
10  Structural balance adjusted for 
updated  estimate of potential output
Federal Government’s latest estimate of 
potential  output (last amended on 27 Janu-
ary 2016) is used in the cyclical adjustment procedure and therefore serves as the basis 
for a consistent picture of the cyclical pos-
ition over the period under observation. 
Under the debt brake, the structural fi  gures 
calculated using the simplifi  ed cyclical ad-
justment procedure are updated for the last time in the September of the year following the budget in question.
11 CeilingUnder the debt brake, the ceiling for central 
government’s structural funding gap from 
2016 onwards is 0.35% of GDP in the year 
prior to that in which the budget is drawn 
up. A reduction path was defi  ned for the 
years 2011 to 2015, the starting point for 
which was determined by the Federal Min-istry of Finance based on an estimate from summer 2010.
2
1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake in 
Germany – key aspects and implementation, Monthly 
Report, October 2011, p 27.2 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), op cit, pp 26-28.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
69

to be complied with in the end, even without 
recognising the withdrawal from the reserve as 
income.
The Federal Cabinet’s decisions on the bench -
mark figures for the 2017 budget and the new 
medium- term financial plan up to 2020 are due 
in March. According to the tax estimate of No -
vember 2015, the tax revenue estimates would 
actually only need to be reduced relatively 
moderately vis- à- vis the figures in the previous 
financial plan from the summer of 2015. Trans -
fers of turnover tax to state government from 
2017 onwards for the pledged case- based 
lump sum payments for asylum seekers had 
not been specified before the tax estimate (and 
have yet to be specified), however, and were 
therefore not included. Furthermore, additional 
burdens to be borne by central government as 
part of the reform of the federal structure 
would have to be included in the financial plan -
ning from 2020. If the migration of refugees 
continues at its previous strong level, greater 
strains could arise in particular for tax transfers 
to state government based on the number of 
cases, unemployment benefit II, as well as for 
central government’s share of accommodation 
costs, which, as a general rule, are to be 
covered by local government. It will only be 
possible to reliably quantify the actual add -
itional burdens at a later date, not least be -
cause of the uncertainty regarding future 
migration  levels.9 However, it appears advisable 
to gear budgetary policy in such a way that, 
given a baseline scenario deemed realistic from 
today’s perspective in the budget plans, at least 
a slight structural surplus, and thus a certain 
safety margin below the upper limit set by the 
debt brake is realised again in the future.
Central government’s off- budget entities (ex -
cluding bad banks and other entities that use 
commercial double- entry bookkeeping)10 re-
corded a high surplus of €9 billion in 2015 
compared with just over €4 billion in 2014. On 
balance, the rise is largely attributable to the 
pre- financing of the new Fund to promote 
municipal  investment, which received a central government grant totalling €3½ billion. Fol -
lowing a broadly balanced result in 2014, the 
Energy and climate fund ultimately recorded a 
surplus of almost €2 billion arising from central 
government grants. The Restructuring fund, 
which generated surpluses of €½ billion in pre -
vious years on account of its income from the 
bank levy, posted a result of +€1½ billion. With 
a surplus of almost €1 billion owing to repay -
ments of previously granted capital aid, the 
Financial  Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) also 
closed the year more favourably after a broadly 
balanced result in 2014. Furthermore, the sur -
plus achieved by the off- budget entities for 
provisions for civil servants’ pensions was also 
up by €½ billion. On the flip side, the deficit of 
the Flood assistance fund set up in 2013 rose 
somewhat to just under €1 billion – particularly 
as a result of a (re)payment to central govern -
ment, although it would appear that this 
amounted to only half of the €½ billion planned 
in the central government budget. The balance 
of the Investment and repayment fund, which 
was set up in 2009 to fund an economic stimu -
lus package, deteriorated more sharply. An ap -
propriation of €2 billion from the Bundesbank’s 
profit in 2014 was followed by a transfer of 
only €½ billion arising from a closing entry in 
the central government budget at the start of 
2015. After receiving a transfer of just over €½ 
billion from the central government budget in 
2014, the Special provision fund for inflation-  
indexed Federal securities needed to make a Aim for surpluses  
in future  – des-
pite greater 
requirements posed by refu-gees and reform of federal structure  – when adopting bench-mark figures in March
Central govern-
ment’s off- budget entities recorded high surplus in 2015 owing to advance pay-ments by central government, …9 No precise figures on the net migration of refugees last 
year are available as yet either. Within the total of 1.1 mil -
lion arrivals recorded in the system for the initial reporting 
of asylum seekers (EASY), some people have probably been 
counted twice and onward travellers are not systematically 
booked out. Only 0.44 million applications for asylum have 
been submitted to the Federal Office   for Migration and 
Refugees, and reliable data concerning outstanding appli -
cations do not seem to be available. To ensure that the 
necessary goods and accommodation can be provided at 
an appropriate level and in the right place, it seems crucial 
that reliable data are made available as soon as possible. 
Orderly recording of arrivals would help to organise sup -
port and integration measures efficiently and also to dis -
tribute the expenses actually incurred amongst the govern -
ment levels, as agreed.
10 The new reserve is also not included in the off- budget 
entities as it is not an independent entity.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
70

small repayment in 2015 owing to a fall in the 
applicable price index.
An overall deficit, and thus a significantly less 
favourable result, is on the cards for 2016. 
After being pre-  financed in 2015, the Fund to 
promote municipal investment is expected to 
have its first significant outflows this year. It 
is  also foreseeable that the reserves built up 
by  the Energy and climate fund in 2015 will 
gradually  be depleted. Furthermore, the Flood 
assistance  fund’s deficit is likely to increase 
markedly. In addition to making higher repay -
ments to central government, a rise in compen -
sation payments is anticipated. Moreover, the 
deficit recorded by the Special provision fund 
for inflation- indexed Federal securities is set to 
increase substantially due to an upcoming 
repayment . In the case of the Restructuring 
fund, the transfer of receipts posted in the pre -
vious year to the new Single Bank Resolution 
Fund is likely to have a negative impact. If 
renewed  relief is not provided through repay -
ments of previously granted capital aid, SoFFin 
is likely to also be plunged back into deficit. 
The Investment and repayment fund is set to 
receive no transfer arising from profit gener -
ated by the Bundesbank in excess of the budget 
estimate or at budget outturn as, in these 
cases, a topping- up of the reserve for add -
itional refugee- related spending is envisaged in 
the most recent budget laws. Only the civil ser -
vant pension pots might see a year- on- year im -
provement with somewhat higher surpluses.
State government budgets11
According to the monthly cash statistics, the 
surplus recorded by the state government core 
budgets in 2015 came to just under €3 billion 
and was thus still markedly up on the year (by 
€2 billion) despite a deterioration in the fourth 
quarter. Supported, in particular, by the signifi -
cant growth in tax revenue (+6%, or €14½ bil -
lion), receipts rose by a total of just over 4½% 
(€15 billion). Following additional impetus in 
the last quarter (probably not least in connec -tion with expenditure on refugees – responsi -
bility for their initial reception lies at state gov -
ernment level), spending climbed by 4% (€13 
billion) for 2015 as a whole. Strong growth was 
recorded, above all, for other operating ex -
penditure (+12½%, or €3½ billion) and current 
transfers to local government (+9%, or €6 bil -
lion). All in all, investment was also up signifi -
cantly (+4½%, or €1½ billion). By contrast, only 
a moderate increase was recorded for person -
nel expenditure (+2%, or €2½ billion),12 while 
interest expenditure continued to fall sharply 
(-7½%, or just over €1 billion).
A certain level of deterioration in state govern -
ment finances is expected for 2016, the main 
reason for this being anticipated additional ex -
penditure on asylum seekers. It should also be 
borne in mind that the additional central gov -
ernment funds for state and local government 
approved in autumn 2015 to address this – tak -
ing the form of advance payments (via higher 
shares in turnover tax revenue), in particular – 
are to be transferred based on assumptions 
made at that time. Should the average time 
needed to make decisions on asylum applica -
tions be greater, or the influx of refugees be 
higher than was assumed last autumn, actual 
refugee numbers will not be taken into account 
until the final settlement is calculated in 2017. 
In this regard, the federal states are effectively 
providing financial assistance in advance in 
2016 and are temporarily being further weighed 
down by payments over and above their agreed 
share of the costs – which also includes spend -
ing on school educational programmes. Fur -
thermore, growth in tax revenue is likely to 
taper off markedly according to the latest tax 
estimate. Relief is expected to follow in the 
years to come, however, as persons who are 
granted refugee status are then entitled to … but deficit 
likely to follow in 2016
Higher surplus in 
2015 despite 
deterioration in 
final quarterRefugee- related additional spending 
 causing financial 
deterioration in 
2016, but relief likely to be pro-vided by central 
government in 
2017
11 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2015 was analysed in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s January 2016 Monthly Report. These are 
the most recent data available.
12 In the case of current staff, growth amounted to only 
1% and was therefore actually less than the increase in 
negotiated  pay rates, which was largely adopted for civil 
servants.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
71

claim the means- tested basic allowance for job 
seekers (unemployment benefit II), which is 
financed  by central government. But another 
important factor for state government budgets 
will be the speed at which, and extent to 
which, rejected asylum applicants are repatri -
ated – an option to which, it would appear, 
relatively little recourse has been made to date. 
Responsibility for this lies at state government 
level; funding will not be provided by central 
government if applicants remain in Germany 
for a longer period of time after their applica -
tions have been rejected.
There remains a wide gulf between the federal 
states in terms of their financial situation. 
Although  the debt brake is not set to enter into 
force until 2020, the vast majority have already 
achieved at least a balanced (core) budget. At 
its meeting in December 2015, the Stability 
Council expected the budgetary recovery pro -
cedures launched for Berlin and Schleswig-  
Holstein in 2012 to be successfully completed 
this year. At the same time, however, it was 
deemed necessary to extend the budgetary re -
covery procedures for Bremen and Saarland, 
which are especially heavily indebted and still 
have high budget deficits, and implement add -
itional consolidation measures over the coming 
years in order to ensure their compliance with 
the debt brake.
At the same time as the debt brake require -
ments enshrined in the Basic Law (Grundgesetz)  
enter fully into force at state government level, 
the financial equalisation system hitherto in 
place will expire. It would certainly be desirable 
for the requisite new rules on financial equal -
isation to be simpler and more transparent. 
Additionally, it appears to be worth considering 
reducing the degree of financial equalisation to 
a certain extent in order to take account of re -
gional price differences, for instance, and set 
improved incentives to reinforce the financial 
and economic capacity of each federal state. 
Given this opportunity to adopt a further-  
reaching reform, it would be highly advisable 
to decisively strengthen the principle of respon -sibility at the individual state government level, 
thereby expanding scope for action to comply 
with the debt brake, such as by means of 
limited, state-  specific surcharges or discounts 
on income tax.13 The reform proposal pre -
sented by the federal states in December 
201514 presents very little prospect of improve -
ment in this regard. The proposal to do away 
with the state government financial equalisa -
tion system currently in place and instead even 
out differences in financial  capacity primarily 
via the distribution of turnover tax receipts 
would indeed constitute a certain degree of 
simplification. At the same time, however, the 
high degree of equalisation would essentially 
be maintained and new supplementary central 
government grants, some of which are not im -
mediately clear- cut in economic terms, are en -
visaged. All in all, the incentives to reinforce 
 financial capacity at the individual state govern -
ment level therefore remain limited. In the up -
shot, all state governments are better off at the 
expense of central government. Above and 
beyond that, the federal states are also propos -
ing higher, open- ended financial aid for 
budgetary recovery for Bremen and Saarland 
without placing conditions on these payments 
– conditions that are key to avoiding moral 
hazard. It is not least in terms of incentives for 
federal states to assume individual responsibil -
ity for their own budgetary policies that a crit -
ical view should also be taken of the proposal 
to introduce central/state government com -
bined bonds with full central government liabil -
ity in order to facilitate more favourable bor -
rowing conditions for state government.Extension of 
budgetary recovery proced-ures for Bremen and Saarland envisaged
Financial equal-
isation proposal made at the state govern-ment level offers no major improvements
13 For more information on this subject, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The reform of financial relations in the Ger -
man federal system, Monthly Report, September 2014, 
pp 33-52.
14 See the press release concerning the conference of the 
state premiers at the Bremen federal state office in Berlin, 
which was held on 3 December 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
72

Social security funds15
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
According to provisional figures, the statutory 
pension insurance scheme recorded a deficit of 
almost €2 billion in 2015 following a surplus of 
just over €3 billion in the previous year. While a 
deficit had been expected as a result of the 
contribution rate cut and the full- year impact 
of the pension benefits package that came into 
effect in mid-2014 (in particular, the increase in 
the mothers’ pension and the full pension 
without actuarial deductions from the age of 
63), it was significantly lower than originally 
 estimated when the contribution rate was cut 
from 18.9% to 18.7% (€4 billion). Conse -
quently, the reserve came to 1.7 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure at the end of 
2015 and thus remained markedly higher than 
the regular upper limit of 1.5 times the scheme’s 
monthly expenditure.
Rising by 2½% (€6½ billion), overall receipts 
climbed at a somewhat more subdued rate 
than in 2014. Owing to the cut in the contribu -
tion rate, growth in contribution receipts was 
pushed down to 3%. Adjusted for this, how -
ever, growth was 4% – more or less as sharp as 
in 2014  – thanks to favourable employment 
and wage developments. Central government 
grants were up by a total of 2%. At 4½% 
(€11½ billion), expenditure growth significantly 
outstripped that of receipts. Pension spending 
rose at a similarly high rate. First, this was 
driven by the mid- year pension increases (July 
2015: 2.1% in western Germany and 2.5% in 
eastern Germany). Second, the benefit in -
creases in connection with the pension benefits 
package continued to make themselves felt.
This year, one particular factor that is likely to 
drive up spending is the pension increase at 
mid- year, which is expected to be very strong 
(over 4%). The massive rise in 2016 is chiefly 
attributable to robust wage increases, correct -
ing the statistical special effect from the previ -ous year (due to the revision of the national 
accounts) and pensions being pushed upwards 
due to the contribution rate cut at the start of 
2015. Even so, the overall rate at which pen -
sion spending is rising could be somewhat 
lower than in 2015 owing to the waning im -
pact of the pension benefits package,16 mean -
ing that the deficit increase would remain con -
tained. In the light of the demographic lull 
coming to a gradual end and the number of 
persons entering retirement shooting upwards, 
the statutory pension insurance scheme looks 
set to remain in deficit in the years to come. 
The reserves will therefore continue to be de -
pleted and, once they reach the lower limit of 
0.2 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure, it Deficit in 2015 
lower than expected
Significant 
 burdens arising from pension benefits package and contribution rate cut
Rising deficits 
on the cardsFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 201562646668707274
–4–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
15 The financial development of the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes in the third quar -
ter of 2015 was analysed in detail in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s December 2015 Monthly Report. These 
are the most recent data available.
16 The more likely scenario is that the number of persons 
taking early retirement will fall, causing the rate at which 
spending is rising to slow accordingly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
73

is likely that pressure to raise contribution rates 
will persist over the longer term.
Federal Employment Agency
The surplus recorded by the Federal Employ -
ment Agency in 2015 totalled just over €3½ 
billion and was therefore up by €2 billion on 
the year.17 By contrast, a surplus of only just 
under €½ billion was envisaged in the budget 
plan. Around €3 billion will be paid into the 
general reserve, a move that will raise its funds 
to €6½ billion, while the rest will be transferred 
to specific reserves (insolvency benefit and win -ter compensation payments). The improvement 
is attributable, on the one hand, to a sharp 
revenue  rise of just under 4½% (€1½ billion). 
Positive macroeconomic developments were 
reflected in growth in contribution receipts, 
which likewise amounted to just under 4½%, 
while a similarly steep increase overall was re -
corded for other revenue (particularly refunds 
of administrative costs by central government, 
the winter construction levy and insolvency 
benefit contributions).
On the other hand, spending recorded a year- 
on- year fall of just over 2% (just over €½ bil -
lion). The continued improvement in the labour 
market situation contributed to the significant 
decline in expenditure on unemployment bene -
fit I (insurance- related benefit), which fell by 
3½%. Benefits pursuant to the Phased Retire -
ment Act (Altersteilzeitgesetz)  fell particularly 
sharply (-38%) due to the phasing- out of sub -
sidies from the Federal Employment Agency. 
Spending on active labour market policy meas -
ures remained virtually unchanged.
The budget plan adopted in December 2015 
envisages a surplus of just under €2 billion for 
2016. This represents a marked deterioration 
compared with actual figures for 2015. As in 
previous years, spending on active labour mar -
ket policy measures is expected to rise very 
sharply (by one- quarter to just over €8 billion). 
Just under €½ billion has been earmarked for 
temporary measures –  that were already ex -
panded in 2015 – to integrate refugees into the 
labour market, eg by offering language courses. 
However, actual figures in some areas may 
once again be better than the estimates in the 
budget plan. According to the planned figures, 
administrative spending will climb significantly 
(+8%, or €½ billion), which is largely attribut -
able to support and placement services pro -
vided to refugees. For instance, staffing levels 
are to be further increased at job centres as it is 
expected that, as the number of asylum appli -Higher surplus in 
2015 thanks to sharp rise in contribution receipts …… and lower 
spending
Despite 
 additional expenditure,  surplus still 
planned for 
2016Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Excluding central go-
vernment liquidity assistance. 2 Including transfers to the civil 
servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 20157.07.58.08.59.09.5
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Revenue1
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total 
expenditure 2Log scale
17 Including the Civil servants’ pension fund, the surplus 
amounted to €4 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
74

cations being successfully processed rises, per -
sonnel requirements will intensify distinctly 
from around mid-2016 onwards since more 
staff will be needed to deal with those refugees 
who are then entitled to (means- tested) un -
employment benefit II. The associated costs 
will, as a general rule, be refunded by central 
government as recourse cannot be made to in -surance against temporary unemployment 
based on previous contribution payments. In 
order to preserve the contribution equivalence 
principle, it would be essential to ensure that 
the cost of further expanding measures to inte -
grate refugees not eligible to claim insurance 
benefits into the labour market were covered 
primarily using general tax revenue.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2016  
76

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ...........  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 9 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 0 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 1 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 2 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2016
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2014          Apr 5.2 2.0 0.8 1.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 − 1.0 0.25 0.33 2.3
         May 5.0 2.1 1.1 1.2 − 2.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.25 0.32 2.2         June 5.4 2.4 1.6 1.5 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 0.08 0.24 2.0
         July 5.5 2.4 1.8 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.04 0.21 1.9
         Aug 5.9 2.7 2.0 2.1 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.02 0.19 1.7         Sep 6.2 3.0 2.5 2.3 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.1 0.01 0.10 1.6
         Oct 6.1 2.7 2.5 2.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 1.7 0.00 0.08 1.6
         Nov 7.0 3.3 3.1 3.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 0.01 0.08 1.5         Dec 8.1 3.8 3.8 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 0.03 0.08 1.3
2015          Jan 9.0 4.1 3.9 3.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 9.2 4.1 4.1 4.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 10.1 4.6 4.7 4.7 0.7 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.05 0.03 0.8
         Apr 10.6 4.9 5.4 5.0 1.1 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.3 5.0 5.0 5.1 1.4 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.8 5.2 4.9 5.1 1.4 0.3 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July 12.2 5.4 5.2 5.0 1.9 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.5 5.1 4.9 5.0 2.3 1.1 − 3.1 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.7 5.2 4.9 5.0 2.2 0.8 − 3.3 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct 11.6 5.3 5.2 5.1 2.4 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 11.1 5.2 5.0 5.0 2.7 1.3 − 3.3 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.7 5.2 4.7 ... 2.3 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2014          Apr 
+ 15,316 + 19,704 + 14,720 + 19,993 + 19,754 + 372 − 25,798 + 400 1.3813 104.2 100.4
         May + 2,473 + 20,844 − 995 + 4,187 − 69,498 + 3,471 + 60,364 + 482 1.3732 103.6 99.5
         June + 18,325 + 21,050 + 45,030 + 10,545 − 37,278 + 385 + 71,825 − 447 1.3592 102.7 98.7
         July + 30,806 + 26,038 + 18,542 + 3,769 + 26,006 + 301 − 10,823 − 712 1.3539 102.3 98.2
         Aug + 13,249 + 10,496 + 2,256 − 8,281 + 2,017 + 3,932 + 3,323 + 1,264 1.3316 101.5 97.5         Sep + 32,885 + 25,217 + 81,682 + 8,961 + 86,324 + 13,435 − 25,091 − 1,946 1.2901 99.9 95.9
         Oct + 29,523 + 28,798 + 50,650 − 4,478 + 65,587 + 4,628 − 16,133 + 1,045 1.2673 99.1 95.0
         Nov + 26,054 + 24,662 + 54,199 + 10,067 + 5,736 + 3,138 + 34,561 + 698 1.2472 99.0 94.9         Dec + 40,139 + 26,439 − 42,181 − 10,391 + 19,910 + 2,234 − 55,055 + 1,121 1.2331 99.0 94.8
2015          Jan + 8,609 + 12,724 − 55,148 − 7,044 − 53,249 + 4,683 − 874 + 1,336 1.1621 95.2 91.1
         Feb + 14,600 + 26,215 − 18,593 + 21,223 − 40,608 + 9,513 − 12,928 + 4,209 1.1350 93.3 89.5         Mar + 31,183 + 26,745 + 109,208 + 90,326 − 18,922 + 8,420 + 29,135 + 250 1.0838 90.6 86.9
         Apr + 24,020 + 27,940 − 54,154 − 13,639 + 23,102 + 4,636 − 64,462 − 3,791 1.0779 89.7 86.1
         May + 7,803 + 24,936 + 32,447 − 8,142 + 46,655 + 3,059 − 7,315 − 1,809 1.1150 91.6 87.9         June + 34,593 + 32,463 + 59,630 − 20,925 + 56,938 − 6,390 + 26,783 + 3,224 1.1213 92.3 88.5
         July + 38,756 + 36,851 − 10,846 − 12,780 + 78,512 + 9,944 − 79,531 − 6,990 1.0996 91.3 87.5
         Aug + 17,722 + 17,080 + 6,918 − 14,323 + 22,283 − 7,785 + 5,378 + 1,365 1.1139 93.0 89.0         Sep + 34,183 + 28,123 + 49,031 − 4,293 + 20,349 − 3,830 + 28,507 + 8,297 1.1221 93.8 89.7
         Oct + 27,471 + 31,131 + 36,379 − 2,104 + 25,483 − 693 + 19,697 − 6,004 1.1235 93.6 p 89.6
         Nov + 29,776 + 29,270 + 37,174 + 1,762 + 43,427 + 13,665 − 24,152 + 2,471 1.0736 91.1 p 87.1         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0877 92.5 p 88.2
2016          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0860 93.6 p 89.1
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
2013 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.6 − 0.8 0.7 − 3.2 1.4 − 1.7 3.0
2014 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.9 − 0.7 0.2 0.6 5.2 − 0.4 2.4
2015 ... ... 1.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2014          Q3 0.8 1.5 1.2 2.7 − 0.5 0.1 1.6 3.7 − 0.4 2.3
         Q4 1.0 1.2 1.6 3.4 − 0.5 0.2 0.6 6.0 − 0.6 2.1
2015          Q1 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 1.1 0.3 7.3 0.2 1.8
         Q2 1.6 1.5 1.6 2.2 0.6 1.2 1.3 6.8 0.9 2.8
         Q3 1.6 1.3 1.8 0.7 − 0.3 1.1 − 0.9 7.0 0.9 3.3
         Q4 ... ... ... ... ... 1.3 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,4
 
2013 − 0.7 0.9 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.2 − 0.4
2014 0.8 1.0 1.3 2.4 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.5 − 0.9
2015 ... ... p 0.8 − 2.4 ... 1.4 p 0.5 p 17.3 ... 3.4
2014          Q3 0.6 0.0 0.7 3.2 − 2.1 0.1 − 3.0 21.6 − 1.4 − 0.8
         Q4 0.3 − 1.4 0.7 5.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 0.1 25.9 − 1.4 − 0.7
2015          Q1 1.6 0.0 0.7 2.5 − 3.0 1.7 1.8 24.9 − 0.2 1.6
         Q2 1.3 − 1.7 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.6 1.3 − 3.1 10.0 1.0 5.1
         Q3 1.7 0.2 1.6 − 4.2 − 0.4 0.4 1.7 20.2 2.0 3.8
         Q4 ... ... p − 0.5 − 5.7 ... 2.0 p 1.8 p 14.8 ... 3.0
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
2013 78.3 76.6 82.1 71.3 78.4 80.9 65.0 − 71.6 72.0
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2015 81.2 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2014          Q4 80.5 79.4 84.4 73.2 77.9 82.0 66.7 − 73.9 73.3
2015          Q1 81.0 79.7 84.8 71.2 78.6 81.9 69.2 − 74.6 71.3
         Q2 81.2 79.8 84.4 70.7 79.1 82.6 67.7 − 76.1 72.2
         Q3 81.1 80.0 84.0 72.7 79.0 82.9 63.5 − 75.5 71.4
         Q4 81.5 79.2 84.6 71.0 80.1 83.4 64.2 − 75.9 71.0
2016          Q1 81.9 80.0 85.0 72.5 79.5 82.8 65.5 − 77.1 72.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
2013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.9
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015 10.9 8.3 4.6 ... 9.4 10.4 ... 9.4 ... ...
2015          July 10.8 8.3 4.6 5.8 9.5 10.5 24.9 9.2 11.8 10.1
         Aug 10.8 8.1 4.5 5.9 9.4 10.6 24.6 9.1 11.7 10.0
         Sep 10.6 7.9 4.4 6.1 9.4 10.4 24.6 9.0 11.6 9.9
         Oct 10.6 7.9 4.5 6.3 9.4 10.3 24.5 8.9 11.5 10.0
         Nov 10.5 7.9 4.6 6.5 9.5 10.2 ... 8.8 11.4 10.0
         Dec 10.4 7.9 4.7 ... 9.5 10.2 ... 8.8 11.4 10.2
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.0
2014 8 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 9 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2015          Aug 0.1 0.8 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.2
         Sep − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.8 0.0 0.2 − 0.4
         Oct 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.0 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 0.0 0.3 − 0.1
         Nov 0.1 1.4 0.3 0.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.0
         Dec 0.2 1.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.4
2016          Jan e 0.4 ... e 0.4 ... ... ... ... ... e 0.4 ...
 
General government financial balance 10
 
2012 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 4.8 − 8.8 − 8.0 − 3.0 − 0.8
2013 − 3.0 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 4.1 − 12.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 0.9
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.5
 
General government debt 10
 
2012 89.3 104.1 79.7 9.5 52.9 89.6 159.4 120.2 123.2 41.4
2013 91.1 105.1 77.4 9.9 55.6 92.3 177.0 120.0 128.8 39.1
2014 92.1 106.7 74.9 10.4 59.3 95.6 178.6 107.5 132.3 40.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. justed data. 3  ESA  2010. 4  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for wor-
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual king-day variations. 5  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- January, April, July and October. 6  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2,3
 
3.6 4.3 4.0 − 0.5 0.3 − 1.1 1.4 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 5.9 2013
3.0 4.1 4.0 1.0 0.4 0.9 2.5 3.0 1.4 − 2.5 2014
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2015
2.6 3.8 3.4 1.2 0.3 1.4 2.4 3.6 1.6 − 2.1 2014          Q31.7 6.7 5.8 1.6 − 0.2 0.3 2.8 2.8 1.8 − 1.8          Q4
1.2 5.5 5.2 2.5 0.5 1.6 2.9 2.8 2.6 0.2 2015          Q1
1.4 6.2 5.8 1.8 0.9 1.6 3.4 2.7 3.4 1.2          Q2
1.7 5.5 5.4 1.9 1.0 1.5 3.7 2.5 3.4 2.3          Q3
2.0 ... ... ... 1.1 ... ... ... ... ...          Q4
 
Industrial production1,4
 
3.2 − 3.2 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 5.2 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 20130.3 4.4 − 5.7 − 3.0 0.9 1.8 3.7 1.7 1.3 − 0.9 20144.5 ...
p 6.3 p − 3.4 ... 1.7 ... ... 3.4 ... 2015
− 0.6 3.8 − 5.5 0.4 − 0.3 1.8 2.3 2.7 0.8 − 0.2 2014          Q3
3.6 3.3 − 1.1 − 2.4 0.4 − 0.2 0.7 2.3 0.5 − 0.8          Q4
4.2 3.5 4.7 3.9 1.7 0.3 5.6 5.6 1.7 0.2 2015          Q1
4.5 0.8 8.5 − 4.5 0.6 1.9 3.6 4.9 3.1 3.2          Q2
4.0 − 1.2 7.4 − 7.3 2.8 2.4 6.6 4.7 4.2 4.1          Q3
5.3 ... p 4.6 p − 6.6 ... 2.1 ... ... 4.6 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 5
 
73.2 64.5 77.0 76.7 83.6 73.5 77.1 78.3 73.3 49.3 201374.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 75.6 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 201474.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 77.7 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 2015
75.1 66.9 78.1 80.3 83.7 75.5 81.1 81.2 76.9 54.5 2014          Q4
74.4 66.4 80.5 80.6 84.1 78.0 81.0 85.1 78.1 54.9 2015          Q1
74.4 65.6 78.7 82.3 84.2 77.6 79.1 83.4 77.2 60.3          Q2
73.6 69.0 77.2 82.2 84.4 77.7 86.2 83.6 77.6 56.4          Q3
74.3 72.2 77.9 82.2 83.4 77.6 83.4 82.3 78.1 61.1          Q4
75.9 72.4 77.8 81.4 85.0 77.0 85.4 83.2 79.0 56.9 2016          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 6,7
 
11.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 2013
10.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.1 5.3 6.9 ... 12.6 11.5 9.1 22.1 15.6 2015
9.1 6.2 5.2 6.8 5.7 12.2 11.4 9.2 21.9 15.2 2015          July
9.0 6.1 5.1 6.8 5.7 12.3 11.4 9.0 21.7 15.2          Aug 
9.0 6.1 5.1 6.8 5.7 12.4 11.3 8.8 21.4 15.2          Sep 
8.9 6.1 5.1 6.9 5.7 12.3 11.1 8.8 21.2 15.3          Oct 
8.4 6.1 5.1 6.7 5.8 12.2 10.8 8.7 21.0 15.7          Nov 
8.5 6.1 5.1 6.6 5.8 11.8 10.6 8.8 20.8 15.7          Dec 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
1.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.6 2015
− 1.0 0.1 1.4 0.4 0.9 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.9 2015          Aug 
− 0.8 − 0.2 1.6 0.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.9          Sep 
− 0.4 − 0.1 1.6 0.4 0.7 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 1.8          Oct 
− 0.5 0.4 1.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 1.5          Nov 
− 0.3 0.9 1.2 0.5 1.1 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.6          Dec 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2016          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 10
 
− 3.1 0.2 − 3.6 − 3.9 − 2.2 − 5.7 − 4.2 − 4.1 − 10.4 − 5.8 2012− 2.6 0.7 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 2.6 − 15.0 − 6.9 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 1.4 − 2.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.8 − 5.0 − 5.9 − 8.9 2014
 
General government debt 10
 
39.8 22.1 67.6 66.4 81.6 126.2 51.9 53.7 85.4 79.3 201238.8 23.4 69.6 67.9 80.8 129.0 54.6 70.8 93.7 102.5 201340.7 23.0 68.3 68.2 84.2 130.2 53.5 80.8 99.3 108.2 2014
seasonally adjusted. 7  Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: calculation 10  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition); Euro-area aggregate and
based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. member states: European Central Bank, Germany: Federal Statistical Office and
8  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 9  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. Bundesbank calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          May − 25.7 − 36.4 23.8 10.7 9.1 51.6 37.0 − 14.6 − 21.0 − 14.9 − 0.4 3.3 − 9.0
         June 9.3 23.6 − 12.9 − 14.3 − 6.4 69.3 − 34.0 − 103.4 − 15.4 − 10.6 − 1.4 − 22.3 18.8
         July − 25.9 − 15.7 6.4 − 10.2 − 17.8 27.2 61.1 34.0 − 6.8 − 12.4 0.6 − 10.3 15.2         Aug − 45.7 − 51.0 − 15.6 5.3 15.9 − 1.3 − 5.8 − 4.5 0.2 − 5.0 1.3 − 5.9 9.8         Sep 34.8 26.2 − 14.5 8.6 9.2 − 25.0 − 17.7 7.3 − 6.0 − 16.5 0.3 − 12.0 22.1
         Oct 5.0 − 24.0 − 9.0 29.0 23.1 10.4 − 4.0 − 14.4 − 37.0 − 13.9 − 0.2 − 26.5 3.6
         Nov 33.7 25.6 5.5 8.1 5.2 60.2 76.5 16.3 − 13.3 1.1 − 0.4 − 13.1 − 0.9
         Dec − 45.0 − 9.1 − 12.2 − 35.9 − 43.7 − 10.0 − 115.3 − 105.4 − 29.4 − 2.9 2.3 − 30.9 2.2
2015          Jan 93.9 19.3 5.1 74.7 52.5 − 14.6 196.7 211.2 − 1.8 − 12.2 0.5 − 9.0 19.0
         Feb 9.5 19.8 2.4 − 10.3 − 0.5 − 23.7 − 18.8 4.9 − 14.5 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 9.8 5.2
         Mar 77.4 44.1 − 1.4 33.2 30.0 11.2 − 29.2 − 40.4 − 19.8 − 12.4 − 1.3 − 25.6 19.5
         Apr 52.8 16.3 17.1 36.5 32.2 − 58.6 37.3 95.9 − 46.4 − 18.8 − 2.1 − 15.7 − 9.7
         May 23.7 7.0 − 0.8 16.6 31.3 25.4 − 56.1 − 81.4 − 24.4 − 8.3 − 1.7 − 24.1 9.6
         June 7.1 − 16.3 − 28.1 23.4 24.6 54.8 − 86.9 − 141.7 − 20.4 − 13.8 − 1.2 − 13.0 7.7
         July 58.6 54.8 51.1 3.8 4.1 − 64.8 − 0.2 64.6 − 6.6 10.3 − 0.7 − 21.4 5.3
         Aug 15.3 − 23.2 6.6 38.5 47.4 − 22.8 10.2 33.0 − 10.1 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 9.3 3.0
         Sep 29.8 − 9.5 − 8.8 39.3 45.7 − 7.0 − 95.0 − 88.0 − 19.3 − 3.1 − 0.9 − 26.0 10.7
         Oct 37.5 15.3 − 12.5 22.2 18.6 8.0 28.7 20.7 − 40.8 − 25.5 − 0.9 − 17.5 3.1
         Nov 87.3 48.5 2.0 38.8 46.8 4.0 − 13.5 − 17.5 − 6.4 − 13.4 − 1.7 − 4.9 13.5
         Dec − 118.2 − 77.6 − 2.9 − 40.6 − 34.5 − 7.4 − 196.7 − 189.3 − 4.6 3.0 − 0.6 − 25.6 18.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2014          May − 2.3 − 4.7 − 9.6 2.4 1.0 7.5 17.7 10.2 12.1 − 2.6 − 0.2 10.8 3.9
         June − 7.2 0.5 − 0.9 − 7.8 0.6 34.6 12.3 − 22.3 5.5 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 12.7
         July 10.3 3.2 3.3 7.1 4.1 21.8 23.5 1.7 − 1.2 − 4.3 0.7 − 0.7 3.1
         Aug − 6.4 0.8 − 3.4 − 7.2 − 2.0 − 16.9 − 11.4 5.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.9 − 2.8 0.5
         Sep 10.2 6.2 2.1 4.0 4.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 2.5 − 3.2 − 0.7 0.5 − 4.5 1.5
         Oct 5.3 − 4.2 − 4.5 9.5 2.4 16.5 10.9 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.2 1.2 0.1
         Nov 14.1 15.3 6.0 − 1.2 1.9 12.8 30.9 18.1 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.4 1.5 1.8
         Dec − 15.5 1.5 5.4 − 17.1 − 10.0 − 5.7 − 33.1 − 27.4 − 17.5 − 7.3 0.2 − 8.1 − 2.2
2015          Jan 28.5 13.0 7.0 15.4 6.5 − 57.6 52.2 109.8 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.0 1.8 0.8
         Feb 9.4 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.9 − 11.1 − 13.9 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.3 2.3
         Mar 15.2 9.7 8.4 5.6 7.2 − 12.1 − 19.0 − 6.9 − 15.3 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 9.1 − 0.1
         Apr 17.3 3.3 0.7 14.0 4.9 7.7 33.9 26.2 − 13.2 − 10.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4
         May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4
         June − 0.9 − 2.7 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.2 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 1.8 3.7
         July 31.5 22.9 21.3 8.6 6.4 − 27.6 − 8.7 19.0 12.5 16.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 20.7 − 0.9 19.9 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0
         Sep 11.5 4.1 − 2.6 7.3 8.7 15.9 − 2.0 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.4 − 0.4
         Oct 3.4 − 3.8 − 9.4 7.1 3.5 − 8.5 − 13.1 − 4.6 − 10.7 − 9.0 − 1.3 0.7 − 1.1
         Nov 27.3 21.3 7.8 6.0 10.6 − 13.0 − 35.7 − 22.7 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 4.1
         Dec − 19.7 − 11.4 − 5.5 − 8.3 − 2.9 4.9 − 52.5 − 57.4 − 24.2 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.1 2.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
33.1 − 50.1 − 63.8 57.8 54.9 7.1 47.8 1.0 1.9 − 13.9 − 4.1 8.6 2014          May
26.4 51.1 − 16.6 23.1 44.4 6.4 38.0 − 19.4 − 1.9 28.1 − 12.9 2.4          June
− 23.1 2.4 − 28.8 15.0 10.3 9.4 0.9 6.4 − 1.6 2.7 16.9 − 7.3          July− 46.4 − 48.2 − 47.5 40.7 34.9 2.0 32.8 3.5 2.4 2.9 3.7 2.4          Aug − 6.1 22.8 − − 0.8 14.7 33.4 0.3 33.1 − 12.8 − 5.8 − 18.3 − 11.6 6.0          Sep 
− 6.5 33.8 − 25.2 8.8 38.3 3.5 34.8 − 20.6 − 8.9 25.6 14.6 − 4.3          Oct 
25.9 − 11.4 − 92.7 90.5 100.6 6.2 94.4 − 14.5 4.4 − 2.7 5.6 0.6          Nov 
− 50.1 − 0.1 − 24.6 36.3 52.7 23.8 28.9 − 12.7 − 3.7 − 13.4 − 17.7 19.5          Dec 
80.8 − 45.0 − 45.4 24.7 54.5 − 2.7 57.2 − 37.1 7.3 23.7 20.2 − 4.3 2015          Jan 
− 28.6 − 17.0 − 45.8 21.5 28.3 4.1 24.2 − 8.5 1.6 36.4 8.7 2.2          Feb 
22.6 52.2 − 33.6 57.4 54.8 7.7 47.1 − 5.4 7.9 1.8 − 9.5 − 7.4          Mar 
− 43.3 − 28.1 − 112.0 76.9 90.6 8.8 81.8 − 15.5 1.8 − 18.4 21.9 6.3          Apr 
44.1 1.7 − 27.6 61.4 91.9 6.7 85.2 − 35.2 4.8 − 4.3 − 9.1 − 6.8          May
14.0 61.7 − 6.6 40.3 65.7 10.7 55.0 − 25.5 0.1 − 22.6 − 17.6 8.2          June
− 42.3 − 29.2 − 71.9 40.9 40.1 14.2 25.9 1.4 − 0.6 − 3.4 24.4 − 12.2          July− 14.8 2.6 − 14.8 10.7 12.5 − 1.9 14.4 − 5.4 3.6 2.1 11.0 − 4.5          Aug 
28.7 33.0 − − 19.6 7.2 24.0 − 2.8 26.8 − 8.4 − 8.5 − 4.2 − 15.3 − 0.8          Sep 
33.0 − 58.0 − 111.3 77.3 92.3 2.3 90.0 − 10.2 − 4.9 − 6.1 21.3 1.4          Oct 
− 17.2 62.6 − 52.3 54.1 58.3 5.7 52.6 − 1.9 − 2.2 3.9 14.6 1.0          Nov 
− 72.6 − 49.5 − 1.2 48.3 40.8 14.5 26.3 6.9 0.6 − 31.0 − 21.1 − 10.4          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
1.9 − 24.5 3.0 1.3 15.7 11.2 7.3 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.1 0.7 2014          May
− 0.9 30.9 2.8 1.9 − 8.1 − 8.3 − 2.5 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 2.7          June
1.3 24.4 4.5 2.4 7.6 5.5 0.0 − 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.2          July
− 4.8 − 38.5 3.7 − 0.1 22.7 15.8 2.9 0.6 1.7 − 0.3 2.1          Aug 
1.5 − 4.0 3.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 − 4.8 0.1 − 2.7 0.0 0.6          Sep 
− 1.3 6.5 3.2 0.8 18.2 25.6 − 9.3 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.4          Oct 
− 0.3 0.8 2.5 1.2 26.2 26.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.8          Nov − 1.3 12.2 3.6 5.0 − 14.6 − 18.1 8.2 2.2 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.6          Dec 
6.3 − 59.5 2.4 − 0.8 24.9 26.3 − 5.1 − 1.1 3.4 0.0 1.4 2015          Jan 
− 6.7 − 11.4 2.1 0.8 28.6 23.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.0 2.3          Feb 
2.9 10.3 2.3 2.2 5.2 5.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.8          Mar 
− 2.7 5.0 2.2 1.8 35.9 29.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 3.8 − 0.1 4.1          Apr 
1.4 − 4.8 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1          May2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
− 3.2 − 18.6 4.7 3.3 13.1 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 1.2 0.0 − 0.6          July− 0.3 − 13.1 2.4 − 0.5 12.1 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2          Aug 
1.8 16.8 2.8 − 0.8 20.5 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.8          Sep 
− 0.6 − 25.3 3.0 − 0.3 31.4 30.7 − 3.8 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 3.7          Oct − 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1          Nov 
10.3 15.3 2.6 2.3 − 16.3 − 21.2 6.1 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Nov 25,426.6 16,364.8 12,929.5 10,736.1 1,398.2 795.2 3,435.3 1,099.5 2,335.8 4,616.6 4,445.2
         Dec 24,648.0 16,161.5 12,802.4 10,649.6 1,360.8 792.1 3,359.1 1,097.3 2,261.8 4,487.3 3,999.1
2014          Jan 25,041.7 16,241.9 12,803.5 10,640.4 1,368.4 794.7 3,438.5 1,118.5 2,320.0 4,680.4 4,119.3
         Feb 24,985.6 16,222.0 12,771.6 10,635.6 1,343.7 792.3 3,450.4 1,110.2 2,340.1 4,671.5 4,092.2
         Mar 24,905.6 16,233.6 12,772.9 10,638.7 1,330.0 804.2 3,460.6 1,108.0 2,352.6 4,638.6 4,033.4
         Apr 25,042.7 16,233.3 12,767.4 10,647.1 1,294.8 825.6 3,465.9 1,107.7 2,358.2 4,697.2 4,112.3
         May 25,173.8 16,217.0 12,733.6 10,585.5 1,333.1 815.0 3,483.4 1,109.4 2,373.9 4,770.8 4,186.0
         June 25,131.3 16,209.3 12,730.5 10,606.7 1,318.3 805.5 3,478.8 1,100.9 2,377.9 4,751.1 4,170.9
         July 25,303.6 16,176.1 12,701.1 10,574.2 1,321.3 805.7 3,475.0 1,110.1 2,364.8 4,853.0 4,274.6
         Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,873.2 16,227.8 12,671.7 10,633.1 1,271.8 766.8 3,556.1 1,132.4 2,423.6 4,972.7 4,672.7
2015          Jan 26,921.6 16,393.3 12,750.4 10,698.9 1,275.7 775.8 3,642.8 1,158.4 2,484.4 5,398.4 5,129.9
         Feb 26,861.1 16,416.5 12,778.3 10,716.2 1,278.1 784.0 3,638.1 1,143.7 2,494.5 5,392.9 5,051.8
         Mar 27,244.7 16,511.9 12,832.4 10,765.9 1,275.2 791.3 3,679.5 1,148.2 2,531.3 5,467.9 5,265.0
         Apr 26,911.8 16,535.4 12,830.5 10,749.0 1,274.2 807.3 3,704.9 1,152.3 2,552.6 5,406.4 4,970.0
         May 26,748.3 16,548.4 12,839.8 10,759.5 1,275.6 804.7 3,708.6 1,137.8 2,570.8 5,400.4 4,799.6
         June 26,189.0 16,507.3 12,800.9 10,757.1 1,253.4 790.4 3,706.4 1,136.2 2,570.2 5,260.9 4,420.8
         July 26,412.1 16,590.6 12,861.9 10,760.4 1,299.8 801.6 3,728.7 1,134.8 2,593.9 5,281.3 4,540.2
         Aug 26,257.5 16,566.8 12,808.9 10,720.1 1,302.0 786.8 3,757.9 1,126.0 2,632.0 5,232.4 4,458.3
         Sep 26,202.4 16,595.6 12,784.3 10,710.7 1,302.3 771.3 3,811.3 1,120.5 2,690.8 5,148.9 4,457.9
         Oct 26,411.1 16,657.0 12,814.2 10,744.3 1,287.4 782.5 3,842.8 1,124.5 2,718.3 5,240.8 4,513.3
         Nov 26,728.7 16,772.6 12,885.6 10,799.3 1,295.0 791.3 3,887.0 1,116.6 2,770.5 5,304.4 4,651.7
         Dec 25,920.1 16,613.1 12,777.0 10,703.9 1,294.2 778.8 3,836.1 1,109.2 2,726.9 5,019.2 4,287.8
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Nov 5,680.6 3,663.8 2,894.5 2,502.7 146.9 244.9 769.3 377.9 391.4 1,101.1 915.7
         Dec 5,571.3 3,644.0 2,884.1 2,498.8 145.3 240.0 759.9 371.4 388.5 1,065.2 862.1
2014          Jan 5,651.4 3,659.6 2,893.1 2,498.5 144.8 249.8 766.6 377.8 388.8 1,111.0 880.7
         Feb 5,617.5 3,654.6 2,886.9 2,500.6 143.2 243.1 767.7 373.9 393.7 1,111.8 851.1
         Mar 5,600.4 3,658.2 2,894.0 2,501.7 144.3 247.9 764.3 369.2 395.0 1,105.8 836.3
         Apr 5,631.0 3,679.4 2,914.4 2,508.2 145.2 261.0 765.0 369.8 395.2 1,112.1 839.6
         May 5,688.2 3,679.0 2,910.7 2,513.9 146.5 250.4 768.2 371.2 397.0 1,136.0 873.2
         June 5,697.3 3,670.8 2,910.9 2,515.1 145.8 250.0 759.9 362.6 397.3 1,150.9 875.5
         July 5,765.7 3,681.2 2,914.0 2,515.6 143.9 254.6 767.2 365.7 401.5 1,183.5 900.9
         Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.4 3,696.4 2,931.4 2,527.7 143.6 260.1 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.3 3,728.3 2,948.0 2,536.5 142.2 269.2 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.3 3,739.4 2,953.8 2,542.4 142.3 269.1 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.2 3,758.2 2,967.1 2,546.4 144.1 276.5 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,202.9 3,772.6 2,966.9 2,546.0 135.6 285.3 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.5 3,770.8 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.7 3,767.1 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.3 3,803.0 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.6 3,813.0 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 816.9 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,041.7 3,824.0 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 827.9 364.5 463.4 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.6 3,832.0 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.4 368.4 469.0 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.5 3,864.8 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.3 363.9 481.3 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,924.1 3,840.0 3,003.8 2,586.5 155.8 261.6 836.2 358.3 477.9 1,166.3 917.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
903.4 10,961.8 10,369.7 10,389.6 4,295.5 1,162.4 419.6 2,345.1 2,080.3 86.7 2013          Nov 
921.2 10,900.4 10,351.8 10,401.3 4,310.6 1,153.6 431.3 2,334.9 2,084.5 86.4          Dec 
908.3 10,919.1 10,348.6 10,399.4 4,304.6 1,132.1 442.6 2,337.6 2,096.5 86.0 2014          Jan 
910.2 10,949.2 10,338.5 10,382.8 4,307.7 1,129.1 445.4 2,319.8 2,094.6 86.2          Feb 
916.5 10,966.6 10,355.6 10,399.0 4,332.6 1,129.0 441.5 2,311.4 2,098.5 86.1          Mar 
921.8 10,948.1 10,350.7 10,394.3 4,364.8 1,124.3 442.6 2,280.1 2,096.5 86.0          Apr 
928.9 11,020.7 10,387.2 10,425.8 4,414.7 1,121.4 439.4 2,266.3 2,098.4 85.6          May
935.3 11,050.7 10,387.6 10,424.2 4,447.5 1,104.4 434.9 2,255.8 2,097.2 84.4          June
944.7 11,022.8 10,378.1 10,420.0 4,448.9 1,115.3 430.6 2,244.8 2,095.2 85.0          July
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,155.3 10,549.3 10,627.7 4,728.8 1,089.3 399.5 2,217.4 2,105.6 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,302.5 10,590.3 10,692.1 4,817.8 1,073.8 388.9 2,213.4 2,109.9 88.2 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,285.8 10,597.7 10,694.4 4,837.9 1,039.2 388.9 2,231.2 2,110.2 87.0          Feb 
990.9 11,356.3 10,635.3 10,744.5 4,893.8 1,040.0 384.6 2,222.2 2,118.1 85.7          Mar 
999.8 11,349.7 10,679.6 10,777.8 4,965.1 1,030.6 378.5 2,200.5 2,119.3 83.7          Apr 
1,006.4 11,443.2 10,721.3 10,815.0 5,040.0 1,001.7 374.0 2,193.2 2,124.0 82.2          May
1,017.1 11,464.3 10,721.7 10,820.6 5,088.8 977.6 370.1 2,178.9 2,124.2 81.1          June
1,031.3 11,461.3 10,752.5 10,866.2 5,125.2 983.3 367.8 2,187.7 2,121.9 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,445.1 10,749.4 10,857.4 5,126.6 981.6 362.3 2,183.5 2,124.3 79.0          Aug 
1,026.5 11,480.0 10,765.2 10,865.6 5,153.0 977.2 358.7 2,179.8 2,118.8 78.1          Sep 
1,028.8 11,577.8 10,817.6 10,927.7 5,244.4 973.3 356.8 2,161.2 2,114.6 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,601.3 10,850.6 10,947.0 5,287.5 971.0 350.5 2,150.7 2,111.7 75.7          Nov 
1,049.0 11,555.7 10,883.7 10,992.0 5,321.2 980.5 348.9 2,151.5 2,114.8 75.1          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
222.9 3,142.9 3,081.9 2,956.1 1,415.6 188.8 33.3 712.2 528.1 78.1 2013          Nov 
226.6 3,140.9 3,075.9 2,955.8 1,403.8 197.6 33.6 710.9 532.2 77.8          Dec 
213.5 3,136.4 3,074.8 2,960.6 1,414.2 195.0 32.8 709.6 531.7 77.3 2014          Jan 
213.7 3,149.6 3,084.0 2,965.9 1,419.3 198.7 32.4 705.8 532.1 77.6          Feb 
215.6 3,139.6 3,074.6 2,954.0 1,410.5 200.0 32.0 703.1 530.9 77.5          Mar 
217.0 3,164.3 3,101.6 2,984.7 1,446.5 200.8 31.5 699.3 529.2 77.4          Apr 
218.3 3,182.1 3,116.5 2,992.7 1,455.0 203.1 32.0 696.8 528.6 77.2          May
220.3 3,165.8 3,101.0 2,972.3 1,446.5 195.6 32.1 693.6 528.3 76.1          June
222.6 3,168.9 3,102.0 2,976.7 1,455.9 195.5 31.5 689.5 527.5 76.8          July
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 
244.2 3,378.9 3,293.0 3,168.8 1,711.9 176.8 34.3 649.7 534.1 61.9          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2013          Nov 263.6 308.6 140.0 94.8 8.2 45.3 14.7 5.6 310.6 303.4 417.9 2,631.1 1,999.9
         Dec 214.8 284.4 121.3 92.0 8.5 45.1 12.2 5.2 294.5 287.7 404.8 2,586.5 1,978.6
2014          Jan 236.4 283.2 120.9 89.6 8.6 45.1 13.4 5.6 287.8 279.3 422.6 2,581.8 1,969.1
         Feb 272.5 293.8 127.5 91.0 9.1 45.5 15.2 5.6 306.7 295.2 421.8 2,556.5 1,956.7
         Mar 267.2 300.4 128.2 95.9 9.1 45.4 16.4 5.5 293.9 285.4 404.1 2,558.8 1,961.5
         Apr 256.5 297.4 130.2 91.0 9.3 45.4 16.0 5.4 285.0 276.2 409.3 2,544.4 1,948.4
         May 289.6 305.3 130.0 99.0 9.4 45.4 16.2 5.3 271.3 262.6 405.2 2,563.1 1,948.7
         June 315.9 310.5 133.6 101.3 9.4 45.3 15.6 5.2 299.4 285.1 392.2 2,533.2 1,919.9
         July 292.8 310.0 132.6 101.9 9.2 45.0 16.1 5.2 302.3 293.4 409.0 2,524.2 1,898.5
         Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8
         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9
         Dec 216.7 310.9 138.0 100.5 11.5 39.5 16.4 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.2 2,479.0 1,820.8
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 134.9 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.8 5.4 321.6 311.4 438.6 2,505.8 1,797.1
         Feb 272.1 319.3 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.3 5.3 358.1 348.0 447.3 2,502.9 1,782.8
         Mar 294.7 317.1 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 20.1 5.3 360.3 354.1 437.8 2,492.6 1,762.3
         Apr 251.4 320.6 144.8 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.4 5.1 341.5 333.8 459.7 2,461.7 1,743.0
         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 337.4 330.8 450.6 2,442.8 1,718.3
         June 309.5 334.1 157.1 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 314.6 311.1 433.0 2,430.8 1,703.8
         July 267.3 327.8 148.2 100.3 13.4 38.8 22.3 4.9 311.4 308.2 457.4 2,403.0 1,680.3
         Aug 252.6 335.1 154.3 100.4 13.4 38.8 23.4 4.8 313.2 308.1 455.9 2,372.3 1,670.8
         Sep 281.7 332.7 152.4 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 309.0 301.4 450.5 2,342.0 1,658.9
         Oct 316.6 333.5 156.3 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 303.1 293.6 471.8 2,335.3 1,638.6
         Nov 299.4 354.9 167.1 108.5 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 307.4 302.2 486.3 2,364.9 1,644.4
         Dec 227.2 336.5 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 276.1 274.2 465.3 2,314.3 1,629.7
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2013          Nov 16.5 170.4 46.4 76.0 5.4 38.9 2.9 0.7 3.9 3.3 3.9 561.7 314.1
         Dec 19.0 166.1 44.4 73.8 5.7 38.7 2.9 0.7 6.7 5.1 3.9 550.0 309.5
2014          Jan 15.9 159.9 39.7 72.3 5.7 38.7 2.8 0.7 7.9 7.1 4.1 545.0 304.4
         Feb 18.7 165.0 42.7 73.7 6.1 38.9 2.9 0.7 8.0 6.5 4.0 543.2 303.5
         Mar 17.1 168.5 43.6 76.5 6.1 38.7 2.8 0.7 5.2 4.5 3.8 538.2 305.3
         Apr 14.9 164.7 43.4 72.8 6.2 38.8 2.8 0.7 7.7 7.1 3.8 525.9 293.7
         May 16.8 172.6 46.7 77.5 6.1 38.8 2.8 0.7 4.8 4.8 3.7 540.8 296.7
         June 15.9 177.6 46.8 82.4 6.1 38.9 2.8 0.7 5.2 5.2 3.7 540.3 294.3
         July 17.3 174.9 43.6 83.2 5.9 38.7 2.8 0.7 8.4 7.7 3.7 543.2 291.5
         Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.5 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
63.7 53.4 2,514.0 3,474.2 2,357.7 − 51.9 4,421.8 − 5,432.0 9,236.1 9,888.4 7,354.4 117.2 2013          Nov 
38.5 49.1 2,498.9 3,309.4 2,340.0 − 62.6 3,953.9 − 5,444.5 9,249.4 9,852.3 7,310.4 114.1          Dec 
42.3 43.9 2,495.6 3,474.4 2,384.6 − 44.8 4,108.0 − 5,418.6 9,224.2 9,854.7 7,354.6 107.7 2014          Jan 
42.1 39.1 2,475.3 3,428.5 2,405.2 − 31.4 4,039.0 − 5,427.9 9,235.1 9,866.7 7,337.6 105.3          Feb 
49.1 35.4 2,474.4 3,392.4 2,422.0 − 30.0 3,981.3 − 5,461.0 9,273.8 9,879.1 7,344.7 106.1          Mar 
37.8 32.6 2,474.0 3,463.5 2,433.5 − 23.1 4,060.2 − 5,498.8 9,301.1 9,903.1 7,324.3 104.5          Apr 
43.7 35.1 2,484.3 3,477.3 2,426.9 − 35.6 4,116.1 − 5,556.5 9,362.8 9,970.8 7,313.8 105.4          May
44.4 35.9 2,452.8 3,375.2 2,456.9 − 50.4 4,138.9 − 5,600.8 9,386.0 9,986.6 7,300.5 106.7          June
37.6 35.2 2,451.4 3,438.4 2,469.0 − 46.1 4,239.4 − 5,611.4 9,402.4 10,016.6 7,300.4 107.8          July
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
61.6 42.8 2,374.7 3,561.6 2,459.6 − 45.1 4,570.9 − 5,938.9 9,682.5 10,313.4 7,183.3 112.3          Dec 
58.7 42.3 2,404.8 3,905.6 2,545.6 − 99.0 5,021.9 − 6,021.5 9,744.6 10,402.2 7,297.3 110.6 2015          Jan 
58.8 43.3 2,400.7 3,933.0 2,538.5 − 115.0 4,927.5 − 6,051.5 9,742.4 10,423.4 7,302.8 109.1          Feb 
51.7 44.3 2,396.6 3,964.9 2,567.9 − 65.1 5,139.1 − 6,113.6 9,809.7 10,468.5 7,316.8 109.5          Mar 
55.3 45.8 2,360.6 3,992.7 2,535.0 − 72.7 4,844.4 − 6,196.5 9,876.8 10,569.2 7,224.5 107.6          Apr 
52.5 42.1 2,348.2 3,949.1 2,543.4 − 67.2 4,642.6 − 6,292.6 9,943.8 10,602.7 7,211.9 110.0          May
56.9 44.8 2,329.1 3,782.7 2,526.5 − 60.8 4,280.8 − 6,353.6 9,978.4 10,602.5 7,161.4 112.4          June
44.2 45.1 2,313.7 3,879.8 2,524.6 − 68.1 4,411.3 − 6,397.6 10,028.3 10,683.4 7,150.0 114.8          July
33.9 47.4 2,291.0 3,874.1 2,523.2 − 67.3 4,311.7 − 6,404.7 10,031.9 10,674.7 7,120.4 116.3          Aug 
30.9 46.4 2,264.7 3,798.5 2,528.4 − 53.8 4,321.2 − 6,427.6 10,040.0 10,662.7 7,095.3 117.2          Sep 
30.4 47.5 2,257.4 3,858.9 2,562.3 − 78.0 4,351.0 − 6,524.1 10,122.8 10,779.0 7,102.6 115.7          Oct 
29.1 49.7 2,286.0 3,913.8 2,567.1 − 77.3 4,530.6 − 6,590.3 10,187.6 10,842.2 7,123.9 121.9          Nov 
21.6 48.0 2,244.7 3,659.5 2,555.7 − 50.6 4,095.1 − 6,624.4 10,226.9 10,835.3 7,071.4 120.4          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
12.5 6.3 542.9 679.5 495.3 − 679.0 1,472.5 221.7 1,462.1 2,296.5 2,323.1 1,868.1 − 2013          Nov 
8.9 5.9 535.1 610.6 490.2 − 652.9 1,422.0 224.3 1,448.1 2,293.9 2,319.4 1,853.4 −          Dec 
8.4 4.3 532.3 658.5 498.1 − 638.1 1,439.4 234.7 1,453.9 2,294.3 2,319.0 1,856.7 − 2014          Jan 
9.1 5.1 528.9 634.6 502.7 − 633.8 1,409.2 237.1 1,462.0 2,307.9 2,334.2 1,854.6 −          Feb 
8.0 4.0 526.2 615.1 501.1 − 601.5 1,398.8 238.7 1,454.1 2,302.5 2,323.5 1,847.3 −          Mar 
7.5 4.6 513.8 622.3 500.8 − 594.4 1,400.7 240.8 1,489.9 2,333.2 2,356.9 1,830.8 −          Apr 
7.3 5.7 527.8 636.4 504.7 − 618.1 1,433.7 243.8 1,501.7 2,351.8 2,373.3 1,846.1 −          May
9.1 6.6 524.6 613.8 521.8 − 591.5 1,438.1 246.7 1,493.3 2,340.6 2,365.2 1,855.7 −          June
9.2 6.4 527.7 619.9 526.1 − 570.3 1,465.8 251.2 1,499.4 2,345.9 2,373.5 1,859.5 −          July
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 −          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.7 552.3 − 742.6 1,536.9 297.8 1,766.2 2,610.8 2,652.2 1,795.6 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2013          July 615.9 108.8 708.0 1.3 256.4 92.1 195.0 909.3 92.5 115.1 286.5 1 287.9
         Aug 532.3 104.5 698.6 0.2 255.0 82.6 195.5 917.6 97.1 28.2 269.6 1 269.8
         Sep 531.8 97.5 692.3 0.4 251.1 79.2 191.7 920.4 72.6 34.7 274.5 1 274.2
         Oct 538.2 96.2 674.6 0.2 248.2 58.9 189.8 918.3 80.1 41.9 268.4 1 245.6
         Nov 550.9 90.8 652.4 0.1 244.6 52.1 187.2 920.4 70.9 63.4 244.9 1 217.4
         Dec 550.8 91.6 625.3 0.1 241.5 48.3 177.4 925.9 80.2 57.2 220.2 1 194.4
2014          Jan 532.7 129.3 592.1 0.3 236.8 60.1 149.3 947.9 61.2 24.7 248.1 1 256.0
         Feb 510.3 105.4 576.4 0.3 232.5 42.1 164.4 931.8 83.4 − 12.9 216.0 1 190.0
         Mar 510.4 91.8 570.4 0.3 229.5 29.5 175.5 932.1 81.8 − 17.6 201.1 1 162.8
         Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.1 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016          Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2013          July 161.3 0.6 11.7 0.0 61.8 26.1 79.2 226.3 0.8 − 194.0 97.0 349.4
         Aug 136.9 0.6 11.3 0.0 61.1 27.5 73.6 228.6 0.7 − 207.5 87.0 343.1
         Sep 136.3 0.2 10.6 0.0 59.7 22.3 72.2 229.2 0.7 − 206.2 88.7 340.3
         Oct 138.3 0.2 10.1 0.1 58.9 15.8 63.4 229.2 1.3 − 195.0 92.9 337.9
         Nov 142.5 0.2 8.8 0.0 57.9 15.1 61.4 229.0 1.6 − 176.2 78.4 322.5
         Dec 142.3 0.3 8.5 0.0 57.0 12.9 66.7 230.0 1.4 − 170.0 67.1 310.0
2014          Jan 136.4 18.3 13.2 0.1 56.0 11.0 60.2 231.1 1.9 − 155.2 75.1 317.1
         Feb 128.8 13.5 10.7 0.0 54.7 9.5 58.7 219.4 1.3 − 145.3 64.1 293.0
         Mar 128.5 4.5 11.0 0.1 53.8 9.1 52.5 221.0 1.4 − 147.1 61.0 291.1
         Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016          Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations.the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue ofsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 40.1 + 4.1 − 20.4 + 0.8 − 3.5 + 1.6 − 4.4 + 5.2 + 9.4 − 57.2 − 13.8 − 7.0 2013          July
− 83.6 − 4.3 − 9.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 9.5 + 0.5 + 8.3 + 4.6 − 86.9 − 16.9 − 18.1          Aug − 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 2.8 − 24.5 + 6.5 + 4.9 + 4.4          Sep 
+ 6.4 − 1.3 − 17.7 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 20.3 − 1.9 − 2.1 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 6.1 − 28.6          Oct 
+ 12.7 − 5.4 − 22.2 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 6.8 − 2.6 + 2.1 − 9.2 + 21.5 − 23.5 − 28.2          Nov − 0.1 + 0.8 − 27.1 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 9.8 + 5.5 + 9.3 − 6.2 − 24.7 − 23.0          Dec 
− 18.1 + 37.7 − 33.2 + 0.2 − 4.7 + 11.8 − 28.1 + 22.0 − 19.0 − 32.5 + 27.9 + 61.6 2014          Jan 
− 22.4 − 23.9 − 15.7 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 18.0 + 15.1 − 16.1 + 22.2 − 37.6 − 32.1 − 66.0          Feb + 0.1 − 13.6 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 12.6 + 11.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 4.7 − 14.9 − 27.2          Mar 
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 +
 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
−
0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 14.2 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.1 + 2.3 − 13.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 2013          July− 24.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.4 − 5.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 13.5 − 9.9 − 6.3          Aug − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 5.2 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 2.8          Sep 
+ 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 6.6 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 11.2 + 4.2 − 2.4          Oct 
+ 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 18.8 − 14.5 − 15.3          Nov − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 5.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 11.2 − 12.5          Dec 
− 5.9 + 17.9 + 4.7 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.9 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 14.8 + 7.9 + 7.1 2014          Jan 
− 7.6 − 4.7 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 0.5 + 9.9 − 11.0 − 24.1          Feb − 0.3 − 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 6.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 3.1 − 1.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
−
1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
allocated
on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2015 May                29 2,416.7 384.0 302.7 82.3 220.4 39.6 21.7 21.7 −
         June                  5 2,428.3 384.0 302.5 82.3 220.2 39.6 21.5 21.5 −
                              12 2,442.1 384.0 303.8 82.3 221.5 40.8 22.1 22.1 −
                              19 2,451.9 384.0 304.2 81.9 222.3 40.3 21.0 21.0 −
                              26 2,539.5 384.0 306.7 82.2 224.5 38.7 21.8 21.8 −
         July                  3 2,497.0 364.5 292.8 80.5 212.3 38.4 20.1 20.1 −
                              10 2,508.2 364.5 292.1 80.5 211.6 38.8 21.0 21.0 −
                              17 2,519.0 364.5 290.6 80.5 210.2 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              24 2,525.2 364.5 289.4 78.4 210.9 40.0 21.3 21.3 −
                              31 2,536.6 364.5 287.8 78.5 209.4 40.5 20.3 20.3 −
         Aug                  7 2,536.6 364.5 290.3 79.1 211.2 39.9 20.0 20.0 −
                              14 2,541.9 364.5 290.2 79.1 211.1 39.1 19.7 19.7 −
                              21 2,549.3 364.5 292.3 79.2 213.1 36.9 19.4 19.4 −
                              28 2,558.8 364.5 289.5 79.2 210.3 41.0 19.3 19.3 −
         Sep                  4 2,568.3 364.5 289.6 79.1 210.4 40.7 19.5 19.5 −
                              11 2,587.3 364.5 288.8 79.1 209.6 42.0 21.1 21.1 −
                              18 2,602.3 364.5 290.2 79.1 211.1 41.0 20.6 20.6 −
                              25 2,620.6 364.5 291.6 79.2 212.5 39.9 21.1 21.1 −
         Oct                  2 2,626.8 348.8 287.9 78.9 209.0 41.0 21.5 21.5 −
                                9 2,632.3 348.8 288.4 78.8 209.5 39.5 19.9 19.9 −
                              16 2,640.6 348.8 286.4 78.6 207.8 41.8 19.2 19.2 −
                              23 2,653.2 348.8 287.3 78.6 208.7 41.5 19.4 19.4 −
                              30 2,665.0 348.9 289.9 78.8 211.1 38.9 20.2 20.2 −
2015 Nov                  6 2,668.9 348.9 288.4 78.6 209.8 42.2 20.7 20.7 −
                              13 2,682.4 348.9 290.6 78.6 212.0 40.3 20.4 20.4 −
                              20 2,692.4 348.9 292.3 78.6 213.7 38.4 20.7 20.7 −
                              27 2,706.7 348.9 292.1 78.7 213.4 38.2 20.5 20.5 −
         Dec                  4 2,718.7 348.9 294.5 78.7 215.8 36.3 19.8 19.8 −
                              11 2,731.9 348.9 296.2 78.7 217.5 33.9 19.6 19.6 −
                              18 2,759.3 348.9 295.4 79.0 216.4 35.4 19.7 19.7 −
                              25 2,767.8 348.9 298.2 79.1 219.1 32.2 20.5 20.5 −
2016 Jan                  1 2,781.1 338.7 307.1 80.4 226.7 31.1 20.2 20.2 −
                                8 2,766.9 338.7 308.8 80.4 228.4 29.2 19.9 19.9 −
                              15 2,778.3 338.7 308.4 80.4 228.0 29.9 21.5 21.5 −
                              22 2,794.5 338.7 308.0 80.4 227.6 31.8 21.6 21.6 −
                              29 2,808.3 338.7 305.5 80.5 225.0 33.3 22.4 22.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Mar 737.8 102.2 48.4 20.6 27.9 0.1−−−
         Apr 770.6 102.2 48.6 21.0 27.6 0.1−−−
         May 764.9 102.1 48.0 20.9 27.0 0.1−−−
         June 725.5 104.6 48.4 20.8 27.6 0.1−−−
         July 697.1 104.6 48.8 20.9 27.9 0.1−−−
         Aug 712.0 104.6 49.0 20.8 28.2 0.1−−−
         Sep 738.3 104.6 51.7 21.9 29.9 −−−−
         Oct 736.9 104.6 51.9 21.7 30.2 −−−−
         Nov 734.0 104.6 52.0 21.6 30.3 −−−−
         Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0.0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016          Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0.0−−−
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
495.5 100.1 395.4 − − 0.1 − 131.6 787.0 413.5 373.4 25.7 228.9 2015 May                29
488.0 92.5 395.4 − − 0.1 − 135.1 802.8 428.9 373.9 25.7 229.1          June                  5
485.8 90.4 395.4 − − 0.1 − 133.2 816.9 442.2 374.7 25.7 229.8                               12
485.4 89.7 395.4 − − 0.4 − 136.9 824.9 451.2 373.7 25.7 229.5                               19
555.6 88.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 134.7 839.2 465.1 374.1 25.7 233.2                               26
544.1 76.4 467.1 − − 0.6 − 134.9 845.1 477.6 367.5 25.7 231.5          July                  3
541.8 74.5 467.1 − − 0.2 − 137.0 857.5 491.9 365.6 25.6 229.9                               10
542.7 75.5 467.1 − − 0.1 − 139.4 866.2 505.2 361.0 25.6 228.5                               17
542.6 75.2 467.1 − − 0.3 − 139.7 875.2 514.7 360.5 25.2 227.4                               24
543.6 80.0 463.5 − − 0.1 − 138.2 888.2 528.3 360.0 25.2 228.3                               31
534.7 71.0 463.5 − − 0.2 − 137.7 899.2 540.9 358.3 25.2 225.2          Aug                  7
534.0 69.7 463.5 − − 0.8 − 133.4 911.9 552.8 359.1 25.2 224.0                               14
533.2 69.6 463.5 − − 0.1 − 130.0 919.0 560.8 358.2 25.2 228.8                               21
528.5 70.1 456.2 − − 2.2 − 131.8 931.7 572.5 359.2 25.2 227.3                               28
527.4 71.0 456.2 − − 0.1 − 130.5 945.1 585.6 359.5 25.2 225.9          Sep                  4
527.2 70.9 456.2 − − 0.1 − 134.1 961.1 602.8 358.3 25.2 223.4                               11
527.0 70.7 456.2 − − 0.1 − 136.6 975.5 617.2 358.3 25.2 221.8                               18
527.3 71.1 456.2 − − 0.0 − 138.4 990.0 631.1 358.9 25.2 222.6                               25
539.5 72.6 466.3 − − 0.6 − 137.1 1 001.7 642.5 359.1 25.2 224.1          Oct                  2
536.9 70.6 466.3 − − 0.0 − 135.5 1 015.9 656.7 359.2 25.2 222.2                                 9
535.9 69.5 466.3 − − 0.1 − 136.9 1 028.1 668.9 359.1 25.2 218.3                               16
532.3 65.9 466.3 − − 0.1 − 137.0 1 043.3 683.2 360.2 25.2 218.3                               23
531.2 68.5 462.7 − − 0.0 − 138.7 1 053.8 695.7 358.1 25.2 218.3                               30
524.2 61.5 462.7 − − 0.0 − 134.9 1 065.6 707.7 357.9 25.2 218.9 2015 Nov                  6
525.3 62.5 462.7 − − 0.0 − 135.4 1 080.2 721.9 358.2 25.2 216.2                               13
523.3 60.5 462.7 − − 0.0 − 135.9 1 094.7 736.1 358.6 25.2 213.1                               20
525.2 73.8 451.4 − − 0.1 − 129.0 1 111.2 752.2 359.0 25.2 216.5                               27
521.4 69.8 451.4 − − 0.2 − 127.5 1 129.0 770.7 358.2 25.2 216.2          Dec                  4
520.6 69.1 451.4 − − 0.2 − 124.1 1 145.4 786.3 359.1 25.2 218.0                               11
538.2 68.6 469.5 − − 0.1 − 122.5 1 157.2 798.6 358.7 25.2 216.7                               18
542.5 72.9 469.5 − − 0.0 − 111.8 1 163.3 805.3 358.1 25.2 225.3                               25
559.0 89.0 469.5 − − 0.5 − 107.9 1 161.2 803.1 358.0 25.1 230.8 2016 Jan                  1
540.2 70.6 469.5 − − 0.0 − 110.6 1 169.1 812.4 356.7 25.1 225.3                                 8
535.4 65.7 469.5 − − 0.1 − 111.8 1 185.4 829.7 355.7 25.1 221.9                               15
534.8 65.2 469.5 − − 0.0 − 114.7 1 202.1 846.7 355.4 25.1 217.7                               22
534.0 69.0 465.0 − − 0.1 − 114.1 1 218.1 864.3 353.8 25.1 217.0                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
24.4 10.7 11.0 − − 2.7 − 5.6 53.6 53.6 − 4.4 499.0 2014          Mar 
51.4 38.2 12.9 − − 0.2 − 5.7 51.6 51.6 − 4.4 506.7          Apr 
60.0 41.5 18.5 − − 0.0 − 3.8 50.7 50.7 − 4.4 495.8          May
26.1 7.4 16.1 − − 2.6 − 2.3 49.0 49.0 − 4.4 490.6          June
17.8 7.1 10.5 − − 0.2 − 1.6 47.4 47.4 − 4.4 472.3          July
14.3 4.0 9.7 − − 0.6 − 1.1 45.7 45.7 − 4.4 492.7          Aug 
21.6 6.3 14.9 − − 0.3 − 1.8 45.5 45.5 − 4.4 508.6          Sep 
31.3 15.2 15.2 − − 0.9 − 1.7 45.3 45.3 − 4.4 497.5          Oct 
27.2 8.5 18.5 − − 0.2 − 1.5 47.7 47.7 − 4.4 496.6          Nov 
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2015 May                29 2,416.7 1,032.0 415.1 316.2 98.9 − − 0.0 5.2 − 147.4 82.8 64.6
         June                  5 2,428.3 1,035.0 424.8 322.8 102.1 − − 0.0 5.3 − 146.1 82.9 63.3
                              12 2,442.1 1,034.1 450.9 354.1 96.7 − − 0.1 5.6 − 135.4 72.9 62.5
                              19 2,451.9 1,036.1 421.3 339.8 81.4 − − 0.1 5.5 − 175.4 110.5 64.9
                              26 2,539.5 1,039.0 475.7 389.3 86.3 − − 0.1 5.2 − 204.0 137.6 66.4
         July                  3 2,497.0 1,047.4 504.8 392.2 112.5 − − 0.1 5.0 − 164.1 98.4 65.8
                              10 2,508.2 1,050.6 507.3 383.4 123.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 165.0 96.9 68.1
                              17 2,519.0 1,052.5 533.2 414.4 118.6 − − 0.2 5.2 − 145.0 74.4 70.6
                              24 2,525.2 1,052.4 503.8 386.5 117.1 − − 0.1 5.3 − 181.4 120.3 61.1
                              31 2,536.6 1,057.0 549.5 412.4 137.0 − − 0.1 5.2 − 141.7 75.9 65.8
         Aug                  7 2,536.6 1,059.4 581.8 443.9 137.7 − − 0.1 5.2 − 105.7 39.1 66.6
                              14 2,541.9 1,058.8 578.3 424.0 154.2 − − 0.1 5.5 − 121.9 52.8 69.1
                              21 2,549.3 1,054.5 597.9 428.6 169.1 − − 0.1 5.2 − 116.9 50.1 66.8
                              28 2,558.8 1,053.2 593.0 438.5 154.4 − − 0.1 4.8 − 132.2 67.0 65.3
         Sep                  4 2,568.3 1,055.1 616.8 449.7 167.0 − − 0.1 4.6 − 116.3 49.7 66.6
                              11 2,587.3 1,053.9 626.5 466.5 159.9 − − 0.1 4.8 − 125.2 58.1 67.1
                              18 2,602.3 1,051.9 609.0 469.4 139.5 − − 0.1 4.8 − 155.4 80.3 75.0
                              25 2,620.6 1,051.6 580.6 457.5 123.0 − − 0.1 4.9 − 194.0 115.4 78.6
         Oct                  2 2,626.8 1,054.2 621.8 473.3 148.3 − − 0.2 5.0 − 167.6 88.7 78.9
                                9 2,632.3 1,054.6 644.3 472.3 171.8 − − 0.2 4.9 − 163.2 83.6 79.6
                              16 2,640.6 1,052.8 622.1 462.9 159.1 − − 0.2 4.9 − 195.6 114.4 81.2
                              23 2,653.2 1,050.6 613.8 444.2 169.4 − − 0.2 5.0 − 216.4 131.6 84.8
                              30 2,665.0 1,053.9 632.7 474.5 157.8 − − 0.4 5.0 − 199.2 112.0 87.2
2015 Nov                  6 2,668.9 1,055.4 679.1 492.0 187.0 − − 0.2 5.1 − 154.3 64.9 89.4
                              13 2,682.4 1,055.6 676.0 488.2 187.6 − − 0.2 5.0 − 172.4 81.6 90.8
                              20 2,692.4 1,053.7 644.6 474.2 170.2 − − 0.2 5.1 − 215.0 115.7 99.3
                              27 2,706.7 1,057.7 658.1 498.9 159.0 − − 0.2 5.1 − 211.4 114.8 96.6
         Dec                  4 2,718.7 1,066.2 697.9 520.4 177.3 − − 0.2 5.0 − 177.5 79.8 97.7
                              11 2,731.9 1,069.4 733.3 559.2 174.0 − − 0.1 5.2 − 155.3 69.4 85.9
                              18 2,759.3 1,074.7 739.5 550.5 188.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 172.3 86.9 85.4
                              25 2,767.8 1,083.4 757.1 579.9 177.1 − − 0.1 5.1 − 152.2 70.1 82.1
2016 Jan                  1 2,781.1 1,083.5 768.4 555.9 212.4 − − 0.1 5.2 − 141.8 59.3 82.5
                                8 2,766.9 1,073.9 773.7 563.4 210.1 − − 0.1 4.9 − 149.4 67.5 82.0
                              15 2,778.3 1,065.6 763.7 547.5 216.0 − − 0.2 4.9 − 178.4 95.4 83.0
                              22 2,794.5 1,061.5 757.2 549.6 207.4 − − 0.2 5.1 − 204.9 117.4 87.4
                              29 2,808.3 1,062.6 778.4 556.5 221.8 − − 0.1 5.1 − 195.8 107.9 87.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Mar 737.8 222.2 103.3 50.2 4.7 48.5 − − − − 8.4 1.1 7.3
         Apr 770.6 224.5 112.6 68.4 7.8 36.4 − − − − 26.6 1.4 25.2
         May 764.9 225.7 103.4 62.2 7.2 34.0 − − − − 24.7 0.9 23.9
         June 725.5 227.0 65.5 60.0 5.5 − − − − − 18.9 1.2 17.7
         July 697.1 229.4 56.5 49.9 6.6 − − − − − 14.2 0.8 13.4
         Aug 712.0 229.8 68.8 59.9 9.0 − − − − − 12.8 0.7 12.1
         Sep 738.3 229.8 85.1 81.1 4.0 − − − − − 15.1 1.1 13.9
         Oct 736.9 230.7 72.3 62.5 9.7 − − − − − 21.8 0.8 21.0
         Nov 734.0 232.1 63.1 54.1 9.0 − − 0.0 − − 24.7 0.7 23.9
         Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016          Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
28.7 2.3 7.8 7.8 − 60.7 218.1 − 403.3 96.0 2015 May                29
30.6 2.1 7.6 7.6 − 60.7 215.9 − 403.3 96.8          June                  5
28.8 2.5 7.3 7.3 − 60.7 216.7 − 403.3 96.8                               12
28.8 2.3 6.6 6.6 − 60.7 213.6 − 403.3 98.5                               19
29.6 2.3 6.4 6.4 − 60.7 215.0 − 403.3 98.4                               26
32.0 2.0 5.7 5.7 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4          July                  3
36.8 2.3 5.2 5.2 − 59.5 210.7 − 367.4 98.4                               10
40.2 2.3 4.9 4.9 − 59.5 210.5 − 367.4 98.4                               17
38.0 2.5 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 211.2 − 367.4 98.4                               24
38.2 3.0 3.9 3.9 − 59.5 212.7 − 367.4 98.4                               31
41.4 2.7 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 209.9 − 367.4 98.4          Aug                  7
40.8 2.4 5.2 5.2 − 59.5 203.8 − 367.4 98.4                               14
35.0 2.4 4.5 4.5 − 59.5 207.6 − 367.4 98.4                               21
33.9 2.4 4.6 4.6 − 59.5 210.6 − 367.4 97.2                               28
34.7 2.3 4.1 4.1 − 59.5 210.3 − 367.4 97.2          Sep                  4
33.6 2.2 4.8 4.8 − 59.5 212.2 − 367.4 97.2                               11
35.9 2.3 5.1 5.1 − 59.5 213.7 − 367.4 97.2                               18
40.3 2.1 5.3 5.3 − 59.5 217.8 − 367.4 97.2                               25
47.3 2.0 4.3 4.3 − 59.2 217.4 − 350.7 97.2          Oct                  2
39.6 2.0 4.0 4.0 − 59.2 212.5 − 350.7 97.2                                 9
39.8 2.0 4.2 4.2 − 59.2 212.0 − 350.7 97.2                               16
38.3 2.1 4.9 4.9 − 59.2 215.0 − 350.7 97.2                               23
43.0 2.2 5.0 5.0 − 59.2 216.9 − 350.7 97.2                               30
41.5 2.1 6.6 6.6 − 59.2 217.6 − 350.7 97.2 2015 Nov                  6
41.3 2.0 6.4 6.4 − 59.2 216.5 − 350.7 97.2                               13
42.1 2.3 5.6 5.6 − 59.2 216.8 − 350.7 97.2                               20
41.0 2.2 5.1 5.1 − 59.2 219.0 − 350.7 97.2                               27
39.4 2.1 5.3 5.3 − 59.2 218.0 − 350.7 97.2          Dec                  4
37.1 2.0 4.8 4.8 − 59.2 217.7 − 350.7 97.2                               11
37.2 2.0 4.3 4.3 − 59.2 217.1 − 350.7 97.2                               18
40.8 2.8 4.1 4.1 − 58.2 216.2 − 350.7 97.2                               25
54.5 2.8 3.7 3.7 − 59.2 218.6 − 346.2 97.2 2016 Jan                  1
38.9 2.8 5.1 5.1 − 59.2 215.6 − 346.2 97.2                                 8
38.2 4.5 4.2 4.2 − 59.2 215.9 − 346.2 97.6                               15
39.1 6.3 3.7 3.7 − 59.2 213.9 − 346.2 97.6                               22
40.5 5.8 3.1 3.1 − 59.2 214.1 − 346.2 97.6                               29
 Deutsche Bundesbank
26.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 13.5 23.6 238.7 95.4 5.0 2014          Mar 
27.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.5 23.8 240.8 95.4 5.0          Apr 
28.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 13.5 24.0 243.8 95.4 5.0          May
25.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 13.7 24.4 246.7 98.3 5.0          June
3.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 13.7 24.5 251.2 98.3 5.0          July
2.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 13.7 24.6 254.8 98.3 5.0          Aug 
3.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 25.0 258.7 100.8 5.0          Sep 
3.6 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 25.2 261.8 100.8 5.0          Oct 
2.9 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.2 25.2 264.4 100.8 5.0          Nov 
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,664.5 19.5 2,013.5 1,523.8 1,218.1 305.8 489.7 344.8 144.9 3,720.1 3,302.7 2,727.7 2,439.9
2014          Mar 7,512.4 14.6 2,110.7 1,625.0 1,219.7 405.3 485.7 322.1 163.6 3,608.1 3,206.8 2,623.6 2,356.3
         Apr 7,543.0 15.5 2,107.4 1,616.2 1,212.2 404.1 491.1 325.6 165.6 3,630.9 3,228.6 2,644.2 2,359.8
         May 7,619.9 15.4 2,126.3 1,632.2 1,229.5 402.7 494.1 329.1 165.0 3,630.4 3,225.2 2,637.6 2,364.9         June 7,589.2 14.9 2,089.4 1,595.1 1,196.2 398.9 494.2 330.2 164.0 3,623.8 3,219.0 2,637.4 2,367.1
         July 7,657.0 15.0 2,089.5 1,580.6 1,184.2 396.4 508.9 345.9 163.0 3,635.3 3,227.8 2,639.9 2,366.6
         Aug 7,750.2 15.5 2,103.8 1,596.1 1,201.4 394.8 507.7 345.2 162.5 3,631.4 3,226.7 2,643.3 2,372.4
         Sep 7,746.4 15.3 2,100.2 1,593.1 1,198.5 394.5 507.1 344.3 162.9 3,644.2 3,237.5 2,653.9 2,380.5
         Oct 7,755.6 15.4 2,084.1 1,579.2 1,188.8 390.4 505.0 344.4 160.6 3,653.0 3,241.6 2,649.8 2,378.9
         Nov 7,840.0 15.6 2,074.1 1,563.1 1,174.4 388.8 510.9 351.4 159.6 3,668.7 3,251.5 2,662.4 2,389.2         Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.6 15.4 2,107.0 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 524.6 363.3 161.3 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.4 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.5 15.4 2,096.3 1,578.2 1,195.7 382.4 518.2 362.5 155.7 3,698.4 3,275.9 2,680.8 2,397.4         Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.5 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.1 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,693.9 2,407.4         June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,691.9 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.2 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,716.9 2,421.1
         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0         Dec 7,664.5 19.5 2,013.5 1,523.8 1,218.1 305.8 489.7 344.8 144.9 3,720.1 3,302.7 2,727.7 2,439.9
 Changes 3
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 198.1 0.3 − 19.3 − 12.6 65.8 − 78.4 − 6.6 6.1 − 12.8 64.2 63.9 67.9 56.1
2014          Apr 32.0 1.0 − 3.1 − 8.6 − 7.4 − 1.2 5.5 3.6 2.0 23.2 22.1 20.6 3.6
         May 67.8 − 0.1 17.3 15.2 16.8 − 1.6 2.1 2.8 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 7.1 4.7
         June − 30.3 − 0.5 − 36.5 − 36.7 − 33.2 − 3.5 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 − 6.0 − 5.6 0.2 2.4
         July 57.7 0.1 − 1.6 − 15.4 − 12.6 − 2.7 13.8 14.9 − 1.1 11.5 8.9 2.8 − 0.7
         Aug 86.5 0.5 13.5 15.3 17.1 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 1.4 3.0 5.3
         Sep − 27.7 − 0.2 − 7.5 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 2.7 0.2 10.2 9.6 9.6 7.1
         Oct 8.0 0.1 − 12.3 − 13.9 − 9.8 − 4.0 1.6 2.6 − 1.0 6.5 5.3 − 3.0 − 0.6
         Nov 84.4 0.2 − 8.8 − 16.0 − 14.5 − 1.5 7.2 7.2 0.0 14.4 9.7 12.5 10.8
         Dec − 54.1 3.6 − 53.3 − 33.9 − 28.0 − 6.0 − 19.4 − 18.4 − 1.0 − 15.5 − 12.7 2.9 − 0.82015          Jan 278.4 − 3.8 75.6 46.7 46.9 − 0.2 28.9 26.3 2.6 28.5 21.9 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 11.8 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 10.6 12.1 5.8 8.3
         Mar 86.5 0.1 23.5 28.4 27.5 0.9 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 6.1 4.4 6.9 1.0
         Apr − 63.9 0.6 − 14.1 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 11.3 11.9 3.2 − 0.2
         May − 92.5 0.3 − 9.5 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.4 2.7 9.0         June − 191.7 − 1.1 − 55.0 − 20.9 − 11.2 − 9.8 − 34.0 − 31.0 − 3.0 − 7.8 − 5.9 − 0.8 6.7
         July 57.5 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 24.8 26.9 22.3 0.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 13.0 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 7.3 0.3 − 17.3 − 26.7 − 20.8 − 5.9 9.3 8.8 0.6 4.0 1.1 2.3 6.7
         Oct 25.1 0.7 39.8 36.4 40.4 − 4.0 3.4 3.3 0.1 − 2.1 0.4 − 0.9 6.1
         Nov 59.7 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 271.2 3.6 − 92.0 − 89.0 − 57.1 − 31.9 − 3.0 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 28.7 − 14.7 − 4.5 − 5.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.7 575.0 324.5 250.5 417.4 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.4 746.2 904.9 2015267.4 583.2 336.7 246.5 401.3 270.1 145.2 131.2 28.1 103.1 954.9 723.4 824.1 2014          Mar 284.3 584.4 336.7 247.7 402.4 270.0 148.1 132.4 28.7 103.7 961.7 732.7 827.4          Apr 
272.7 587.6 338.2 249.5 405.2 273.0 148.8 132.2 28.6 103.6 986.8 754.4 861.0          May270.2 581.7 330.2 251.4 404.8 273.3 147.8 131.4 27.9 103.5 997.6 762.8 863.5          June
273.4 587.8 333.0 254.8 407.5 273.9 148.8 133.6 28.2 105.4 1,028.4 793.4 888.9          July
270.9 583.4 327.4 256.0 404.7 272.1 147.8 132.6 28.6 104.0 1,022.4 786.3 977.2          Aug 273.4 583.6 326.9 256.7 406.7 270.0 145.9 136.7 28.4 108.3 1,026.1 784.3 960.6          Sep 
270.9 591.9 333.3 258.6 411.3 272.0 149.3 139.3 29.2 110.2 1,038.4 799.6 964.8          Oct 
273.1 589.1 330.8 258.3 417.2 276.0 147.9 141.3 28.7 112.6 1,070.0 827.9 1,011.6          Nov 276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8          Dec 
285.2 588.8 336.7 252.1 423.2 273.3 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,136.5 885.6 1,180.2 2015          Jan 
283.4 595.1 339.8 255.3 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,128.8 880.6 1,122.6          Feb 290.5 593.0 339.0 253.9 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.2 872.6 1,196.3          Mar 
293.3 601.3 347.6 253.7 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.6 585.3 336.3 249.0 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May278.9 579.9 332.5 247.4 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
300.7 583.5 333.2 250.3 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
295.8 584.7 330.3 254.4 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.7 575.0 324.5 250.5 417.4 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.4 746.2 904.9          Dec 
Changes 3
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.8 − 4.0 − 4.2 0.2 0.3 4.1 1.5 − 3.8 − 1.0 − 2.9 − 92.6 − 105.0 − 150.8 201516.9 1.6 0.4 1.2 1.1 − 0.1 3.0 1.2 0.6 0.6 7.9 10.4 3.0 2014          Apr 
− 11.8 3.1 1.4 1.7 2.3 2.4 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 18.7 15.9 33.7          May
− 2.2 − 5.8 − 7.6 1.9 − 0.4 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 12.3 9.1 0.5          June
3.5 6.1 2.7 3.4 2.5 0.4 0.6 2.2 0.3 1.8 23.6 23.9 24.1          July
− 2.3 − 4.5 − 5.5 1.1 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 11.1 − 11.7 88.4          Aug 
2.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.6 0.6 − 3.4 − 3.0 4.0 − 0.2 4.2 − 12.8 − 17.7 − 17.4          Sep 
− 2.4 8.3 6.4 1.9 1.2 − 1.3 0.9 2.4 0.7 1.7 10.8 14.3 2.8          Oct 
1.7 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 4.6 2.8 − 1.5 1.8 − 0.6 2.4 31.3 28.1 47.4          Nov 3.7 − 15.6 − 7.2 − 8.4 − 2.8 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 1.4 0.2 − 1.6 − 30.9 − 33.1 42.1          Dec 
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 1.0 2.5 5.5 0.6 4.9 53.7 49.4 124.4 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.2 − 7.8 − 57.6          Feb 
5.8 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 1.5 1.6 2.8 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 17.0 − 24.3 73.7          Mar 3.4 8.7 8.7 0.0 − 0.6 0.0 2.8 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.1 32.6 34.1 − 94.4          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.7 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 25.1 − 28.1 − 102.8          June
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 2.1 0.6 0.8 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 3.9 32.0          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.6 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 2.9 1.8 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 7.2          Sep 
− 7.1 1.4 2.9 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 7.9 − 8.4          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.5 − 35.3 50.6          Nov 
1.2 − 10.2 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 13.9 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 5.0 − 0.6 − 4.4 − 68.0 − 66.8 − 86.1          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,664.5 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.0 3,215.0 1,670.4 948.2 291.3 596.4 534.5 80.7 35.3
2014          Mar 7,512.4 1,347.5 1,132.2 215.3 3,131.3 3,035.5 1,412.2 1,014.8 298.8 608.5 531.0 79.3 34.2
         Apr 7,543.0 1,376.0 1,153.3 222.7 3,137.7 3,043.0 1,427.3 1,009.0 296.3 606.6 529.3 80.7 36.9
         May 7,619.9 1,378.3 1,163.9 214.5 3,157.4 3,061.4 1,442.9 1,012.5 302.7 605.9 528.8 79.9 34.7         June 7,589.2 1,370.1 1,143.3 226.8 3,146.9 3,053.8 1,438.8 1,010.4 303.4 604.5 528.4 78.1 36.5
         July 7,657.0 1,376.8 1,134.7 242.1 3,154.6 3,061.7 1,450.4 1,006.9 303.9 604.3 527.6 76.3 35.5
         Aug 7,750.2 1,361.0 1,124.7 236.3 3,170.6 3,079.8 1,468.1 1,005.9 304.8 605.8 528.1 78.9 35.3         Sep 7,746.4 1,349.9 1,117.3 232.6 3,172.6 3,079.6 1,470.2 1,002.9 300.5 606.5 528.2 80.1 38.6
         Oct 7,755.6 1,353.0 1,123.0 230.0 3,177.6 3,085.6 1,490.7 988.8 290.9 606.0 528.0 80.1 36.6
         Nov 7,840.0 1,348.2 1,116.1 232.1 3,198.0 3,105.3 1,514.5 985.5 290.7 605.3 527.6 81.0 36.6         Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.6 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,114.1 1,530.7 976.8 292.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.5 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.3 3,220.8 3,126.5 1,543.4 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5         Dec 7,664.5 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.0 3,215.0 1,670.4 948.2 291.3 596.4 534.5 80.7 35.3
 Changes 4
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 198.1 − 62.8 − 50.6 − 12.2 103.5 104.3 153.0 − 37.4 − 10.4 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.5 − 0.4
2014          Apr 32.0 28.6 21.3 7.4 6.6 7.6 15.2 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 1.6 1.4 2.7
         May 67.8 1.5 10.0 − 8.5 19.0 17.8 15.1 3.4 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.2
         June − 30.3 − 8.1 − 20.5 12.4 − 10.5 − 7.6 − 4.1 − 2.1 0.7 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 1.8 1.8
         July 57.7 5.6 − 9.2 14.9 7.1 7.4 11.0 − 3.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 1.9 − 1.1
         Aug 86.5 − 16.6 − 10.4 − 6.2 15.5 17.7 17.4 − 1.1 0.9 1.5 0.6 2.5 − 0.2
         Sep − 27.7 − 13.1 − 8.4 − 4.7 0.4 − 1.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 4.5 0.6 0.1 0.9 3.2
         Oct 8.0 2.9 5.6 − 2.7 5.0 5.9 20.5 − 14.1 − 9.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 2.0
         Nov 84.4 − 4.9 − 7.0 2.1 20.4 19.8 23.8 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.0
         Dec − 54.1 − 25.6 − 5.4 − 20.2 − 1.3 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 7.3 2.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 2.4
2015          Jan 278.4 54.3 23.1 31.3 13.8 5.2 14.5 − 8.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.1 2.2 2.5
         Feb − 70.0 − 14.9 − 4.3 − 10.7 5.9 12.1 12.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7
         Mar 86.5 10.9 − 1.2 12.0 − 4.6 − 8.0 − 1.9 − 4.0 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.2 1.8
         Apr − 63.9 − 11.7 − 15.3 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.5 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.8 18.8 25.9 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.7         June − 191.7 − 39.1 − 12.4 − 26.7 − 5.2 − 7.8 2.9 − 9.0 − 5.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.9 1.2
         July 57.5 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3
         Sep − 7.3 0.8 3.6 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.7 − 0.4 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
         Oct 25.1 13.7 20.6 − 7.0 9.5 13.5 25.6 − 12.2 − 4.3 0.1 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.5
         Nov 59.7 14.4 10.3 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 271.2 − 44.2 − 42.6 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.4 4.1 2.2 3.0 − 2.0 − 4.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.1 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.3 569.2 970.6 2015
41.6 15.8 3.4 2.7 16.4 11.7 5.2 4.0 1,090.4 35.1 501.5 511.5 921.0 2014          Mar 
40.4 14.9 3.4 2.7 14.0 13.2 7.7 4.0 1,078.9 35.4 511.2 508.3 919.0          Apr 
41.8 16.0 3.4 2.7 16.1 10.9 4.8 4.0 1,091.2 36.7 519.8 516.8 947.6          May38.3 12.8 3.4 2.7 15.0 12.8 5.2 3.9 1,085.5 39.7 498.9 531.8 946.9          June
37.5 12.3 3.4 2.7 16.6 11.8 8.4 3.9 1,084.0 39.0 524.2 537.7 967.4          July
40.3 14.4 3.3 2.7 11.8 10.6 10.1 3.7 1,079.7 41.0 523.9 550.3 1,051.1          Aug 38.1 14.1 3.3 2.7 12.9 11.5 7.4 3.7 1,084.7 42.1 537.3 550.2 1,040.6          Sep 
40.2 14.5 3.3 2.6 12.0 11.2 9.1 3.6 1,083.0 41.9 536.9 545.3 1,047.1          Oct 
41.1 15.0 3.3 2.6 11.7 10.6 9.6 3.6 1,084.8 41.3 562.0 540.1 1,093.7          Nov 42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 18.0 12.7 6.8 3.5 1,103.7 44.2 614.3 543.2 1,256.2 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,104.3 44.7 610.1 557.4 1,188.7          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.4 1,263.6          Mar 
41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.1 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.3 569.2 970.6          Dec 
Changes 4
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 90.7 6.9 − 32.1 27.8 − 142.7 2015
− 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 1.5 2.5 0.0 − 11.0 0.3 10.2 − 3.0 − 1.9 2014          Apr 
1.3 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 − 2.3 − 3.0 − 0.0 8.6 1.2 5.7 7.6 28.4          May
− 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.1 − 5.6 3.0 − 20.7 15.1 − 0.8          June
− 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.6 − 1.0 3.2 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 0.8 22.1 5.0 20.3          July
2.8 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 − 1.1 1.7 − 0.2 − 6.8 1.9 − 2.5 12.1 83.4          Aug 
− 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 0.8 − 2.7 0.0 − 4.4 0.8 5.7 − 2.6 − 10.9          Sep 
2.0 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 4.9 6.3          Oct 
0.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.4 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.6 25.3 − 5.1 46.1          Nov 0.9 0.8 0.0 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 13.5 − 1.9 − 31.8 − 6.2 30.6          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.4 1.2 3.4 0.0 8.1 4.0 63.5 3.9 131.3 2015          Jan − 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 7.0 − 3.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 5.7 13.6 − 68.4          Feb − 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 6.5 1.2 6.4 5.4 75.3          Mar 
0.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.8 0.6 − 98.3          Apr 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.7 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 36.0 − 1.8 − 100.8          June
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 17.4 − 0.7 26.6          July− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.0 9.7 − 23.6          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.2 7.3 − 27.9 4.0 19.9          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 0.0 10.8 5.9 2.3 0.0 − 10.7          Oct − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 2.3 − 16.8 − 6.7 51.2          Nov 
2.2 1.7 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 60.3 − 4.5 − 73.3 − 3.0 − 85.8          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2015          July 1,791 7,915.6 150.6 2,578.7 2,003.2 566.1 3,988.7 373.3 2,808.2 0.5 799.2 127.9 1,069.7
         Aug 1,789 7,888.4 168.3 2,558.9 1,991.4 559.3 3,992.4 373.9 2,812.7 0.6 797.4 127.6 1,041.3
         Sep 1,783 7,877.1 172.0 2,537.5 1,974.4 556.4 3,991.6 376.1 2,814.5 0.6 792.6 127.5 1,048.5
         Oct 1,778 7,903.9 172.4 2,559.9 2,000.4 554.5 4,004.2 382.3 2,828.5 0.6 785.2 127.4 1,039.9
         Nov 1,776 7,987.6 183.9 2,551.3 1,995.7 550.2 4,033.8 366.2 2,858.7 0.6 800.4 127.1 1,091.4
         Dec 1,775 7,707.8 186.6 2,413.2 1,893.0 517.3 3,985.6 338.1 2,849.8 0.7 788.9 120.4 1,002.0
Commercial banks 6
2015          Nov 272 3,131.1 102.2 1,027.2 940.0 86.5 1,150.6 187.6 712.2 0.4 245.3 64.3 786.7
         Dec 271 2,985.2 109.9 971.9 889.9 81.4 1,125.0 168.4 712.1 0.5 238.2 58.2 720.2
   Big banks 7
2015          Nov 4 1,910.7 29.4 599.9 559.1 40.6 475.6 103.7 254.4 0.1 113.1 57.2 748.7
         Dec 4 1,790.7 42.2 558.7 522.5 36.0 453.4 88.2 253.1 0.2 106.6 51.8 684.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2015          Nov 160 910.9 42.4 230.0 185.7 43.7 601.1 62.1 418.8 0.2 119.5 5.5 32.0
         Dec 159 887.4 32.9 223.1 181.4 41.3 597.0 58.5 419.8 0.2 118.1 5.4 29.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2015          Nov 108 309.5 30.4 197.4 195.2 2.2 74.0 21.8 39.0 0.0 12.7 1.6 6.1
         Dec 108 307.1 34.8 190.2 186.0 4.1 74.5 21.7 39.1 0.0 13.4 1.1 6.5
Landesbanken
2015          Nov 9 1,026.6 17.0 327.2 233.6 91.9 542.8 57.0 378.1 0.1 106.5 11.1 128.6
         Dec 9 947.3 9.4 280.8 204.8 75.1 524.3 49.6 371.0 0.1 102.8 11.2 121.6
Savings banks
2015          Nov 414 1,144.0 18.8 200.1 75.5 123.8 895.1 50.1 693.3 0.1 151.4 14.4 15.7
         Dec 414 1,144.8 21.4 194.5 72.9 121.1 897.8 49.4 695.7 0.1 152.6 14.4 16.7
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2015          Nov 2 295.0 1.7 167.0 134.8 32.2 66.5 11.9 23.8 0.0 30.8 14.0 45.8
         Dec 2 280.4 2.1 157.6 126.6 31.0 65.1 11.2 23.6 0.0 30.3 13.3 42.2
Credit cooperatives
2015          Nov 1,023 815.4 12.4 170.6 61.7 108.4 599.1 31.8 471.1 0.1 96.1 14.7 18.7
         Dec 1,023 816.7 13.6 167.4 59.9 107.2 602.2 32.1 472.4 0.1 97.5 14.8 18.7
Mortgage banks
2015          Nov 16 362.1 1.9 75.1 51.1 23.9 269.6 6.3 200.9 − 62.3 0.2 15.4
         Dec 16 350.4 1.8 73.1 51.6 21.2 264.3 6.4 198.1 − 59.8 0.2 11.0
Building and loan associations
2015          Nov 21 213.8 0.0 60.7 43.1 17.7 148.0 1.4 124.9 . 21.7 0.3 4.7
         Dec 21 213.6 0.4 60.2 42.7 17.5 148.2 1.4 125.3 . 21.4 0.3 4.6
Special purpose banks
2015          Nov 19 999.5 29.9 523.4 455.8 65.7 362.1 20.0 254.5 − 86.2 8.2 75.8
         Dec 19 969.5 27.9 507.8 444.7 62.7 358.7 19.7 251.7 − 86.2 8.0 67.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2015          Nov 143 979.7 56.4 372.2 332.6 39.3 447.0 63.2 263.6 0.3 117.5 5.0 99.2
         Dec 142 944.2 54.8 349.3 310.0 39.1 445.3 61.0 264.1 0.3 117.7 4.4 90.5
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2015          Nov 35 670.2 26.0 174.8 137.4 37.1 373.0 41.4 224.6 0.2 104.9 3.4 93.1
         Dec 34 637.1 20.0 159.1 124.0 35.0 370.7 39.3 225.0 0.3 104.3 3.3 84.0
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,769.6 495.3 1,274.2 3,423.7 1,744.9 296.2 708.4 58.8 605.6 535.7 68.7 1,164.1 478.3 1,079.8 2015          July
1,754.0 483.5 1,270.4 3,447.4 1,766.0 299.8 709.5 69.3 604.3 536.0 67.9 1,155.0 478.8 1,053.2          Aug 1,748.0 499.6 1,248.4 3,421.4 1,759.0 284.5 707.3 54.1 603.6 536.8 67.0 1,158.2 478.9 1,070.6          Sep 
1,753.3 513.4 1,239.8 3,441.2 1,790.1 280.7 700.5 62.8 603.6 538.1 66.3 1,169.1 478.9 1,061.5          Oct 
1,757.0 532.1 1,224.9 3,467.9 1,813.2 287.9 697.7 64.2 603.2 538.9 65.9 1,170.9 479.2 1,112.5          Nov 1,677.6 454.5 1,223.0 3,425.9 1,776.3 284.9 694.4 29.1 605.4 542.0 64.9 1,107.6 479.0 1,017.7          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
756.0 339.5 416.5 1,304.5 798.8 158.8 217.0 45.2 107.4 97.7 22.6 151.4 163.2 756.0 2015          Nov 718.1 292.6 425.4 1,274.6 771.0 152.3 221.1 21.6 107.4 97.9 22.8 148.7 162.6 681.2          Dec 
Big banks 7
449.6 201.8 247.8 557.0 329.6 90.1 64.3 45.1 67.0 65.3 6.0 109.6 97.3 697.3 2015          Nov 427.6 180.1 247.4 531.5 308.0 83.7 66.9 21.0 66.9 65.2 5.9 108.2 97.1 626.4          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
157.5 50.9 106.6 604.4 375.9 49.5 123.6 0.1 40.0 32.1 15.4 41.0 57.2 50.9 2015          Nov 146.2 32.4 113.8 597.2 367.4 48.9 125.0 0.6 40.1 32.5 15.8 39.8 56.8 47.4          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
148.8 86.8 62.0 143.2 93.3 19.2 29.2 − 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.9 8.8 7.8 2015          Nov 144.3 80.0 64.2 145.9 95.6 19.6 29.1 − 0.4 0.2 1.2 0.8 8.7 7.4          Dec 
Landesbanken
287.7 60.2 227.6 305.8 130.9 58.8 102.3 16.0 13.8 10.5 0.0 239.6 56.2 137.3 2015          Nov 269.1 45.2 223.8 292.7 123.1 61.1 94.6 7.0 13.8 10.6 0.0 201.2 56.2 128.1          Dec 
Savings banks
136.9 9.8 127.1 852.8 490.6 20.4 14.8 − 295.3 260.3 31.8 15.0 95.3 44.0 2015          Nov 136.6 12.6 124.0 855.0 492.7 20.6 14.9 − 296.2 261.5 30.7 13.8 95.3 44.0          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
155.8 48.3 107.5 27.2 12.1 4.3 9.3 2.6 − − 1.5 50.9 15.7 45.4 2015          Nov 150.1 43.1 107.0 24.1 9.8 3.7 9.0 0.4 − − 1.5 48.7 15.7 41.7          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
104.7 4.2 100.5 605.7 360.0 32.2 18.2 − 186.3 170.0 9.0 7.8 64.4 32.8 2015          Nov 103.7 2.5 101.2 608.1 360.6 33.1 18.0 − 187.5 171.5 8.8 8.0 64.5 32.4          Dec 
Mortgage banks
81.2 6.8 74.4 138.7 8.7 9.4 120.5 − 0.1 0.1 . 107.1 14.8 20.3 2015          Nov 77.1 5.1 72.0 137.4 8.4 9.1 119.8 − 0.1 0.1 . 105.4 14.8 15.7          Dec 
Building and loan associations
24.3 4.0 20.3 162.7 1.0 0.7 159.7 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.4 9.6 14.8 2015          Nov 23.3 3.3 20.0 164.6 1.0 0.7 161.6 − 0.3 0.3 1.0 2.4 9.9 13.5          Dec 
Special purpose banks
210.4 59.4 151.0 70.5 11.2 3.3 56.0 0.4 − − . 596.7 59.9 61.9 2015          Nov 199.7 50.1 149.6 69.4 9.7 4.2 55.5 0.1 − − . 579.3 59.9 61.1          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
297.3 146.2 151.1 502.2 344.5 51.2 76.4 7.9 21.2 20.9 9.0 23.7 50.8 105.6 2015          Nov 275.5 123.3 152.2 499.3 340.5 48.9 79.8 5.3 21.2 20.8 8.9 24.2 50.3 95.0          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
148.5 59.4 89.1 359.1 251.2 32.1 47.2 7.9 20.8 20.5 7.8 22.8 42.1 97.8 2015          Nov 131.2 43.2 87.9 353.4 244.9 29.2 50.7 5.3 20.8 20.5 7.8 23.4 41.6 87.5          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.7 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,234.1 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.2
2014          July 14.7 48.6 1,508.3 1,135.2 0.0 2.4 370.8 1.6 3,155.7 2,699.2 0.3 1.9 454.3
         Aug 15.3 60.2 1,512.3 1,140.9 0.0 2.3 369.1 1.6 3,155.0 2,699.5 0.3 1.4 453.8
         Sep 15.0 80.8 1,488.5 1,117.3 0.0 2.2 369.0 1.6 3,165.0 2,707.1 0.3 0.9 456.7
         Oct 15.2 61.8 1,493.6 1,126.5 0.0 2.3 364.8 1.6 3,169.0 2,711.8 0.3 1.2 455.7
         Nov 15.4 52.8 1,486.8 1,121.2 0.0 2.3 363.3 1.6 3,178.9 2,719.7 0.3 0.9 458.1
         Dec 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015          Jan 15.2 69.3 1,490.7 1,128.5 0.0 2.7 359.4 1.7 3,191.5 2,725.6 0.4 1.1 464.5
         Feb 15.2 69.7 1,486.0 1,125.7 0.0 3.1 357.2 1.6 3,205.1 2,736.8 0.4 1.3 466.6
         Mar 15.2 97.5 1,488.9 1,127.0 0.0 3.2 358.6 1.6 3,212.0 2,738.7 0.3 1.5 471.5
         Apr 15.9 91.7 1,473.6 1,117.3 0.0 3.4 352.8 1.6 3,221.1 2,745.0 0.4 1.5 474.2
         May 16.1 95.0 1,466.4 1,114.3 0.0 3.5 348.6 1.6 3,207.9 2,743.3 0.3 1.7 462.5
         June 15.1 115.4 1,424.2 1,082.1 0.0 3.3 338.8 1.6 3,200.4 2,745.2 0.3 2.4 452.5
         July 15.4 116.6 1,429.7 1,091.8 0.0 2.7 335.2 1.6 3,228.7 2,748.4 0.3 2.4 477.6
         Aug 15.2 133.6 1,418.0 1,086.8 0.0 2.1 329.1 1.6 3,230.9 2,751.1 0.3 1.9 477.5
         Sep 15.6 139.8 1,384.6 1,059.7 0.0 2.3 322.7 1.6 3,230.8 2,756.1 0.3 1.7 472.8
         Oct 16.2 140.0 1,421.3 1,100.0 0.0 2.1 319.1 1.6 3,232.0 2,764.6 0.3 1.5 465.6
         Nov 15.7 152.2 1,438.4 1,122.6 0.0 2.6 313.2 1.6 3,249.0 2,775.2 0.3 1.0 472.5
         Dec 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.7 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,234.1 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.2
Changes *
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.6 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 69.1 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.3
2014          July + 0.1 − 11.3 − 3.4 − 0.9 − − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.1
         Aug + 0.5 + 11.6 + 4.3 + 6.0 − − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep − 0.2 + 20.6 − 23.7 − 23.5 − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.0 + 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.9
         Oct + 0.1 − 19.0 + 5.1 + 9.2 − + 0.1 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 1.0
         Nov + 0.2 − 9.0 − 6.9 − 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 2.4
         Dec + 3.6 + 28.5 − 60.8 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 11.7 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.1
2015          Jan − 3.8 − 12.0 + 63.8 + 62.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 26.4 + 15.6 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 10.5
         Feb − 0.0 + 0.4 − 4.7 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 11.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.1         Mar + 0.1 + 27.8 + 3.0 + 1.4 − + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 4.9
         Apr + 0.6 − 5.7 − 15.3 − 9.7 − + 0.2 − 5.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8
         May + 0.3 + 3.3 − 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 13.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 11.7         June − 1.1 + 20.4 − 42.1 − 32.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.1
         July + 0.3 + 1.2 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 28.3 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.1
         Aug − 0.1 + 17.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         Sep + 0.3 + 6.3 − 33.3 − 27.1 − + 0.2 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.1 + 36.6 + 40.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.2         Nov − 0.6 + 12.3 + 17.3 + 22.7 − + 0.5 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.9
         Dec + 3.6 + 2.8 − 91.8 − 59.9 − − 0.9 − 31.0 + 0.1 − 14.9 − 11.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 27.1 94.5 1,134.6 167.5 967.1 0.0 11.8 3,073.9 1,455.0 945.4 604.4 69.2 31.3 2014          July
− 27.1 94.4 1,124.5 144.1 980.4 0.0 11.8 3,091.6 1,472.1 945.3 605.9 68.4 31.3          Aug − 26.9 95.2 1,117.2 155.7 961.5 0.0 11.8 3,092.6 1,474.8 941.9 606.5 69.4 31.2          Sep 
− 26.5 95.2 1,122.7 149.1 973.6 0.0 11.5 3,097.3 1,494.5 928.1 606.1 68.6 31.1          Oct 
− 26.5 95.1 1,116.1 155.8 960.2 0.0 11.5 3,116.4 1,517.9 926.7 605.3 66.5 31.1          Nov − 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9          Dec 
− 26.1 93.1 1,137.9 174.9 963.1 0.0 11.3 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 606.6 64.7 30.8 2015          Jan 
− 26.2 92.3 1,133.5 169.2 964.3 0.0 11.3 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 606.1 63.8 30.8          Feb − 25.9 92.3 1,134.4 178.0 956.4 0.0 11.2 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 603.9 63.0 30.7          Mar 
− 25.8 92.5 1,117.5 163.4 954.0 0.0 11.2 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 601.5 61.9 30.2          Apr 
− 25.7 92.8 1,103.0 164.4 938.6 0.0 11.1 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 600.0 61.0 30.2          May− 25.3 92.5 1,090.2 161.7 928.4 0.0 11.1 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 598.3 60.4 29.6          June
− 25.0 92.4 1,079.0 152.5 926.5 0.0 10.8 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 596.4 59.5 29.5          July
− 25.0 92.1 1,072.5 149.0 923.4 0.0 10.8 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 595.2 58.8 29.5          Aug − 24.9 92.0 1,076.0 153.1 922.9 0.0 10.8 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 594.6 58.1 29.5          Sep 
− 24.7 91.9 1,096.4 150.5 945.8 0.0 10.6 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 594.6 57.5 29.5          Oct 
− 24.5 92.0 1,108.0 158.2 949.7 0.0 10.5 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 594.3 56.8 29.5          Nov − 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3          Dec 
Changes *
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 0.4 + 0.5 − 10.0 + 1.2 − 11.2 − − 0.2 + 7.8 + 12.2 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.0 2014          July
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 10.0 − 23.4 + 13.3 − + 0.0 + 17.7 + 17.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0          Aug − − 0.2 + 0.7 − 7.1 + 11.6 − 18.7 − − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 3.4 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 5.5 − 6.7 + 12.1 − − 0.3 + 4.7 + 19.7 − 13.8 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 6.6 + 6.8 − 13.4 − − 0.0 + 19.2 + 23.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.0          Nov − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.0 − 28.0 + 23.0 − + 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.4 − 1.2 + 26.1 + 47.1 − 21.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 2015          Jan 
− + 0.1 − 0.9 − 4.4 − 5.6 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 8.8 − 7.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 17.0 − 14.6 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.3 − 14.4 + 1.0 − 15.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5          June
− − 0.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 9.2 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 − 2.6 + 22.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 11.6 + 7.7 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 − 2.0 − 42.4 − 27.1 − 15.2 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.6 830.4 555.7 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2014          July 0.2 1,109.1 868.6 634.1 234.5 8.1 232.3 1.1 737.9 432.1 122.7 309.4 9.5 296.4
         Aug 0.2 1,103.8 862.7 624.0 238.6 8.9 232.2 1.1 733.8 430.4 118.2 312.3 9.1 294.2
         Sep 0.2 1,098.9 855.7 607.3 248.4 8.9 234.3 1.1 741.0 429.9 111.3 318.6 7.4 303.7
         Oct 0.2 1,119.6 878.5 628.7 249.8 8.6 232.5 1.1 738.3 429.8 110.3 319.5 7.7 300.8
         Nov 0.2 1,151.0 907.8 658.2 249.7 8.7 234.5 1.1 749.8 433.9 113.5 320.4 8.3 307.6
         Dec 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015          Jan 0.2 1,213.2 966.6 684.2 282.4 10.9 235.7 1.1 770.7 445.3 117.5 327.8 7.0 318.4
         Feb 0.2 1,198.1 956.6 687.3 269.3 9.3 232.2 1.1 766.7 444.5 115.7 328.9 6.6 315.5
         Mar 0.3 1,186.6 944.4 654.9 289.5 10.9 231.4 1.1 777.0 447.4 113.2 334.2 7.2 322.4
         Apr 0.2 1,199.9 958.7 675.5 283.1 10.0 231.3 1.1 780.2 455.7 124.6 331.1 6.1 318.4
         May 0.3 1,189.7 948.9 665.0 284.0 9.1 231.7 1.1 787.3 459.0 127.1 331.8 6.3 322.0
         June 0.3 1,142.5 903.1 617.1 286.0 8.1 231.3 1.1 765.7 435.1 104.4 330.7 7.5 323.1
         July 0.3 1,149.0 911.5 625.0 286.5 6.6 230.9 1.1 760.0 433.4 103.3 330.1 5.0 321.6
         Aug 0.3 1,140.9 904.7 619.3 285.3 6.1 230.2 1.1 761.5 435.8 106.9 328.8 5.8 319.9
         Sep 0.3 1,152.8 914.7 627.4 287.4 4.4 233.7 1.1 760.7 434.9 106.6 328.3 6.0 319.8
         Oct 0.3 1,138.7 900.4 617.1 283.4 2.9 235.3 1.1 772.2 446.5 116.4 330.1 6.1 319.6
         Nov 0.3 1,112.9 873.2 598.4 274.8 2.8 237.0 1.1 784.8 450.0 103.7 346.4 6.9 327.9
         Dec 0.3 1,066.6 830.4 555.7 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
Changes *
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 92.1 − 86.2 − 82.4 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.0 + 2.1
2014          July − 0.0 + 32.1 + 33.0 + 35.7 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 7.7 + 6.6 + 5.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 + 1.4
         Aug − 0.0 − 9.3 − 9.9 − 12.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 6.4 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.6
         Sep + 0.0 − 17.7 − 19.4 − 24.7 + 5.3 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 7.1 − 8.4 + 1.3 − 1.8 + 8.0
         Oct − 0.0 + 23.9 + 24.7 + 23.5 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 6.8 − 2.9 − 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.2
         Nov + 0.0 + 32.4 + 29.3 + 30.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 6.0
         Dec − 0.0 − 33.1 − 30.7 − 44.4 + 13.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 20.8 − 23.1 − 20.2 − 2.9 − 1.9 + 4.1
2015          Jan + 0.0 + 62.4 + 57.8 + 50.3 + 7.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 20.6 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 2.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 17.1 − 12.0 + 2.2 − 14.2 − 1.5 − 3.6 − − 5.8 − 2.1 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.2
         Mar + 0.0 − 24.0 − 24.5 − 39.9 + 15.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 5.1
         Apr − 0.0 + 25.3 + 26.1 + 27.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 14.3 + 12.7 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.9
         May + 0.0 − 17.8 − 17.3 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.9         June + 0.0 − 41.3 − 40.1 − 44.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 20.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.7
         July + 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − − 9.1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 2.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.7
         Sep + 0.0 + 14.0 + 12.2 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct + 0.0 − 20.2 − 20.2 − 13.9 − 6.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 7.7 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9
         Nov + 0.0 − 38.2 − 39.4 − 25.9 − 13.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 2.7 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Dec − 0.0 − 36.9 − 33.7 − 37.8 + 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 20.7 − 18.9 − 1.9 + 0.7 − 7.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
14.3 37.7 587.4 287.2 300.2 209.6 90.5 0.1 269.1 147.3 121.8 62.8 59.0 0.9 2014          July
14.7 37.7 592.2 274.2 317.9 230.3 87.6 0.1 258.3 127.7 130.5 70.5 60.1 1.3          Aug 14.7 37.7 598.2 292.6 305.6 216.9 88.8 0.1 260.2 135.1 125.2 64.9 60.2 1.3          Sep 
14.6 37.8 597.5 289.0 308.5 220.4 88.2 0.1 260.0 137.5 122.5 62.6 59.9 1.3          Oct 
14.7 37.6 627.5 301.3 326.3 238.4 87.8 0.1 258.6 132.1 126.5 65.7 60.8 1.3          Nov 14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7          Dec 
14.0 35.8 691.4 338.7 352.6 260.2 92.5 0.1 260.9 141.4 119.5 59.2 60.3 0.7 2015          Jan 
14.0 35.7 672.5 310.8 361.7 269.4 92.3 0.1 263.7 143.1 120.7 61.8 58.9 0.8          Feb 14.1 36.1 712.5 369.6 342.9 256.1 86.9 0.1 253.6 131.2 122.4 64.7 57.7 0.9          Mar 
13.8 36.0 729.9 348.1 381.8 297.3 84.5 0.1 265.1 146.9 118.2 62.3 55.9 0.9          Apr 
13.8 36.8 714.0 357.6 356.4 270.8 85.7 0.1 265.4 142.7 122.7 70.8 51.9 0.9          May13.6 36.4 671.4 331.2 340.2 256.3 83.9 0.1 240.5 127.7 112.8 61.6 51.2 0.9          June
13.6 35.3 690.6 342.8 347.7 266.7 81.0 0.1 244.4 131.9 112.5 62.0 50.5 0.9          July
13.7 35.2 681.5 334.5 347.0 264.5 82.5 0.1 253.6 135.3 118.3 65.9 52.4 0.9          Aug 13.7 35.2 672.0 346.4 325.5 244.3 81.2 0.1 234.5 128.3 106.3 53.2 53.1 0.9          Sep 
13.5 35.2 656.9 362.9 294.0 212.7 81.3 0.1 243.4 134.6 108.8 56.6 52.3 0.8          Oct 
13.6 34.8 649.0 373.8 275.2 190.5 84.6 0.1 243.2 136.3 106.9 55.7 51.2 0.8          Nov 13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7          Dec 
Changes *
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 14.2 − 12.4 + 0.3 − 12.7 − 0.0 2015
+ 0.1 − 1.0 + 28.6 + 13.5 + 15.1 + 18.0 − 2.8 − + 11.6 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 9.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 2014          July
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 14.0 + 16.7 + 19.8 − 3.1 − − 11.5 − 20.0 + 8.4 + 7.6 + 0.8 + 0.3          Aug + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.1 − 16.7 − 16.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 − 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 0.1          Sep 
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 − 0.7 − − 0.3 + 2.4 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 30.0 + 12.2 + 17.8 + 18.1 − 0.3 − − 1.4 − 5.4 + 4.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 − 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 2.1 − 22.0 − 25.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 39.3 − 19.8 − 19.5 − 18.4 − 1.1 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 68.7 + 56.0 + 12.8 + 11.5 + 1.3 − + 35.9 + 26.3 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 2015          Jan 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 20.1 − 28.2 + 8.1 + 8.6 − 0.5 − + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 + 32.7 + 56.4 − 23.8 − 17.3 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 12.6 − 13.0 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 2.0 + 0.0          Mar 
− 0.4 − 0.0 + 25.2 − 17.7 + 42.9 + 44.3 − 1.3 − + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 20.1 + 8.0 − 28.1 − 28.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 4.8 + 3.9 + 8.2 − 4.3 − 0.0          May− 0.2 − 0.3 − 39.2 − 25.0 − 14.1 − 12.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 23.9 − 14.5 − 9.3 − 8.9 − 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 − 1.2 + 16.0 + 10.6 + 5.4 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 4.3 + 2.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.5 + 12.0 − 21.5 − 20.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 18.9 − 7.0 − 11.9 − 12.6 + 0.7 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 18.2 + 15.2 − 33.4 − 33.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.0 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.2          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 − 14.3 + 8.4 − 22.7 − 25.2 + 2.5 − − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 4.3 − 32.0 − 48.3 + 16.4 + 15.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.8 − 7.6 − 6.0 − 1.6 − 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,234.1 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.5 2,451.6
2014          July 3,155.7 2,699.5 268.1 215.3 214.6 0.7 52.8 51.6 1.2 2,887.6 2,352.9
         Aug 3,155.0 2,699.8 260.5 212.2 211.6 0.5 48.4 47.5 0.9 2,894.4 2,359.6
         Sep 3,165.0 2,707.4 270.3 220.9 220.3 0.6 49.4 49.1 0.3 2,894.7 2,360.7
         Oct 3,169.0 2,712.1 265.6 212.6 211.8 0.8 53.0 52.5 0.5 2,903.4 2,364.9
         Nov 3,178.9 2,720.0 265.7 214.6 214.1 0.4 51.1 50.7 0.4 2,913.3 2,375.5
         Dec 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015          Jan 3,191.5 2,726.0 267.9 214.7 214.0 0.7 53.1 52.8 0.4 2,923.7 2,388.4
         Feb 3,205.1 2,737.1 275.8 218.9 217.8 1.0 57.0 56.7 0.2 2,929.2 2,391.5
         Mar 3,212.0 2,739.0 278.1 220.4 219.4 1.0 57.7 57.1 0.6 2,933.9 2,399.1
         Apr 3,221.1 2,745.4 284.0 216.6 215.7 1.0 67.3 66.8 0.5 2,937.1 2,403.4
         May 3,207.9 2,743.6 272.4 215.8 214.7 1.1 56.6 55.9 0.7 2,935.5 2,407.1
         June 3,200.4 2,745.5 279.2 223.8 222.5 1.3 55.4 54.3 1.1 2,921.2 2,397.0
         July 3,228.7 2,748.7 273.0 215.4 214.0 1.3 57.6 56.5 1.1 2,955.7 2,430.2
         Aug 3,230.9 2,751.4 269.4 214.0 212.9 1.1 55.5 54.6 0.9 2,961.4 2,432.5
         Sep 3,230.8 2,756.4 271.8 218.5 217.6 0.9 53.3 52.5 0.8 2,959.0 2,428.4
         Oct 3,232.0 2,764.9 268.0 212.4 211.7 0.7 55.6 54.8 0.8 2,964.0 2,433.8
         Nov 3,249.0 2,775.5 264.2 212.9 212.3 0.6 51.3 50.9 0.4 2,984.8 2,451.1
         Dec 3,234.1 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.5 2,451.6
Changes *
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 69.1 + 54.0 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.4 + 74.1
2014          July + 8.4 + 2.2 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 8.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 10.2
         Aug − 0.8 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 3.0 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 4.1 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 6.4
         Sep + 10.0 + 7.7 + 9.7 + 8.7 + 8.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.3
         Oct + 4.1 + 4.7 − 4.7 − 8.3 − 8.5 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 4.1
         Nov + 9.9 + 7.9 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 9.8 + 10.7
         Dec − 11.7 − 7.4 − 8.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 6.8 − 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.6 + 5.1
2015          Jan + 26.4 + 15.5 + 10.7 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 8.0 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.9
         Feb + 13.5 + 11.2 + 8.0 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 3.1
         Mar + 7.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7 + 7.6
         Apr + 9.1 + 6.4 + 5.9 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.3
         May − 13.1 − 1.6 − 11.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 3.8
         June − 7.5 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 14.3 − 10.1
         July + 28.3 + 3.1 − 6.2 − 8.4 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 34.4 + 31.9
         Aug + 2.3 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 2.6         Sep − 0.1 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4
         Oct + 1.2 + 8.6 − 3.8 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 5.7
         Nov + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.9 − 0.4 + 17.6 + 14.1
         Dec − 14.9 − 11.1 − 8.6 − 5.1 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 6.3 + 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.3 256.0 1,976.3 219.2 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,151.9 249.5 1,902.4 200.9 25.0 534.7 281.4 36.0 245.4 253.4 − 2.1 2014          July
2,160.8 250.6 1,910.2 198.8 24.9 534.8 279.9 32.9 247.0 255.0 − 2.1          Aug 
2,160.3 250.3 1,910.0 200.5 24.8 534.0 277.8 32.3 245.5 256.2 − 2.1          Sep 
2,167.0 251.8 1,915.3 197.8 24.4 538.6 280.7 34.5 246.3 257.9 − 2.1          Oct 
2,175.1 252.6 1,922.5 200.5 24.3 537.7 280.1 33.8 246.3 257.6 − 2.1          Nov 
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1          Dec 
2,175.2 252.5 1,922.7 213.2 24.0 535.3 284.0 32.7 251.3 251.3 − 2.1 2015          Jan 
2,179.6 251.4 1,928.1 212.0 24.1 537.7 283.1 32.7 250.4 254.6 − 2.1          Feb 
2,180.6 251.7 1,928.9 218.6 23.8 534.8 281.9 32.3 249.5 252.9 − 2.1          Mar 
2,182.1 250.5 1,931.7 221.3 23.7 533.7 280.8 29.5 251.3 252.9 − 2.1          Apr 
2,192.6 253.2 1,939.4 214.5 23.6 528.4 280.4 29.5 250.9 248.0 − 2.1          May
2,190.5 251.5 1,939.0 206.5 23.3 524.2 278.3 28.7 249.5 246.0 − 2.0          June
2,201.5 250.8 1,950.6 228.7 23.0 525.5 276.6 28.5 248.2 248.9 − 2.0          July
2,208.2 251.0 1,957.2 224.4 22.9 528.9 275.7 28.2 247.6 253.1 − 2.0          Aug 
2,208.7 251.2 1,957.4 219.7 22.9 530.6 277.5 29.3 248.2 253.1 − 2.0          Sep 
2,220.0 253.2 1,966.8 213.8 22.7 530.2 278.5 29.3 249.2 251.8 − 2.0          Oct 
2,233.7 256.1 1,977.6 217.4 22.5 533.8 278.6 28.1 250.5 255.1 − 2.0          Nov 
2,232.3 256.0 1,976.3 219.2 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1          Dec 
Changes *
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.4 + 54.6 + 15.1 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 7.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 + 2.8 − 0.4 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.3 − − 0.0 2014          July
+ 8.5 + 1.0 + 7.5 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 1.6 − − 0.0          Aug 
− 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.2 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 1.5 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 1.7 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 8.1 + 0.8 + 7.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 1.4 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 7.8 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 9.1 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.2 + 1.5 − − 0.0 2015          Jan 
+ 4.4 − 1.1 + 5.4 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 3.4 − −          Feb 
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 1.6 − 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 10.6 + 2.8 + 7.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.9 − − 0.0          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.0 − − 0.1          June
+ 9.7 − 0.7 + 10.4 + 22.2 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 6.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 11.6 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 10.5 + 2.0 + 8.6 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − −          Nov 
− 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 6.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2013 2,354.0 1,179.5 1,159.3 935.4 223.9 1,281.1 319.2 127.7 97.3 58.9 124.2 45.7 70.0 104.9
2014          Dec 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Mar 2,400.0 1,229.7 1,192.0 987.3 204.7 1,305.7 329.9 127.4 99.6 60.9 125.0 48.2 70.0 129.2
         June 2,413.0 1,234.8 1,205.1 992.0 213.1 1,309.4 334.8 128.1 99.4 61.4 123.2 49.1 67.1 130.2         Sep 2,426.3 1,244.5 1,218.5 1,001.2 217.3 1,309.0 336.5 127.5 100.6 61.7 125.3 50.0 65.6 129.5         Dec 2,439.9 1,253.3 1,229.6 1,010.4 219.2 1,314.1 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.4
 Short-term lending
2013 217.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 180.2 4.1 33.9 6.4 12.0 40.9 3.4 6.4 22.8
2014          Dec 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Mar 219.5 − 7.7 − 7.7 184.4 3.9 34.7 6.0 13.0 42.3 3.9 6.3 25.6
         June 222.5 − 8.3 − 8.3 188.3 4.2 35.5 5.5 12.9 41.4 4.3 6.0 27.7
         Sep 217.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 183.3 4.3 34.6 5.3 12.8 43.5 4.4 5.2 26.6
         Dec 207.6 − 8.0 − 8.0 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
 Medium-term lending
2013 248.0 − 35.6 − 35.6 173.6 12.5 24.7 6.0 9.4 16.9 3.9 11.5 35.3
2014          Dec 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Mar 251.7 − 35.3 − 35.3 179.1 13.2 24.6 5.3 10.0 16.4 4.2 11.7 39.4
         June 251.5 − 35.7 − 35.7 177.9 13.6 24.3 5.2 10.2 16.1 4.3 11.5 39.3
         Sep 251.2 − 35.5 − 35.5 176.8 13.4 24.0 5.1 10.3 15.8 4.4 11.3 39.3
         Dec 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.2 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.5 11.7 41.1
 Long-term lending
2013 1,888.9 1,179.5 1,115.4 935.4 180.0 927.2 302.5 69.1 84.9 37.5 66.3 38.4 52.1 46.8
2014          Dec 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Mar 1,928.9 1,229.7 1,149.0 987.3 161.7 942.2 312.9 68.1 88.4 38.0 66.3 40.1 52.1 64.2
         June 1,939.0 1,234.8 1,161.1 992.0 169.1 943.3 317.0 68.3 88.8 38.3 65.7 40.5 49.7 63.2         Sep 1,957.4 1,244.5 1,174.5 1,001.2 173.3 948.9 318.8 68.8 90.2 38.5 66.0 41.2 49.0 63.6         Dec 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2014          Q4 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 10.0 + 8.3 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 17.9 + 4.0 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 15.6 + 1.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 4.1
         Q2 + 13.3 + 4.7 + 12.6 + 7.5 + 5.2 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 1.0 − 2.9 + 1.8         Q3 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6         Q4 + 13.7 + 9.0 + 10.9 + 9.0 + 1.9 + 4.9 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
 Short-term lending
2014          Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 6.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 2.6
2015          Q1 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 7.5 − 0.0 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Q2 + 3.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.9 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 2.1         Q3 − 4.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2         Q4 − 7.1 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 7.1 − − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.2
 Medium-term lending
2014          Q4 + 1.6 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 + 1.8 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.0
2015          Q1 + 0.8 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 − 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1         Q3 − 0.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Q4 + 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5
 Long-term lending
2014          Q4 + 14.5 + 8.5 + 9.9 + 8.3 + 1.6 + 8.6 + 3.3 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 2.6
2015          Q1 + 9.4 + 4.0 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 6.8 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6
         Q2 + 10.2 + 4.7 + 11.6 + 7.5 + 4.1 + 1.3 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 0.2         Q3 + 17.9 + 9.8 + 13.7 + 9.3 + 4.4 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 17.0 + 9.0 + 11.7 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.8
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
652.4 191.4 37.3 175.2 388.0 49.7 1,059.4 836.6 222.8 147.3 11.9 13.6 3.5 2013
644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8 2014          Dec 
645.3 188.6 33.8 173.5 390.9 48.2 1,080.0 858.2 221.8 150.0 11.3 14.4 3.9 2015          Mar 
650.7 190.9 34.8 174.6 393.1 48.1 1,089.6 866.8 222.8 151.6 11.0 14.1 3.5          June649.0 191.5 32.0 175.9 394.7 47.7 1,103.0 878.4 224.6 153.6 11.0 14.2 3.6          Sep 654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 886.6 225.1 154.5 10.1 14.2 3.5          Dec 
Short-term lending
54.5 9.3 6.8 12.1 28.1 6.8 35.8 4.2 31.6 1.8 11.9 1.1 0.0 2013
52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0 2014          Dec 
52.6 8.3 5.9 11.1 27.2 6.6 34.4 3.8 30.6 2.1 11.3 0.7 0.0 2015          Mar 
54.9 8.6 6.9 10.9 27.0 6.6 33.7 4.1 29.5 1.9 11.0 0.6 0.0          June51.0 8.6 6.2 10.4 26.1 6.3 33.8 4.2 29.6 1.7 11.0 0.6 0.0          Sep 48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 3.7 29.5 1.8 10.1 0.5 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
65.8 9.6 6.8 18.9 32.2 3.6 73.9 23.1 50.8 45.6 − 0.5 0.0 2013
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0 2014          Dec 
67.6 9.7 7.2 19.1 31.9 3.5 72.1 22.1 50.1 45.0 − 0.5 0.0 2015          Mar 
66.9 9.9 7.0 19.4 32.1 3.6 73.2 22.0 51.2 46.2 − 0.5 0.0          June
66.5 9.9 7.0 19.5 32.3 3.5 73.9 22.1 51.9 46.9 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
532.0 172.4 23.7 144.3 327.7 39.3 949.7 809.4 140.3 99.9 − 12.0 3.5 2013
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7 2014          Dec 
525.1 170.5 20.7 143.3 331.8 38.1 973.5 832.3 141.2 102.9 − 13.2 3.9 2015          Mar 
528.8 172.4 20.8 144.3 333.9 37.9 982.7 840.6 142.1 103.6 − 13.0 3.5          June
531.5 173.0 18.8 146.0 336.3 37.9 995.3 852.1 143.2 105.0 − 13.2 3.6          Sep 
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 8.4 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 4.2 + 6.4 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 2014          Q4+ 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 4.9 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.6 + 8.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3          Q2− 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 11.5 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3+ 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 9.0 + 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q4
Short-term lending
+ 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 2014          Q4
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
+ 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q2− 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2014          Q4
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q1
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 − − − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 5.7 + 2.6 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.7 + 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − + 0.3 + 0.3 2014          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 1.1 − − 0.2 + 0.1 2015          Q1
+ 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 8.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 − − 0.2 − 0.3          Q2
+ 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 12.7 + 11.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1          Q3
+ 5.0 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 8.6 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2015          Jan 3,128.6 1,537.9 919.5 253.1 666.4 28.6 637.8 606.6 64.7 30.8 25.8 3.2
         Feb 3,137.7 1,549.4 918.3 254.3 664.0 29.3 634.7 606.1 63.8 30.8 23.7 3.6
         Mar 3,131.7 1,548.8 916.0 254.0 662.0 30.8 631.1 603.9 63.0 30.7 23.4 3.6
         Apr 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 251.8 653.4 31.3 622.1 601.5 61.9 30.2 23.3 4.0
         May 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 247.2 653.2 32.3 620.9 600.0 61.0 30.2 23.2 2.2
         June 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 242.7 650.2 32.9 617.4 598.3 60.4 29.6 23.1 2.2
         July 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 241.8 668.6 33.6 635.1 596.4 59.5 29.5 22.8 1.7
         Aug 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 241.4 667.7 33.5 634.2 595.2 58.8 29.5 22.7 2.7
         Sep 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 238.9 664.6 33.2 631.4 594.6 58.1 29.5 22.7 2.6
         Oct 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 231.6 658.6 34.7 623.9 594.6 57.5 29.5 22.7 1.9
         Nov 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 239.6 657.1 35.1 622.0 594.3 56.8 29.5 22.5 2.0
         Dec 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
Changes*
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2015          Jan + 10.5 + 20.1 − 7.2 − 3.9 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.6
         Feb + 9.1 + 11.6 − 1.1 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.3         Mar − 6.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 1.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.2 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3
         May + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.8         June − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1
         July + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 0.8 + 18.5 + 0.7 + 17.8 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Aug + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.1         Sep − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 − 7.2 − 6.0 + 1.5 − 7.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Nov + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Dec − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 3.4 − 1.7 + 2.2 − 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.5
Domestic government End of year or month*
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.8 10.2 34.6 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2015          Jan 184.5 50.7 127.6 84.0 43.6 7.4 36.1 3.8 2.4 29.1 4.8 2.2
         Feb 186.8 52.4 128.0 85.4 42.7 8.0 34.7 3.8 2.6 29.0 2.9 2.4
         Mar 187.3 52.9 127.8 84.9 42.9 9.1 33.8 3.8 2.7 28.9 2.8 2.4
         Apr 185.0 52.3 126.1 83.1 43.0 9.2 33.8 3.8 2.8 28.8 2.8 2.8
         May 191.9 58.6 126.5 82.9 43.6 9.6 34.0 3.9 2.9 28.7 2.8 1.3
         June 193.8 57.8 129.1 84.7 44.3 9.7 34.7 3.8 3.2 28.3 2.8 1.4
         July 189.2 54.0 128.1 84.2 43.9 9.7 34.2 3.7 3.4 28.2 2.8 1.3
         Aug 197.1 60.8 129.2 85.3 43.8 9.7 34.1 3.7 3.5 28.2 2.8 1.9
         Sep 197.4 59.8 130.4 86.4 44.0 9.7 34.3 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 2.1
         Oct 191.6 58.7 125.6 81.3 44.3 9.8 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 1.6
         Nov 200.5 58.4 134.7 90.7 44.0 9.5 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.8 1.6
         Dec 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.8 10.2 34.6 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2015 + 10.0 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2015          Jan − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.7         Feb + 2.4 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2         Mar + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 6.9 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6         June + 1.8 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2
         July − 4.7 − 3.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Aug + 7.9 + 6.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 0.6
         Sep + 0.2 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Oct − 6.2 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5
         Nov + 8.8 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 9.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         Dec − 3.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 − 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.22015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.9 155.3 610.6 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2015          Jan 2,944.1 1,487.2 791.9 169.0 622.8 21.2 601.6 602.8 62.3 1.8 21.0 1.1
         Feb 2,950.9 1,497.1 790.3 169.0 621.3 21.3 600.0 602.3 61.2 1.8 20.9 1.2         Mar 2,944.4 1,495.9 788.2 169.1 619.1 21.7 597.4 600.1 60.2 1.8 20.6 1.2
         Apr 2,955.9 1,520.0 779.1 168.7 610.4 22.1 588.3 597.7 59.1 1.4 20.5 1.2
         May 2,966.9 1,538.7 773.9 164.4 609.6 22.7 586.9 596.2 58.0 1.4 20.4 0.9         June 2,957.9 1,542.3 763.8 157.9 605.9 23.2 582.7 594.6 57.2 1.4 20.3 0.8
         July 2,990.1 1,558.9 782.3 157.6 624.7 23.8 600.9 592.7 56.1 1.4 20.0 0.4
         Aug 2,996.7 1,569.9 780.0 156.1 623.9 23.8 600.1 591.5 55.3 1.4 19.9 0.8         Sep 2,989.4 1,570.9 773.0 152.4 620.6 23.5 597.1 590.9 54.6 1.4 19.8 0.5
         Oct 3,006.2 1,596.7 764.6 150.3 614.3 24.9 589.4 590.9 53.9 1.3 19.8 0.3
         Nov 3,024.3 1,618.5 762.0 149.0 613.0 25.6 587.5 590.5 53.3 1.4 19.7 0.4         Dec 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.9 155.3 610.6 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
Changes*
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 31.9 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.5 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.2
2015          Jan + 12.6 + 21.8 − 6.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 6.6 + 9.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Mar − 6.5 − 0.9 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Apr + 11.5 + 24.2 − 9.1 − 0.4 − 8.7 + 0.4 − 9.1 − 2.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 10.9 + 18.7 − 5.1 − 4.3 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 8.8 + 3.6 − 10.0 − 6.0 − 4.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
         July + 32.2 + 16.6 + 18.8 − 0.1 + 18.9 + 0.7 + 18.2 − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.4
         Aug + 6.6 + 11.0 − 2.3 − 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 7.1 + 0.9 − 6.7 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3
         Oct + 17.2 + 25.9 − 8.1 − 1.8 − 6.3 + 1.4 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 18.2 + 21.8 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec + 3.0 − 2.3 + 3.9 + 6.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 − 4.0 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2015          Jan 1,013.7 467.2 524.8 102.7 422.1 10.3 411.9 6.8 14.8 1.8 16.2 1.1
         Feb 1,008.7 464.6 522.4 102.3 420.2 10.3 409.9 6.8 14.7 1.8 16.2 1.2
         Mar 1,007.9 465.9 520.4 102.7 417.7 10.4 407.2 7.0 14.7 1.8 16.0 1.2
         Apr 1,007.8 474.3 511.9 102.9 408.9 10.6 398.3 7.0 14.6 1.4 16.0 1.2
         May 1,006.3 477.1 507.6 100.0 407.6 11.2 396.5 7.0 14.5 1.4 16.0 0.9
         June 997.9 476.9 499.5 95.6 403.9 11.7 392.2 7.1 14.4 1.3 16.0 0.8
         July 1,025.2 483.1 521.0 97.1 423.9 12.2 411.7 7.1 14.0 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Aug 1,029.4 488.2 520.1 97.0 423.1 12.1 411.0 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.8
         Sep 1,024.3 489.3 514.0 94.5 419.5 11.8 407.7 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.7 0.5
         Oct 1,031.8 504.5 506.3 93.2 413.1 12.9 400.2 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.3
         Nov 1,033.9 508.8 504.3 92.7 411.6 13.4 398.2 7.0 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Dec 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
Changes*
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.2
2015          Jan + 5.7 + 10.1 − 4.3 − 1.5 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Feb − 5.2 − 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Mar − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.1 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Apr − 0.2 + 8.5 − 8.5 + 0.2 − 8.8 + 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         May − 1.5 + 2.8 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2         June − 8.1 − 0.2 − 7.9 − 4.0 − 3.9 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July + 27.5 + 6.2 + 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 + 0.5 + 19.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.1 + 5.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 0.4         Sep − 5.0 + 1.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3
         Oct + 8.0 + 15.3 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 6.4 + 1.1 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 2.1 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1         Dec − 4.1 − 5.9 + 2.2 + 7.2 − 4.9 + 1.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2015          July 1,964.8 1,075.8 1,043.6 183.0 720.0 140.6 32.2 261.3 247.5 26.2 180.6 40.7
         Aug 1,967.3 1,081.6 1,049.4 185.7 722.7 141.0 32.2 259.9 246.3 25.8 180.0 40.6
         Sep 1,965.2 1,081.6 1,048.9 181.6 725.1 142.2 32.7 259.0 245.6 25.1 179.8 40.6
         Oct 1,974.4 1,092.3 1,059.7 186.8 731.0 142.0 32.5 258.3 245.0 25.0 178.8 41.2
         Nov 1,990.4 1,109.7 1,078.0 188.2 746.5 143.2 31.7 257.7 244.6 24.9 178.6 41.1
         Dec 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
Changes*
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2015          July + 4.8 + 10.4 + 9.7 + 6.0 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.5
         Aug + 2.5 + 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.2
         Sep − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 4.1 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Oct + 9.2 + 10.6 + 10.8 + 5.2 + 5.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Nov + 16.1 + 17.5 + 18.3 + 1.4 + 15.5 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Dec + 7.1 + 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.2 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2015          July 189.2 8.9 3.2 2.5 3.2 0.1 14.3 47.0 12.8 17.2 16.3 0.8 13.5
         Aug 197.1 9.7 3.2 3.5 3.0 0.1 14.3 48.1 13.1 18.0 16.2 0.8 13.5
         Sep 197.4 10.5 3.5 3.9 2.9 0.1 14.3 52.1 14.6 20.4 16.4 0.8 13.5
         Oct 191.6 8.7 3.3 2.5 2.8 0.1 14.3 48.9 14.6 17.2 16.2 0.8 13.5
         Nov 200.5 7.8 2.5 2.6 2.7 0.1 14.4 49.6 12.7 19.7 16.3 0.9 13.4
         Dec 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.2 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2015 + 10.0 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2015          July − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 7.9 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Oct − 6.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Nov + 8.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 0.5 − 2.0 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Dec − 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 201413.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.2 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 2015
13.8 60.5 200.8 11.6 189.2 585.6 576.3 9.3 42.1 0.0 4.2 − 2015          July
13.5 59.1 200.7 11.7 189.1 584.4 575.1 9.3 41.4 0.0 4.2 −          Aug 13.4 57.9 201.1 11.7 189.4 583.8 574.5 9.3 40.7 0.0 4.1 −          Sep 
13.3 57.0 201.2 12.0 189.2 583.8 574.5 9.3 40.0 0.0 4.0 −          Oct 
13.1 56.3 201.4 12.2 189.2 583.5 574.5 9.0 39.4 0.0 3.9 −          Nov 13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.2 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 1.7 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015
− 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2015          July
− 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug 
− 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Oct 
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Nov 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 201452.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.1 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 2015
46.4 24.0 9.7 7.5 5.1 0.4 86.9 14.0 54.8 16.9 1.2 − 2015          July
51.9 28.7 10.3 7.7 5.2 0.4 87.5 15.8 53.6 17.0 1.1 −          Aug 49.4 25.8 10.5 7.9 5.2 0.4 85.3 15.8 51.6 16.8 1.1 −          Sep 
48.3 24.9 10.1 8.1 5.2 0.4 85.7 15.9 51.5 17.2 1.1 −          Oct 
51.5 27.9 10.1 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.5 15.4 58.3 16.7 1.1 −          Nov 52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.1 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015
− 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 2.2 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 2015          July
+ 5.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 − + 0.6 + 1.8 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          Aug − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 −          Sep 
− 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 3.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − + 5.9 − 0.5 + 6.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 −          Nov + 0.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.3 + 2.2 + 0.8 − 0.0 −          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2015          Aug 604.3 595.2 528.5 379.6 66.6 52.9 9.1 7.4 0.2 67.9 58.8 43.2 9.1
         Sep 603.6 594.6 529.3 377.9 65.2 51.5 9.0 7.4 0.2 67.0 58.1 42.8 8.9
         Oct 603.6 594.6 530.7 379.5 64.0 50.2 9.0 7.4 0.2 66.3 57.5 42.2 8.8
         Nov 603.2 594.3 531.5 377.6 62.8 49.0 9.0 7.4 0.2 65.9 56.8 41.7 9.0
         Dec 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 2.3 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
Changes*
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2015          Aug − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Sep − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2
         Oct + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1
         Nov − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.2
         Dec + 2.1 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 2.2 − 0.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2015          Aug 1,118.0 237.6 30.6 390.0 85.2 105.6 2.5 24.7 5.7 987.7 0.2 0.2 37.0 0.7
         Sep 1,121.2 232.0 32.9 388.1 92.2 115.4 2.3 25.9 5.5 979.9 0.2 0.2 37.0 0.5
         Oct 1,132.2 227.7 32.0 396.3 97.2 119.9 2.5 27.4 5.9 984.9 0.3 0.2 36.8 0.5
         Nov 1,133.0 221.3 32.0 403.8 93.3 116.5 2.6 29.2 6.3 987.3 0.3 0.2 38.0 0.5
         Dec 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
Changes*
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2015          Aug − 8.9 − 4.9 + 1.8 − 4.1 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Sep + 3.3 − 5.7 + 2.3 − 1.9 + 7.0 + 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 7.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Oct + 11.0 − 4.4 − 1.0 + 8.3 + 5.1 + 4.5 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Nov + 0.7 − 6.4 + 0.0 + 7.4 − 3.9 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0         Dec − 57.3 − 32.1 − 1.7 − 19.7 − 4.7 − 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 49.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 6.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 22 205.2 43.6 0.0 16.9 21.0 82.5 17.0 17.6 1.6 21.1 149.0 5.7 4.0 9.0 105.4
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015          Oct 21 214.9 44.7 0.0 17.6 16.3 92.0 17.6 21.7 2.0 22.9 157.2 5.3 3.1 9.6 9.4
         Nov 21 213.8 43.1 0.0 17.7 16.1 92.4 17.7 21.7 2.0 22.3 157.3 5.4 2.4 9.6 9.0         Dec 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 9.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Oct 12 149.6 28.0 − 9.6 11.9 71.8 15.1 9.2 1.3 18.9 103.6 4.9 3.1 6.4 5.7         Nov 12 148.5 26.6 − 9.6 11.8 72.1 15.2 9.2 1.3 18.4 103.8 5.0 2.4 6.4 6.1         Dec 12 148.3 26.7 − 9.4 11.6 72.9 14.9 8.9 1.4 17.6 105.0 5.0 2.4 6.7 6.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Oct 9 65.3 16.7 0.0 8.0 4.4 20.3 2.5 12.5 0.7 3.9 53.6 0.3 − 3.2 3.7         Nov 9 65.3 16.5 0.0 8.0 4.3 20.4 2.6 12.5 0.6 3.9 53.5 0.4 − 3.2 3.0         Dec 9 65.3 16.4 0.0 8.1 4.2 20.5 2.6 12.5 0.7 3.7 54.2 0.3 − 3.2 3.2
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2013 29.7 2.6 6.7 47.9 30.3 41.3 18.0 4.3 6.5 3.7 16.8 13.9 8.0 11.6 9.4 0.4
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015          Oct 2.1 0.0 0.6 4.3 2.7 3.8 1.7 0.4 0.5 0.3 1.6 16.1 8.3 0.7 0.0
         Nov 2.3 0.0 0.7 3.9 2.3 3.4 1.5 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.6 16.1 8.2 0.7 0.0
         Dec 2.4 2.2 0.7 4.0 2.6 3.9 1.8 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.7 15.6 8.1 0.8 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Oct 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.9 2.9 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.3 11.6 5.0 0.5 0.0
         Nov 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 11.5 5.0 0.5 0.0         Dec 1.6 1.4 0.4 2.9 1.9 3.0 1.4 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.4 11.2 5.0 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2015          Oct 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.2 0.2 0.0         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.2 0.2 0.0         Dec 0.8 0.7 0.4 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.4 3.1 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2012 55 210 2,042.7 552.1 537.9 179.5 358.4 14.2 550.2 427.1 16.9 410.2 123.1 940.4 671.8
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015          Feb 53 202 2,152.9 589.9 573.2 208.7 364.5 16.7 666.9 539.4 14.7 524.7 127.5 896.1 626.0
         Mar 53 201 2,175.3 602.0 585.8 218.5 367.3 16.2 668.1 547.7 14.9 532.8 120.4 905.2 660.9
         Apr 53 200 2,127.8 622.4 606.5 210.0 396.5 15.9 660.4 535.8 14.8 521.0 124.6 845.1 588.5
         May 53 201 2,109.5 630.1 613.5 198.6 414.9 16.6 650.5 521.1 14.7 506.4 129.4 828.9 576.7
         June 53 201 1,970.5 578.9 561.3 196.5 364.8 17.6 642.2 520.2 14.5 505.6 122.1 749.3 513.7
         July 53 203 1,983.3 579.6 561.7 199.1 362.6 17.9 632.2 512.8 14.5 498.3 119.5 771.5 538.8
         Aug 52 202 1,966.9 602.1 584.4 189.0 395.4 17.7 627.2 511.0 14.3 496.7 116.2 737.6 544.1
         Sep 51 199 1,977.3 586.4 568.5 180.7 387.8 17.9 624.9 507.9 13.9 494.0 117.0 766.0 552.1
         Oct 51 199 1,946.7 558.2 540.2 152.9 387.3 18.0 633.7 513.2 13.9 499.3 120.5 754.8 525.1
         Nov 51 199 1,980.5 533.8 515.8 150.0 365.8 18.0 658.8 528.5 14.6 513.9 130.4 787.9 557.2
Changes *
2013 + 1 − 1 − 279.1 − 98.0 − 97.7 − 37.9 − 59.8 − 0.3 − 13.7 − 2.1 − 5.9 + 3.8 − 11.7 − 167.4 − 186.2
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2015          Mar − − 1 − 7.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 10.1 − 0.8 − 13.0 − 3.8 + 0.2 − 4.0 − 9.2 + 7.1 + 34.8
         Apr − − 1 − 21.6 + 31.9 + 31.9 − 8.5 + 40.5 − 0.0 + 5.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 6.1 − 58.9 − 72.4
         May − + 1 − 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.0 − 11.4 + 12.4 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 20.6 − 0.1 − 20.5 + 3.7 − 16.1 − 16.7
         June − − − 137.5 − 45.7 − 46.8 − 2.1 − 44.7 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 3.9 − 6.5 − 78.1 − 59.0
         July + 0 + 2 + 11.1 − 4.4 − 4.5 + 2.6 − 7.1 + 0.2 − 16.6 − 13.0 − 0.1 − 12.9 − 3.6 + 20.5 + 21.1
         Aug − 1 − 1 − 14.3 + 28.9 + 28.9 − 10.1 + 38.9 + 0.0 + 4.2 + 6.1 − 0.2 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 31.9 + 10.5
         Sep − 1 − 3 + 10.3 − 15.7 − 15.9 − 8.4 − 7.6 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 0.9 + 28.3 + 8.1
         Oct − − − 32.3 − 33.6 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 2.4 − 12.9 − 31.3
         Nov − − + 30.2 − 35.3 − 34.8 − 2.9 − 31.9 − 0.5 + 10.7 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 7.8 + 29.4 + 23.8
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2012 35 83 458.7 199.5 166.3 94.5 71.8 33.2 204.7 162.1 30.6 131.5 42.5 54.6 −
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015          Feb 28 63 405.8 161.7 146.7 85.2 61.5 15.0 183.5 150.7 22.4 128.3 32.8 60.6 −
         Mar 28 63 412.4 163.5 148.5 86.9 61.6 15.0 187.0 154.5 22.4 132.1 32.6 61.8 −
         Apr 27 62 404.1 161.8 147.0 85.9 61.1 14.8 184.1 152.7 22.3 130.4 31.5 58.2 −
         May 27 62 406.3 165.5 151.2 88.4 62.8 14.3 185.7 155.1 22.1 132.9 30.6 55.0 −
         June 27 62 386.0 140.5 124.6 67.1 57.4 15.9 188.8 155.6 22.9 132.7 33.1 56.7 −
         July 25 60 377.2 131.4 116.0 65.2 50.9 15.4 190.0 156.3 22.5 133.8 33.7 55.8 −
         Aug 25 60 382.5 136.1 121.6 67.2 54.4 14.5 185.4 152.3 22.4 129.9 33.1 61.0 −
         Sep 25 59 386.2 133.4 119.3 58.0 61.2 14.1 186.1 152.0 22.8 129.2 34.2 66.7 −
         Oct 25 59 380.8 130.3 114.9 55.6 59.2 15.4 185.8 152.7 22.8 129.9 33.0 64.8 −
         Nov 25 59 379.5 121.1 107.4 44.5 62.8 13.7 191.7 158.3 22.5 135.8 33.3 66.8 −
Changes *
2013 − 2 − 8 − 28.7 − 9.0 − 5.7 − 3.1 − 2.7 − 3.3 − 17.2 − 11.5 − 4.6 − 7.0 − 5.7 − 2.5 −
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2015          Mar − − + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.2 + 1.2 −
         Apr − 1 − 1 − 4.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 −
         May − − + 0.1 + 2.7 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.8 − 3.2 −
         June − − − 18.7 − 24.3 − 26.0 − 21.3 − 4.8 + 1.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 2.5 + 1.7 −
         July − 2 − 2 − 10.4 − 9.9 − 9.2 − 2.0 − 7.2 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 1.0 −
         Aug − − + 7.9 + 5.8 + 6.5 + 2.0 + 4.5 − 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.6 + 5.3 −
         Sep − − 1 + 3.9 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 9.1 + 6.9 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 1.0 + 5.7 −
         Oct − − − 7.2 − 4.0 − 5.1 − 2.4 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 −
         Nov − − − 4.8 − 10.9 − 8.8 − 11.1 + 2.3 − 2.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2016
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,054.8 727.7 371.2 356.5 327.1 34.7 26.9 7.8 292.4 127.0 39.9 821.1 670.8 2012
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,161.1 786.5 436.9 349.6 374.6 24.1 18.9 5.2 350.5 139.4 47.8 804.6 625.6 2015          Feb 
1,153.3 781.8 424.9 356.9 371.5 24.9 19.6 5.3 346.6 145.8 48.4 827.7 661.5          Mar 
1,189.2 819.1 428.2 390.9 370.1 24.4 19.0 5.3 345.7 142.2 47.7 748.8 586.8          Apr 
1,191.2 822.8 425.5 397.2 368.4 22.5 17.1 5.4 345.9 144.3 48.2 725.9 574.7          May1,139.6 798.9 433.8 365.1 340.7 20.4 15.3 5.1 320.3 144.5 47.7 638.7 509.5          June
1,143.4 792.8 417.7 375.1 350.5 20.4 15.8 4.7 330.1 144.1 47.6 648.1 536.0          July
1,144.2 797.5 416.5 381.0 346.7 19.9 15.4 4.6 326.8 138.3 47.3 637.1 537.1          Aug 1,122.3 774.4 419.2 355.3 347.8 19.4 14.9 4.5 328.4 141.6 47.3 666.1 544.8          Sep 
1,124.6 763.8 406.5 357.3 360.8 19.7 15.0 4.7 341.1 141.0 47.6 633.5 520.6          Oct 
1,124.3 742.0 377.3 364.7 382.3 22.0 17.0 5.0 360.3 138.6 48.4 669.2 554.0          Nov 
Changes *
− 142.1 −118.2 − 44.3 − 74.0 − 23.9 − 10.4 − 7.7 − 2.7 − 13.4 − 1.5 + 1.2 − 136.7 − 186.7 2013+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014
− 27.6 − 15.6 − 11.9 − 3.7 − 11.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 12.8 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 13.5 + 35.8 2015          Mar 
+ 53.4 + 47.1 + 3.3 + 43.8 + 6.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 70.6 − 74.6          Apr 
− 4.0 − 2.2 − 2.7 + 0.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 22.9 − 17.4          May− 46.0 − 18.5 + 8.3 − 26.8 − 27.5 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 25.5 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 87.2 − 60.9          June
− 1.6 − 11.3 − 16.1 + 4.9 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 9.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 + 22.1          July
+ 7.6 + 11.2 − 1.2 + 12.4 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.8 − 0.3 − 11.0 + 6.7          Aug − 22.1 − 23.2 + 2.7 − 25.9 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 29.0 + 7.7          Sep 
− 2.7 − 15.5 − 12.7 − 2.8 + 12.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 12.5 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 32.6 − 28.7          Oct 
− 11.5 − 33.4 − 29.2 − 4.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 19.6 − 6.0 + 0.9 + 35.7 + 24.6          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
356.8 207.7 120.4 87.2 149.2 22.0 17.8 4.2 127.1 24.9 32.1 44.9 − 2012
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
310.6 183.8 105.1 78.7 126.8 18.1 12.9 5.3 108.7 17.8 26.7 50.8 − 2015          Feb 
316.1 182.7 102.1 80.6 133.4 18.5 13.3 5.2 114.9 17.6 27.1 51.6 −          Mar 
313.7 179.1 99.3 79.8 134.5 14.9 13.1 1.8 119.7 16.4 26.2 47.9 −          Apr 
320.5 185.9 102.2 83.7 134.6 14.0 12.3 1.8 120.6 13.4 26.9 45.5 −          May
296.1 157.1 79.5 77.6 139.0 14.1 11.6 2.5 125.0 18.4 26.8 44.7 −          June
289.0 155.5 78.2 77.3 133.5 14.2 11.7 2.5 119.4 17.9 26.4 43.9 −          July
298.2 160.9 82.3 78.6 137.3 13.9 11.4 2.5 123.3 14.3 26.2 43.8 −          Aug 
301.6 168.9 94.6 74.3 132.7 14.4 11.9 2.5 118.2 14.4 26.3 44.0 −          Sep 
298.3 166.2 91.7 74.5 132.1 14.8 12.3 2.5 117.3 13.4 26.5 42.6 −          Oct 
293.4 159.3 90.2 69.0 134.1 11.8 9.2 2.6 122.3 14.8 26.7 44.7 −          Nov 
Changes *
− 18.9 − 4.6 − 7.0 + 2.4 − 14.3 − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 10.7 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 4.1 − 2013
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
+ 2.6 − 2.8 − 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 2015          Mar 
+ 0.4 − 1.9 − 2.8 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 3.4 + 5.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.9 −          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 5.8 + 2.9 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.8 − 3.0 −          May
− 23.1 − 28.0 − 22.7 − 5.3 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.7 + 4.8 + 5.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 −          June
− 8.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 6.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 6.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 −          July
+ 11.0 + 6.5 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 4.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 4.7 − 3.6 − 0.2 + 0.6 −          Aug 
+ 3.4 + 8.0 + 12.3 − 4.3 − 4.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −          Sep 
− 4.7 − 3.5 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 −          Oct 
− 7.8 − 8.6 − 1.5 − 7.1 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2016
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 8 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 9 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015          Oct 11,351.4 113.5 113.1 493.8 380.8 0.0
         Nov ......
         Dec 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016          Jan  p ... ... 113.9 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 8 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015          Oct 3,133,471 27.6 31,335 31,163 150,671 119,508 0
         Nov .......
         Dec 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016          Jan  p 3,155,629 ... 31,556 31,385 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Special purpose Regional institutions
Maintenance Regional banks banks and build- of credit cooperatives
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and and credit ing and loan
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks cooperatives Mortgage banks associations beginning in 1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,914 556 1,409
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 10,230 601 1,531
2012 8 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 5,262 248 871
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,479 239 906
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,753 216 934
2015          Oct 6,219 5,217 2,102 10,248 6,039 223 1,114
         Nov .......
         Dec 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 6,100 226 1,127
2016          Jan 5,941 5,215 2,140 10,593 6,176 238 1,082
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and depo- money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are sits with building and loan associa- of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but tions) with agreed maturities of up Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 to 2 years to banks in non-euro-
years requirements area countries to 2 years institution beginning in 1 
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 8 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015          Oct 2,050,940 2,368 395,402 592,510 92,246
         Nov . . . . .
         Dec 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016          Jan 2,092,326 2,016 366,159 592,060 103,068
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at national central
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of allowance. 8The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, was 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012 ,i t
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve has stood at 1%. 9Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum allowance,
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years is 1%. including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required reserves of the
4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2016
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2007 Jan                1 2.70
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2016 Jan                  6 70,632 70,632 0.05−−−7
         Jan                13 65,742 65,742 0.05−−−7
         Jan                20 65,197 65,964 0.05−−−7
         Jan                27 68,964 68,964 0.05−−−7
         Feb                  3 61,227 61,227 0.05−−−7
         Feb                10 60,200 60,200 0.05−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2015 Nov                26 21,777 21,777 2 ... − − − 91
         Dec                16 18,304 18,304 0.05−−− 1,015
         Dec                17 11,710 11,710 2 ... − − − 105
2016 Jan                28 13,562 13,562 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2015          July − 0.12 − 0.13 − 0.07 − 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.17
         Aug − 0.12 − 0.14 − 0.09 − 0.03 0.04 0.09 0.16         Sep − 0.14 − 0.15 − 0.11 − 0.04 0.04 0.09 0.15
         Oct − 0.14 − 0.15 − 0.12 − 0.05 0.02 0.06 0.13
         Nov − 0.13 − 0.16 − 0.14 − 0.09 − 0.02 0.02 0.08         Dec − 0.20 − 0.23 − 0.19 − 0.13 − 0.04 0.00 0.06
2016          Jan − 0.24 − 0.26 − 0.22 − 0.15 − 0.06 − 0.01 0.04
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Dec 0.67 92,021 1.85 227,138 0.36 80,954 2.59 19,152
2015          Jan 0.66 89,436 1.82 226,464 0.35 79,358 2.52 18,930
         Feb 0.64 89,570 1.81 226,183 0.33 79,398 2.44 18,974
         Mar 0.62 89,298 1.79 225,561 0.32 78,982 2.36 19,063
         Apr 0.59 88,530 1.77 224,767 0.30 79,019 2.29 18,947
         May 0.57 86,761 1.76 224,571 0.30 77,340 2.26 19,282
         June 0.54 84,531 1.75 224,254 0.29 74,338 2.22 19,325
         July 0.52 82,865 1.73 221,848 0.27 76,685 2.19 17,642
         Aug 0.51 81,011 1.71 221,355 0.26 77,081 2.17 17,717
         Sep 0.50 79,461 1.70 221,031 0.26 75,281 2.17 17,611
         Oct 0.49 78,623 1.69 220,371 0.25 74,750 2.15 17,702
         Nov 0.48 77,788 1.67 219,914 0.24 76,639 2.09 17,194
         Dec 0.46 77,305 1.66 221,638 0.22 79,582 2.04 17,364
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Dec 2.87 5,179 2.71 28,208 3.67 1,010,175 7.52 56,685 4.79 76,940 4.81 304,322
2015          Jan 2.85 5,263 2.68 28,082 3.64 1,008,817 7.57 55,840 4.76 76,665 4.77 303,620
         Feb 2.79 5,119 2.65 27,981 3.62 1,011,149 7.57 55,246 4.74 76,178 4.75 304,176
         Mar 2.79 5,188 2.62 27,863 3.59 1,012,369 7.62 57,477 4.71 76,470 4.72 303,927
         Apr 2.72 5,144 2.59 27,828 3.56 1,015,337 7.51 56,137 4.66 77,262 4.67 304,710
         May 2.69 5,138 2.56 27,817 3.53 1,019,301 7.47 55,239 4.62 77,540 4.64 306,013
         June 2.68 5,138 2.52 27,830 3.50 1,022,718 7.60 56,765 4.58 77,795 4.62 305,203
         July 2.64 5,301 2.49 27,836 3.46 1,028,020 7.46 54,891 4.54 78,042 4.59 306,587
         Aug 2.63 5,233 2.46 27,881 3.44 1,032,080 7.46 54,768 4.51 78,424 4.56 307,560
         Sep 2.64 5,135 2.44 27,890 3.41 1,036,799 7.55 55,936 4.48 78,671 4.54 306,905
         Oct 2.62 5,160 2.41 27,887 3.38 1,041,492 7.43 54,093 4.44 79,409 4.51 307,750
         Nov 2.61 5,139 2.38 27,838 3.36 1,044,861 7.39 53,821 4.42 79,222 4.49 308,002
         Dec 2.62 5,028 2.36 27,692 3.33 1,047,658 7.38 54,845 4.39 79,344 4.46 306,503
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Dec 3.01 128,996 2.56 128,825 3.05 574,492
2015          Jan 2.98 129,835 2.54 129,362 3.02 575,205
         Feb 2.97 132,522 2.52 128,329 3.00 577,591
         Mar 3.00 132,002 2.50 127,655 2.96 577,082
         Apr 2.98 129,602 2.46 126,479 2.93 578,295
         May 2.91 130,402 2.45 128,043 2.91 580,567
         June 2.89 134,307 2.43 127,057 2.88 580,448
         July 2.80 130,434 2.43 125,698 2.85 585,342
         Aug 2.82 130,317 2.41 126,738 2.84 587,082
         Sep 2.86 132,444 2.39 126,160 2.82 585,043
         Oct 2.80 130,602 2.36 127,257 2.80 587,398
         Nov 2.82 128,922 2.33 129,015 2.78 594,272
         Dec 2.77 125,780 2.29 129,455 2.74 593,030
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Dec 
0.22 1,007,229 0.37 9,654 0.79 749 1.13 1,266 0.61 530,260 0.75 76,202
2015          Jan 0.22 1,017,766 0.53 8,558 0.87 856 1.08 1,305 0.58 528,544 0.73 77,361
         Feb 0.20 1,030,249 0.53 7,278 0.71 886 1.07 1,131 0.54 529,378 0.70 76,071
         Mar 0.17 1,027,392 0.39 8,124 0.81 771 1.01 1,049 0.51 528,471 0.65 74,766
         Apr 0.16 1,043,564 0.34 7,663 0.77 653 0.94 952 0.48 528,261 0.61 72,608
         May 0.16 1,058,904 0.36 5,630 0.74 657 0.94 884 0.47 528,271 0.58 71,013
         June 0.15 1,062,893 0.29 6,524 0.70 703 0.88 880 0.46 527,934 0.56 69,686
         July 0.14 1,073,284 0.33 6,953 0.74 656 0.93 866 0.44 527,609 0.54 68,185
         Aug 0.14 1,079,170 0.32 5,546 0.65 636 0.94 879 0.43 527,949 0.52 66,653
         Sep 0.14 1,079,060 0.34 6,158 0.87 668 1.12 971 0.42 528,705 0.51 65,229
         Oct 0.15 1,089,962 0.34 5,760 0.71 793 0.90 1,088 0.41 529,980 0.49 63,966
         Nov 0.14 1,107,307 0.34 5,900 0.69 840 0.89 1,196 0.40 530,810 0.47 62,774
         Dec 0.13 1,111,195 0.28 6,140 0.50 1,161 0.97 1,379 0.39 533,865 0.45 61,900
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Dec 
0.09 344,692 0.15 16,156 0.48 781 1.36 931
2015          Jan 0.08 337,454 0.15 13,140 0.47 398 0.47 654
         Feb 0.07 333,734 0.17 12,552 0.67 437 0.48 584
         Mar 0.07 337,419 0.15 15,096 0.33 775 0.45 863
         Apr 0.06 343,035 0.11 15,562 0.36 612 0.46 660
         May 0.06 342,155 0.12 10,161 0.33 1,010 0.55 634
         June 0.06 342,151 0.20 10,205 0.43 484 0.41 512
         July 0.06 351,672 0.17 10,002 0.31 565 0.61 1,243
         Aug 0.06 354,182 0.11 8,622 0.30 312 0.73 305
         Sep 0.05 357,208 0.15 8,732 0.22 723 0.54 351
         Oct 0.05 373,013 0.10 10,805 0.28 798 0.43 528
         Nov 0.05 377,900 0.11 10,676 0.39 574 0.56 326
         Dec 0.04 375,464 0.07 14,914 0.36 1,338 0.57 872
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2014          Dec 
2.11 8,817 2.15 2,843 1.80 4,820 2.86 1,162 2.33 2,835 1.95 3,191 3.00 881 2.32 1,810
2015          Jan 2.20 7,282 2.11 3,232 1.91 4,042 2.92 1,027 2.39 2,213 2.05 2,683 3.05 784 2.31 1,457
         Feb 2.04 6,019 2.00 2,014 1.73 3,259 2.85 797 2.23 1,963 1.91 1,916 3.06 570 2.12 1,302         Mar 2.08 8,382 2.03 3,008 1.81 4,242 2.89 1,121 2.17 3,019 1.94 2,718 3.02 869 2.17 1,968
         Apr 2.03 7,162 1.92 2,656 1.77 3,917 2.83 934 2.15 2,311 1.94 2,381 2.97 737 2.07 1,602
         May 1.95 6,519 1.91 2,062 1.69 3,364 2.78 815 2.03 2,340 1.96 1,983 2.92 617 1.95 1,628         June 1.95 8,380 2.02 2,716 1.69 4,215 2.74 998 2.05 3,167 2.01 2,452 2.84 771 2.04 2,119
         July 2.08 8,720 1.92 3,489 1.75 4,272 2.75 1,149 2.27 3,299 1.93 2,649 2.91 868 2.21 2,152
         Aug 2.12 6,485 2.01 2,170 1.88 3,121 2.72 909 2.21 2,455 2.06 1,801 2.83 694 2.16 1,665         Sep 2.19 6,448 1.99 2,333 1.91 3,289 2.96 838 2.30 2,321 1.96 1,949 3.21 618 2.23 1,576
         Oct 2.07 7,280 1.93 2,886 1.76 3,823 2.75 966 2.29 2,491 1.97 2,264 2.88 745 2.21 1,636
         Nov 2.03 6,561 1.97 2,146 1.75 3,295 2.74 872 2.17 2,394 2.07 1,872 2.81 694 2.13 1,556         Dec 2.05 8,344 2.03 2,796 1.81 4,005 2.75 1,136 2.11 3,203 2.06 2,469 2.80 886 2.06 2,163
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Dec 6.01 5.94 5,371 7.85 847 4.22 383 4.89 2,448 7.21 2,540
2015          Jan 6.47 6.38 7,032 7.70 1,519 4.82 358 4.99 2,774 7.52 3,900
         Feb 6.50 6.42 7,275 7.69 1,431 4.74 301 5.08 2,808 7.45 4,166
         Mar 6.08 6.01 8,735 6.98 1,593 4.84 370 4.81 3,556 6.99 4,809
         Apr 6.18 6.11 8,169 7.01 1,553 5.00 326 4.94 3,104 6.95 4,739
         May 6.31 6.24 7,346 7.46 1,458 5.08 304 4.94 2,839 7.20 4,203
         June 6.37 6.29 8,006 7.63 1,547 4.83 327 4.98 3,211 7.33 4,468
         July 6.48 6.40 8,959 7.81 1,769 5.09 361 5.01 3,554 7.47 5,044
         Aug 6.34 6.26 7,313 7.71 1,263 5.33 309 4.98 3,020 7.31 3,984
         Sep 6.28 6.21 7,331 7.63 1,200 5.20 338 4.94 3,052 7.28 3,941
         Oct 6.28 6.20 7,233 7.69 1,135 5.17 309 4.88 3,104 7.36 3,820
         Nov 6.21 6.15 6,657 7.58 1,055 5.24 276 4.90 2,993 7.32 3,388
         Dec 6.03 5.97 6,067 7.30 934 5.67 316 4.78 2,867 7.19 2,884
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Dec . 3.46 233 . . 3.13 27 3.96 124 2.81 82
2015          Jan . 3.34 236 . . 2.77 36 3.72 120 3.02 80
         Feb . 3.10 258 . . 3.01 25 3.76 117 2.46 116
         Mar . 3.33 276 . . 3.04 29 3.78 149 2.73 98
         Apr . 3.15 280 . . 2.58 28 3.77 138 2.53 114
         May . 3.30 226 . . 2.86 23 3.69 128 2.78 75
         June . 3.11 301 . . 2.86 35 3.59 156 2.50 110
         July . 3.44 281 . . 2.81 28 3.93 156 2.85 97
         Aug . 3.49 240 . . 3.05 18 3.86 144 2.92 78
         Sep . 3.28 238 . . 2.52 38 3.90 116 2.78 84
         Oct . 3.33 244 . . 2.33 41 3.87 131 2.89 72
         Nov . 3.58 218 . . 2.84 23 3.90 136 3.14 59
         Dec . 3.39 219 . . 2.72 22 3.89 128 2.66 69
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Dec 2.17 2.13 18,500 2.23 3,583 2.22 2,762 1.96 2,015 2.09 7,445 2.19 6,278
2015          Jan 2.15 1.96 19,769 1.80 6,334 2.23 2,606 1.95 2,006 2.02 6,927 1.83 8,230
         Feb 2.01 1.96 17,048 2.16 3,701 2.28 2,199 1.87 1,753 1.86 6,492 1.99 6,604
         Mar 1.92 1.88 21,134 2.05 4,817 2.19 2,760 1.88 2,118 1.77 7,693 1.88 8,563
         Apr 1.91 1.87 20,486 1.94 4,301 2.11 2,640 1.83 1,935 1.70 7,330 1.95 8,581
         May 1.81 1.77 19,549 1.95 4,229 2.20 2,315 1.84 1,754 1.61 7,123 1.78 8,357
         June 1.89 1.85 24,015 1.98 5,330 2.11 2,798 1.81 2,197 1.72 9,297 1.92 9,723
         July 2.04 1.99 25,310 2.06 6,017 2.17 2,915 1.91 2,502 1.86 10,095 2.10 9,798
         Aug 2.09 2.06 19,745 2.15 4,445 2.27 2,290 1.95 1,939 1.92 7,566 2.15 7,950
         Sep 2.07 2.03 19,161 2.08 4,209 2.17 2,344 1.98 1,851 1.92 7,276 2.12 7,690
         Oct 2.07 2.05 19,874 2.04 5,455 2.11 2,577 1.99 2,125 1.94 7,230 2.14 7,942
         Nov 2.04 2.02 18,426 2.11 4,212 2.27 2,190 1.94 1,874 1.89 7,319 2.09 7,043
         Dec 1.98 1.95 19,521 2.02 4,769 2.16 2,713 1.88 2,045 1.83 7,385 2.01 7,378
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Dec . 2.06 8,434 . . 2.23 1,060 1.80 1,024 2.01 3,345 2.15 3,005
2015          Jan . 1.79 10,246 . . 2.16 1,063 1.82 1,061 1.93 3,426 1.60 4,696
         Feb . 1.89 8,025 . . 2.31 895 1.69 945 1.77 3,166 1.96 3,019
         Mar . 1.79 9,735 . . 2.12 1,130 1.68 1,050 1.69 3,663 1.82 3,892
         Apr . 1.87 9,786 . . 2.07 1,083 1.59 1,021 1.63 3,549 2.09 4,133
         May . 1.68 9,274 . . 2.16 879 1.56 849 1.54 3,669 1.74 3,877
         June . 1.76 11,120 . . 2.02 1,096 1.59 1,090 1.65 4,502 1.84 4,432
         July . 1.91 11,976 . . 2.15 1,134 1.69 1,314 1.80 4,906 2.03 4,622
         Aug . 1.98 9,203 . . 2.23 794 1.71 1,016 1.86 3,653 2.11 3,740
         Sep . 1.96 8,434 . . 2.13 912 1.74 878 1.87 3,334 2.07 3,310
         Oct . 1.99 9,323 . . 2.10 995 1.71 1,063 1.86 3,583 2.16 3,682
         Nov . 1.94 8,245 . . 2.21 812 1.69 888 1.83 3,378 2.05 3,167
         Dec . 1.86 8,294 . . 2.06 969 1.63 915 1.77 3,272 1.95 3,138
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2014          Dec 
9.20 42,857 9.27 36,194 15.42 3,815 4.31 63,192 4.33 62,988
2015          Jan 9.22 41,793 9.23 35,380 15.45 3,799 4.31 63,695 4.32 63,497
         Feb 9.22 41,287 9.24 34,873 15.42 3,786 4.24 66,274 4.25 66,045
         Mar 9.21 43,126 9.25 36,566 15.39 3,817 4.21 66,465 4.22 66,233
         Apr 9.10 41,749 9.16 35,136 15.44 3,751 4.15 64,534 4.17 64,316
         May 8.99 41,166 9.03 34,577 15.44 3,755 4.09 65,569 4.10 65,334
         June 9.01 43,164 9.06 36,409 15.28 3,864 4.08 68,150 4.09 67,919
         July 8.90 41,364 8.92 34,649 15.36 3,861 3.97 64,222 3.98 63,998
         Aug 8.91 41,624 8.93 34,639 15.39 3,989 4.01 64,895 4.03 64,693
         Sep 8.95 42,843 9.01 35,907 15.43 3,899 4.08 65,570 4.10 65,322
         Oct 8.89 41,116 8.89 34,203 15.43 3,971 4.00 62,917 4.01 62,664
         Nov 8.82 40,622 8.82 33,577 15.32 4,064 3.92 65,212 3.94 64,959
         Dec 8.69 41,920 8.80 34,543 15.31 3,938 3.94 61,523 3.96 61,300
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2014          Dec 1.87 72,853 1.94 21,021 2.75 7,808 3.01 1,630 2.19 1,648 1.63 48,092 2.06 3,080 2.04 10,595
2015          Jan 1.67 66,661 1.60 27,284 2.62 7,524 3.09 1,283 1.42 3,073 1.45 45,278 1.90 2,366 1.88 7,137
         Feb 1.59 53,118 1.43 18,293 2.69 6,474 3.04 1,123 2.02 1,159 1.28 37,674 1.63 1,526 1.97 5,162         Mar 1.73 62,691 1.76 20,557 2.67 8,150 2.94 1,516 1.98 1,510 1.49 41,003 1.63 2,066 1.75 8,446
         Apr 1.68 57,793 1.68 21,847 2.53 7,621 3.00 1,359 1.89 1,344 1.43 40,212 1.75 1,671 1.89 5,586
         May 1.66 50,883 1.63 16,561 2.60 6,817 2.91 1,277 1.87 1,334 1.38 33,591 1.92 1,496 1.75 6,368         June 1.71 68,584 1.86 19,621 2.67 8,097 2.87 1,487 1.99 1,733 1.41 43,785 1.91 2,647 1.95 10,835
         July 1.68 69,195 1.64 24,802 2.64 8,543 2.91 1,586 2.05 1,791 1.37 45,314 1.94 2,211 1.97 9,750
         Aug 1.62 49,640 1.67 14,967 2.64 6,644 2.99 1,260 2.03 1,321 1.28 33,589 1.99 1,497 1.98 5,329         Sep 1.84 60,340 1.82 19,271 2.78 8,061 2.91 1,323 2.08 1,333 1.56 39,892 1.69 1,704 2.11 8,027
         Oct 1.68 57,781 1.57 20,890 2.64 8,271 2.89 1,452 2.07 1,254 1.37 37,386 1.71 2,319 1.86 7,099
         Nov 1.67 51,840 1.63 16,651 2.71 7,599 2.91 1,381 2.09 1,254 1.30 32,330 1.98 2,249 1.81 7,027         Dec 1.68 71,770 1.68 21,964 2.63 8,367 2.90 1,688 1.98 1,765 1.42 46,829 1.79 3,286 1.82 9,835
of which: collateralised loans 12
2014          Dec 1.86 14,470 . . 2.54 1,023 2.36 184 2.02 470 1.72 8,250 1.95 1,274 1.89 3,269
2015          Jan 1.64 16,136 . . 2.36 1,101 2.52 141 1.13 2,270 1.70 8,979 1.76 821 1.49 2,824
         Feb 1.83 7,345 . . 2.66 791 2.44 101 1.79 409 1.70 4,714 2.13 172 1.72 1,158         Mar 1.78 11,957 . . 2.52 935 2.42 128 1.76 502 1.77 6,868 1.72 658 1.55 2,866
         Apr 1.76 10,572 . . 2.35 981 2.62 123 1.61 440 1.66 7,028 2.08 406 1.75 1,594
         May 1.84 7,214 . . 2.61 735 2.51 102 1.68 479 1.71 4,202 2.05 427 1.77 1,269         June 1.73 10,890 . . 2.11 642 2.51 133 1.84 561 1.53 5,897 1.90 677 1.94 2,980
         July 1.70 13,470 . . 1.99 894 2.59 175 1.86 593 1.55 8,144 1.85 592 1.87 3,072
         Aug 1.65 6,913 . . 2.14 546 2.69 128 1.86 445 1.41 4,037 1.91 302 1.93 1,455         Sep 1.93 9,689 . . 2.07 584 2.73 101 1.92 380 1.63 5,151 1.65 395 2.44 3,078
         Oct 1.72 9,269 . . 1.99 722 2.53 160 1.94 448 1.60 5,036 1.83 752 1.78 2,151
         Nov 1.76 7,680 . . 2.04 503 2.62 130 1.92 395 1.48 4,036 2.31 1,162 1.87 1,454         Dec 1.61 13,483 . . 1.98 636 2.57 150 1.76 539 1.47 7,249 1.84 1,438 1.67 3,471
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2005 1,696.0 1,633.7 486.8 153.0 240.8 240.3 356.4 79.6 76.9 62.4
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2013          Q4 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014          Q1 2,294.4 2,221.8 542.3 328.0 288.7 225.5 709.9 65.1 62.3 72.5
         Q2 2,339.8 2,266.5 538.5 345.4 291.6 226.3 736.6 66.1 61.9 73.3
         Q3 2,380.2 2,305.6 530.3 366.1 293.9 227.3 758.5 67.2 62.3 74.7
         Q4 2,426.9 2,350.6 522.3 384.2 299.2 230.0 784.2 68.4 62.3 76.3
2015          Q1 2,531.6 2,454.3 517.8 411.7 305.0 239.5 845.5 70.7 64.2 77.3
         Q2 2,471.6 2,394.1 509.8 393.4 305.3 236.1 813.8 70.7 65.1 77.5
         Q3 2,477.4 2,399.0 498.1 406.9 308.4 234.3 814.3 70.9 66.1 78.3
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 1,391.4 384.7 130.4 221.3 234.2 272.0 78.6 70.2 45.3
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2013          Q4 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014          Q1 1,789.2 1,742.2 385.8 285.3 260.9 212.2 486.9 60.6 50.5 47.0
         Q2 1,823.8 1,776.3 381.8 299.8 263.8 212.9 506.6 61.5 50.0 47.5
         Q3 1,855.8 1,807.3 375.2 316.5 266.1 213.5 523.2 62.5 50.3 48.5
         Q4 1,890.8 1,841.4 367.9 331.1 270.7 215.9 542.3 63.6 50.1 49.3
2015          Q1 1,976.3 1,926.5 362.6 355.3 276.2 224.9 590.0 65.7 51.8 49.9
         Q2 1,927.0 1,877.1 355.5 339.5 276.4 221.6 565.7 65.8 52.6 49.9
         Q3 1,930.3 1,879.9 345.5 349.7 279.3 219.7 566.2 65.9 53.6 50.4
Pension funds 4
2005 259.3 242.3 102.0 22.6 19.5 6.1 84.4 1.0 6.6 17.0
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2013          Q4 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014          Q1 505.2 479.6 156.5 42.8 27.8 13.3 223.0 4.5 11.8 25.5
         Q2 516.0 490.2 156.8 45.6 27.8 13.4 230.0 4.6 11.9 25.8
         Q3 524.4 498.3 155.1 49.6 27.8 13.8 235.2 4.7 12.0 26.1
         Q4 536.1 509.2 154.4 53.1 28.5 14.1 241.9 4.9 12.3 27.0
2015          Q1 555.2 527.8 155.2 56.4 28.8 14.6 255.4 4.9 12.4 27.4
         Q2 544.6 517.0 154.2 53.9 28.9 14.5 248.1 5.0 12.5 27.6
         Q3 547.1 519.2 152.5 57.2 29.1 14.5 248.2 5.0 12.6 27.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2015 Q2 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2005 1,696.0 6.7 89.8 186.0 1,263.8 989.0 274.8 83.9 65.8
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.52007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.8
2012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.8
2013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.5
2014 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2013          Q4 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.5
2014          Q1 2,294.4 16.3 85.1 191.3 1,825.5 1,536.6 288.9 72.6 103.5
         Q2 2,339.8 16.2 86.7 184.1 1,844.3 1,553.4 290.9 72.6 136.1
         Q3 2,380.2 17.6 86.3 188.0 1,861.3 1,568.1 293.3 72.6 154.4
         Q4 2,426.9 17.3 88.9 202.7 1,887.5 1,591.5 296.0 72.9 157.7
2015          Q1 2,531.6 17.7 90.8 223.1 1,937.6 1,631.9 305.8 74.8 187.5
         Q2 2,471.6 17.9 91.1 206.2 1,942.6 1,636.5 306.1 75.0 138.8
         Q3 2,477.4 17.5 91.6 208.4 1,954.3 1,647.5 306.9 75.4 130.1
Insurance corporations
2005 1,436.7 6.7 88.4 178.9 1,025.7 751.3 274.4 81.9 55.1
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2013          Q4 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014          Q1 1,789.2 16.3 80.8 182.7 1,366.9 1,078.4 288.4 69.7 72.9
         Q2 1,823.8 16.2 82.3 175.6 1,380.4 1,090.0 290.4 69.6 99.8
         Q3 1,855.8 17.6 81.8 179.3 1,392.5 1,099.7 292.8 69.6 115.1
         Q4 1,890.8 17.3 84.2 193.1 1,409.4 1,113.8 295.6 69.8 117.2
2015          Q1 1,976.3 17.7 86.1 212.6 1,449.7 1,144.4 305.3 71.6 138.7
         Q2 1,927.0 17.9 86.3 196.5 1,452.9 1,147.3 305.6 71.8 101.7
         Q3 1,930.3 17.5 86.7 198.6 1,460.3 1,153.9 306.4 72.2 95.1
Pension funds 5
2005 259.3 − 1.3 7.2 238.1 237.7 0.4 2.0 10.7
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2013          Q4 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014          Q1 505.2 − 4.3 8.6 458.7 458.2 0.5 2.9 30.6
         Q2 516.0 − 4.4 8.4 463.9 463.4 0.5 3.0 36.3
         Q3 524.4 − 4.5 8.7 468.9 468.4 0.5 3.1 39.3
         Q4 536.1 − 4.7 9.6 478.2 477.7 0.5 3.2 40.5
2015          Q1 555.2 − 4.8 10.5 487.9 487.4 0.5 3.2 48.8
         Q2 544.6 − 4.8 9.7 489.8 489.3 0.5 3.2 37.1
         Q3 547.1 − 4.9 9.9 494.1 493.6 0.5 3.3 35.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2013 are partially estimated. Figures from 2015 Q2 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2016
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 54,952 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 76,370 − 1,139 − 42,017 − 3,573 44,450 56,092
2013 − 9,340 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 92,275 23,033 − 25,778 − 12,708 61,521 − 32,374
2014 68,626 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 100,586 49,633 − 12,124 − 11,951 73,707 18,993
2015 46,018 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 82,029 148,973 − 65,640 121,164 93,449 − 102,956
2015          Feb 18,624 8,157 4,938 5,576 − 2,357 10,467 25,502 − 4,119 681 28,940 − 6,879
         Mar 12,043 − 5,223 − 3,851 2,007 − 3,379 17,266 26,677 2,266 12,589 11,822 − 14,635
         Apr 8,386 4,097 6,508 3,328 − 5,740 4,289 8,469 − 15,908 11,397 12,980 − 83
         May 936 − 506 − 13,628 1,127 11,994 1,442 8,063 − 9,509 13,328 4,244 − 7,127
         June − 23,009 − 25,695 − 10,836 − 3,872 − 10,987 2,685 174 − 13,948 11,459 2,663 − 23,183
         July 614 − 2,977 585 1,688 − 5,251 3,591 13,429 11,603 13,155 − 11,329 − 12,815
         Aug 17,897 14,808 1,576 1,949 11,284 3,089 15,159 − 781 9,915 6,025 2,738
         Sep 39,829 20,567 3,560 19,563 − 2,555 19,262 47,910 1,546 12,775 33,589 − 8,081
         Oct 7,518 − 1,263 5,758 − 6,129 − 892 8,781 9,949 − 12,250 12,664 9,535 − 2,432
         Nov − 673 − 2,159 − 14,282 − 1,729 13,853 1,486 5,961 3,259 12,847 − 10,145 − 6,634
         Dec − 59,343 − 57,836 − 55,168 996 − 3,664 − 1,507 − 13,853 − 39,388 11,090 14,445 − 45,490
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 17,426 5,120 12,306 16,126 10,259 5,867 1,300
2013 29,243 10,106 19,137 24,322 11,991 12,331 4,921
2014 45,491 18,778 26,713 33,307 17,203 16,104 12,184
2015 37,432 7,668 29,764 22,872 − 5,241 28,113 14,560
2015          Feb 3,393 117 3,276 − 3,057 − 5,160 2,103 6,450
         Mar 388 49 339 − 5,103 8,523 − 13,626 5,491
         Apr 2,706 1,751 955 7,164 6,803 361 − 4,458
         May 11,766 155 11,611 9,720 − 5,586 15,306 2,046
         June 4,582 1,277 3,305 − 6,664 − 4,056 − 2,608 11,246
         July 5,247 510 4,737 8,516 1,279 7,237 − 3,269
         Aug 1,001 122 879 1,017 − 6,693 7,710 − 16
         Sep − 4,399 966 − 5,365 − 2,397 − 9,059 6,662 − 2,002
         Oct 1,358 903 455 − 748 150 − 898 2,106
         Nov 4,844 640 4,204 1,534 5,566 − 4,032 3,310
         Dec 5,811 1,100 4,711 6,194 − 4,119 10,313 − 383
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700 −
2015          May 88,059 53,509 1,616 914 39,135 11,844 4,488 30,062 −
         June 89,201 56,164 3,128 627 38,323 14,085 4,311 28,726 −
         July 114,390 67,339 5,861 965 40,146 20,367 6,331 40,719 −
         Aug 92,367 55,370 1,407 527 34,542 18,895 6,418 30,579 −
         Sep 143,476 84,546 2,315 2,137 59,638 20,456 26,215 32,715 −
         Oct 141,457 92,061 2,675 1,210 62,892 25,285 4,253 45,143 −
         Nov 100,701 62,684 4,141 1,158 40,780 16,605 5,567 32,450 −
         Dec 65,645 45,949 1,436 793 32,123 11,597 8,406 11,290 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742 −
2015          May 20,791 6,990 1,285 414 1,219 4,072 2,200 11,601 −
         June 30,382 16,718 3,061 524 8,526 4,608 1,715 11,949 −
         July 37,991 18,950 3,099 190 5,835 9,826 3,079 15,962 −
         Aug 27,132 13,254 1,078 527 2,557 9,092 3,004 10,875 −         Sep 51,283 15,197 1,745 2,137 7,234 4,080 22,790 13,296 −
         Oct 38,693 15,655 2,170 708 2,740 10,038 1,652 21,385 −
         Nov 33,799 16,563 1,910 1,158 6,586 6,909 4,010 13,227 −         Dec 14,240 5,609 36 43 1,269 4,262 6,029 2,603 −
Net sales  6 
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174 − 1,441
2015          May − 4,331 − 14,849 − 1,269 − 76 − 7,711 − 5,793 612 9,905 −
         June − 28,026 − 14,649 − 1,654 − 4,181 − 1,319 − 7,494 − 2,804 − 10,573 −
         July − 6,422 − 4,763 4,338 − 572 − 6,351 − 2,178 − 187 − 1,472 −
         Aug 12,820 − 1,768 645 151 1,257 − 3,820 2,034 12,554 −         Sep 19,054 2,097 744 − 1,417 3,802 − 1,032 20,743 − 3,786 −
         Oct 1,738 8,310 − 674 − 652 5,887 3,749 − 6,293 − 279 −
         Nov 4,210 − 10,065 3,189 989 − 9,760 − 4,483 − 1,260 15,536 −         Dec − 81,812 − 66,259 − 610 − 1,459 − 8,176 − 56,013 1,431 − 16,984 − 191
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including initial sales of newly issued securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal issue. 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2016
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
2015          June 3,096,573 1,226,621 122,966 78,641 579,992 445,023 241,144 1,628,808 6,547
         July 3,090,151 1,221,858 127,304 78,068 573,641 442,844 240,956 1,627,336 6,547
         Aug 3,102,971 1,220,091 127,949 78,219 575,058 438,864 242,990 1,639,890 6,547
         Sep 3,122,025 1,222,188 128,693 76,802 578,861 437,832 263,733 1,636,105 6,547
         Oct 3,123,763 1,230,497 128,019 76,149 584,747 441,581 257,440 1,635,825 6,547
         Nov 3,127,974 1,220,432 131,208 77,138 574,987 437,098 256,180 1,651,361 6,547
         Dec 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2015 
1,024,420 465,689 43,802 31,391 236,281 154,215 49,726 509,005 2,800    less than 2
642,704 275,563 38,724 22,164 144,867 69,808 42,157 324,983 278 2 to less than 4
487,027 186,431 23,238 9,079 97,717 56,397 39,987 260,608 156 4 to less than 6
284,023 81,974 13,638 6,091 35,329 26,917 22,144 179,904 523 6 to less than 8
228,361 62,727 8,101 5,279 26,056 23,290 12,393 153,240 1,092 8 to less than 10
106,034 27,364 2,786 1,416 10,343 12,819 14,110 64,560 540 10 to less than 15
54,623 11,385 45 143 6,668 4,529 4,025 39,213 − 15 to less than 20
218,971 43,040 265 114 9,549 33,111 73,070 102,862 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2015          June 178,051 519 330 251 202 − − 37 − 154 − 73 1,645,417
         July 178,106 55 157 21 109 − − 135 − 40 − 58 1,671,490
         Aug 177,064 − 1,042 119 72 2 − − 1,050 − 77 − 109 1,544,386
         Sep 178,058 994 965 13 13 − − 32 93 − 58 1,469,146
         Oct 178,797 739 893 − 6 − − 3 − 93 − 64 1,614,655
         Nov 176,443 − 2,354 319 18 85 − 0 − 931 − 1,845 1,685,764
         Dec 177,416 973 1,081 − 23 − − 10 − 73 − 48 1,614,442
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued ket segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) are included as well as enterprises
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) or the Neuer Markt (stock mar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.012015          Aug 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.5 2.4 139.19 112.18 486.17 10,259.46
         Sep 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 1.6 2.7 139.69 113.41 460.31 9,660.44
         Oct 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.6 2.8 140.17 113.79 512.31 10,850.14
         Nov 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.4 2.8 140.48 113.82 534.95 11,382.23         Dec 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.5 1.4 2.7 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016          Jan 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 1.6 2.8 141.46 115.09 464.93 9,798.11
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,609 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,667 115,031 − 3,062 − 1,562 118,093 23,229 − 3,4222013 123,276 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 31,939 117,189 771 100 116,418 31,838 6,086
2014 136,035 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 38,324 141,680 819 − 1,745 140,861 40,069 − 5,642
2015 180,978 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 34,842 175,814 7,404 518 168,410 34,322 5,164
2015          June 11,449 10,457 1,132 141 107 769 9,325 991 11,612 350 − 531 11,262 1,522 − 163         July 7,058 2,216 2,851 − 22 2,652 − 263 − 635 4,841 6,620 1,317 − 60 5,303 4,901 437
         Aug 11,417 9,967 2,248 89 1,686 331 7,719 1,449 10,439 − 636 − 500 11,075 1,949 978         Sep 8,180 9,839 2,240 593 1,037 342 7,599 − 1,659 5,959 − 1,748 − 1,341 7,707 − 318 2,222
         Oct 12,061 8,164 2,738 − 46 2,020 354 5,426 3,898 12,060 237 417 11,823 3,481 1
         Nov 7,478 6,401 2,786 − 176 2,186 193 3,615 1,077 8,427 1,025 − 65 7,402 1,142 − 949         Dec 26,600 26,955 5,428 − 248 5,262 487 21,527 − 355 25,069 − 1,910 − 2,157 26,979 1,802 1,531
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 1.51 0.61 − 10.68 − 7.22 14.39 − 4.86 − 8.74 6.37 20.30
Debt securities − 2.65 0.18 − 1.63 0.29 0.10 − 3.53 − 1.47 0.49 0.32
short-term debt securities − 2.61 1.56 1.62 − 0.13 − 0.44 0.40 − 1.06 0.93 − 1.42
long-term debt securities − 0.03 − 1.39 − 3.24 0.42 0.54 − 3.93 − 0.42 − 0.43 1.74
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.87 − 1.27 − 1.88 1.05 0.06 − 2.74 − 0.07 0.24 0.94
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32
Financial corporations . − 2.14 − 1.26 0.05 − 0.43 − 0.52 0.75 − 0.27 0.87
General government . 0.07 − 0.57 0.66 0.80 − 2.12 − 0.28 − 0.08 0.39
Debt securities of the rest of the world 2.22 1.44 0.26 − 0.76 0.04 − 0.80 − 1.40 0.25 − 0.61
Loans 20.32 39.09 37.54 2.36 15.72 11.11 18.72 0.76 7.99
short-term loans 9.78 55.02 33.19 5.97 16.15 3.98 21.84 1.63 2.72
long-term loans 10.54 − 15.92 4.36 − 3.61 − 0.44 7.12 − 3.12 − 0.87 5.27
Memo item
to domestic sectors 19.11 32.01 34.01 5.87 7.46 14.80 12.26 − 6.60 5.51
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 19.76 1.67 4.92 13.38 − 0.26 − 1.42 3.00
Financial corporations 9.73 1.92 14.36 4.23 2.57 1.45 12.52 − 5.19 2.51
General government 0.50 0.26 − 0.11 − 0.03 − 0.03 − 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 1.21 7.08 3.53 − 3.51 8.26 − 3.69 6.46 7.36 2.48
Equity and investment fund shares 43.12 26.51 13.20 − 1.70 10.45 − 5.51 5.08 11.74 16.63
Equity 43.31 18.86 23.58 0.48 9.32 4.98 − 3.07 8.92 12.76
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 8.70 − 1.62 − 0.69 2.77 − 2.76 − 16.68 1.41 1.98
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07 2.12
Financial corporations . − 0.95 3.78 0.10 0.47 3.19 − 2.59 0.34 − 0.14
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 1.41 9.16 7.92 − 1.41 0.06 8.82 − 0.16 − 4.95
Other equity 1 44.75 8.76 16.04 − 6.75 7.97 7.68 4.79 7.67 15.73
Investment fund shares − 0.20 7.65 − 10.38 − 2.18 1.13 − 10.50 8.15 2.82 3.87
Money market fund shares 0.03 − 0.15 0.23 − 0.16 − 0.01 − 0.08 − 0.25 0.17 − 0.06
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 0.22 7.80 − 10.61 − 2.02 1.14 − 10.41 8.40 2.65 3.93
Insurance technical reserves 1.34 2.82 1.05 0.32 0.36 0.06 0.33 0.35 0.38
Financial derivatives 0.72 6.49 1.24 − 0.41 − 2.60 7.08 3.88 − 1.53 1.69
Other accounts receivable 86.39 165.90 − 83.99 − 25.34 − 22.40 − 43.99 − 34.86 40.11 7.21
Total 147.72 241.59 − 43.27 − 31.71 16.02 − 39.64 − 17.06 58.31 54.52
External financing
Debt securities 18.72 12.78 1.26 − 6.30 2.05 4.32 3.58 4.91 0.46
short-term securities − 1.58 − 1.12 − 11.63 − 6.35 − 1.65 − 0.88 1.26 − 0.04 1.01
long-term securities 20.30 13.90 12.89 0.05 3.70 5.20 2.32 4.95 − 0.55
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 5.10 4.23 1.76 − 0.15 0.15 0.95 2.73 − 0.70
Non-financial corporations . 0.81 − 0.05 0.34 − 0.32 − 0.10 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32
Financial corporations . 2.85 4.08 1.10 0.24 0.42 1.26 1.86 − 0.42
General government . − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 − 0.00 0.01
Households . 1.50 0.20 0.32 − 0.07 − 0.16 0.22 0.29 0.03
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 7.67 − 2.97 − 8.06 2.20 4.17 2.63 2.18 1.16
Loans 3.16 48.82 16.76 27.45 − 18.06 − 8.26 40.27 19.63 − 0.74
short-term loans 7.84 42.52 − 5.92 13.73 − 12.68 − 20.14 23.07 15.88 − 3.80
long-term loans − 4.68 6.31 22.68 13.72 − 5.38 11.88 17.20 3.75 3.06
Memo item
from domestic sectors − 18.60 17.03 36.37 20.69 − 7.89 4.42 29.17 7.26 − 0.82
Non-financial corporations 8.87 29.84 19.76 1.67 4.92 13.38 − 0.26 − 1.42 3.00
Financial corporations − 8.62 8.99 18.39 8.94 − 4.01 − 5.54 22.23 9.32 − 1.02
General government − 18.85 − 21.80 − 1.78 10.08 − 8.80 − 3.43 7.20 − 0.64 − 2.80
from the rest of the world 21.77 31.74 − 19.61 6.76 − 10.17 − 12.68 11.10 12.37 0.08
Equity 12.74 15.94 23.88 2.57 5.05 13.95 − 0.70 5.15 5.82
Listed shares of domestic sectors . − 4.47 − 0.97 − 0.32 0.72 − 4.69 − 15.75 − 4.67 4.24
Non-financial corporations . 9.65 − 5.39 − 0.79 2.29 − 5.95 − 14.10 1.07 2.12
Financial corporations . − 5.02 1.59 − 0.01 − 2.49 − 0.31 3.78 − 6.34 − 2.83
General government . − 0.88 0.03 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
Households . − 8.21 2.80 0.47 0.90 1.57 − 5.43 0.61 4.95
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 7.80 9.72 2.19 3.59 6.65 16.02 6.38 − 1.55
Other equity 1 9.44 12.60 15.13 0.70 0.75 11.99 − 0.97 3.44 3.13
Insurance technical reserves 7.74 6.34 6.05 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 8.09 3.72 1.93 2.46 − 4.73 1.92 10.89 − 16.16 − 1.04
Other accounts payable 18.80 29.82 − 2.09 − 2.78 15.85 − 11.50 30.86 21.88 2.55
Total 69.25 117.41 47.79 24.92 1.67 1.95 86.42 36.92 8.57
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 413.7 411.8 406.4 359.0 389.9 406.4 385.1 395.4 429.7
Debt securities 51.9 48.6 47.5 50.9 51.1 47.5 46.5 46.2 46.2
short-term debt securities 3.6 5.1 6.8 6.8 6.4 6.8 5.7 6.7 5.2
long-term debt securities 48.3 43.5 40.8 44.1 44.7 40.8 40.8 39.5 41.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 24.6 22.9 25.5 25.6 22.9 23.0 23.0 23.8
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.5 4.2
Financial corporations . 13.8 12.7 13.6 13.2 12.7 13.5 13.2 14.0
General government . 6.1 5.7 6.9 7.7 5.7 5.4 5.3 5.6
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 24.0 24.6 25.4 25.5 24.6 23.5 23.2 22.4
Loans 411.5 456.6 498.6 469.9 487.7 498.6 518.1 517.8 523.9
short-term loans 291.4 351.7 385.7 364.7 381.9 385.7 406.7 407.6 409.9
long-term loans 120.1 104.9 112.8 105.3 105.8 112.8 111.4 110.1 113.9
Memo item
to domestic sectors 284.8 316.8 350.8 328.5 336.0 350.8 360.8 354.2 359.0
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.2 228.9 233.8 247.2 246.9 245.5 248.5
Financial corporations 80.9 82.9 97.2 93.2 95.8 97.2 107.4 102.3 104.1
General government 6.3 6.5 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.4
to the rest of the world 126.7 139.8 147.8 141.4 151.7 147.8 157.3 163.6 164.8
Equity and investment fund shares 1,638.4 1,805.7 1,901.3 1,831.0 1,870.1 1,901.3 2,126.4 2,049.0 1,943.8
Equity 1,509.5 1,667.6 1,765.8 1,689.1 1,724.9 1,765.8 1,975.4 1,898.9 1,793.9
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 275.4 262.2 266.0 254.6 262.2 290.6 274.6 239.0
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1 267.4 233.2
Financial corporations . 5.7 10.0 5.5 5.7 10.0 7.4 7.2 5.9
Listed shares of the rest of the world . 52.2 62.1 63.5 62.1 62.1 72.6 70.4 65.1
Other equity 1 1,240.4 1,340.0 1,441.5 1,359.5 1,408.1 1,441.5 1,612.2 1,554.0 1,489.9
Investment fund shares 129.0 138.1 135.5 141.9 145.2 135.5 151.0 150.0 149.8
Money market fund shares − 1.1 1.2 1.5 1.4 1.2 0.9 1.1 1.0
Non-MMF investment fund shares 129.0 137.0 134.4 140.4 143.9 134.4 150.1 149.0 148.8
Insurance technical reserves 43.3 46.1 47.3 46.8 47.2 47.3 47.6 48.0 48.3
Financial derivatives 18.0 16.8 22.6 13.5 13.2 22.6 26.0 24.0 25.3Other accounts receivable 824.3 893.3 868.6 859.8 866.4 868.6 911.4 937.8 934.9
Total 3,400.9 3,678.9 3,792.2 3,631.0 3,725.7 3,792.2 4,061.1 4,018.1 3,952.1
Liabilities
Debt securities 130.9 138.9 150.9 138.0 143.1 150.9 159.5 157.2 158.1
short-term securities 14.6 13.4 1.8 4.4 2.7 1.8 2.3 2.3 3.3
long-term securities 116.3 125.4 149.1 133.6 140.4 149.1 157.1 154.9 154.8
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 51.1 60.0 57.4 58.5 60.0 63.3 63.7 62.0
Non-financial corporations . 4.7 4.6 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.5 4.2
Financial corporations . 30.8 39.6 36.1 37.7 39.6 42.7 43.8 42.6
General government . 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households . 15.6 15.8 16.2 16.0 15.8 16.4 15.3 15.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 87.8 90.9 80.6 84.6 90.9 96.2 93.5 96.1
Loans 1,326.1 1,415.4 1,409.0 1,452.1 1,435.5 1,409.0 1,453.4 1,472.5 1,469.9
short-term loans 429.1 486.7 480.1 511.8 501.3 480.1 506.6 521.1 515.0
long-term loans 897.0 928.7 928.9 940.3 934.2 928.9 946.8 951.4 954.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,049.5 1,101.1 1,111.2 1,134.7 1,125.3 1,111.2 1,138.5 1,146.2 1,145.5
Non-financial corporations 197.6 227.4 247.2 228.9 233.8 247.2 246.9 245.5 248.5
Financial corporations 805.7 811.8 810.1 838.0 832.6 810.1 831.7 841.4 840.0
General government 46.3 61.9 54.0 67.8 59.0 54.0 59.9 59.3 57.0
from the rest of the world 276.7 314.3 297.9 317.5 310.1 297.9 314.9 326.3 324.5
Equity 2,127.9 2,433.5 2,535.1 2,464.9 2,425.1 2,535.1 2,852.3 2,707.6 2,476.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors . 571.9 557.7 572.9 542.1 557.7 651.4 597.2 539.4
Non-financial corporations . 269.8 252.2 260.5 248.9 252.2 283.1 267.4 233.2
Financial corporations . 120.3 121.6 125.6 116.7 121.6 152.0 131.5 118.7
General government . 35.2 35.2 35.6 34.1 35.2 42.9 39.5 41.1
Households . 146.6 148.7 151.2 142.4 148.7 173.4 158.8 146.5
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 670.8 732.2 693.0 674.9 732.2 869.7 817.5 705.4
Other equity 1 1,132.8 1,190.9 1,245.2 1,198.9 1,208.1 1,245.2 1,331.2 1,292.9 1,231.8
Insurance technical reserves 237.6 243.9 249.9 246.9 248.4 249.9 251.5 253.0 254.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 40.2 37.3 54.0 42.0 44.4 54.0 63.9 46.6 44.7
Other accounts payable 951.9 971.4 1,001.9 949.5 977.7 1,001.9 1,047.9 1,036.2 1,039.8
Total 4,814.5 5,240.3 5,400.9 5,293.4 5,274.1 5,400.9 5,828.4 5,673.0 5,443.6
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 75.38 63.95 85.85 20.39 16.47 40.26 14.63 31.14 8.52
Currency 0.91 8.16 15.65 4.57 3.32 6.95 4.14 7.19 3.04
Deposits 74.47 55.79 70.20 15.81 13.15 33.32 10.49 23.96 5.48
Transferable deposits 90.08 89.41 73.84 19.91 11.88 33.62 19.30 34.43 15.01
Time deposits − 5.21 − 9.78 8.76 1.31 0.94 4.14 − 2.32 − 3.12 − 4.21
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 10.39 − 23.85 − 12.41 − 5.42 0.33 − 4.44 − 6.49 − 7.35 − 5.32
Debt securities − 17.39 − 17.81 − 18.00 − 2.52 − 7.47 − 5.89 − 7.38 − 5.09 − 1.87
short-term debt securities − 0.26 − 0.36 − 0.67 − 0.08 − 0.39 − 0.32 0.29 0.31 0.28
long-term debt securities − 17.13 − 17.45 − 17.33 − 2.44 − 7.09 − 5.57 − 7.66 − 5.40 − 2.14
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . − 14.86 − 15.08 − 2.64 − 5.92 − 4.25 − 4.76 − 2.98 − 0.16
Non-financial corporations . 1.24 0.02 0.27 − 0.11 − 0.23 0.21 0.23 0.02
Financial corporations . − 12.46 − 12.52 − 2.25 − 4.92 − 3.58 − 4.05 − 2.40 0.44
General government . − 3.64 − 2.58 − 0.65 − 0.89 − 0.44 − 0.91 − 0.81 − 0.61
Debt securities of the rest of the world . − 2.94 − 2.93 0.12 − 1.56 − 1.64 − 2.62 − 2.11 − 1.71
Equity and investment fund shares − 3.51 9.63 36.87 10.69 7.55 10.43 4.53 10.53 16.85
Equity − 0.08 − 0.41 12.17 3.79 1.00 3.95 − 6.26 2.87 11.73
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . − 5.63 4.61 2.07 0.25 1.79 − 6.53 1.13 6.67
Non-financial corporations . − 5.29 2.69 0.44 0.85 1.55 − 5.50 0.49 6.03
Financial corporations . − 0.35 1.93 1.63 − 0.60 0.23 − 1.03 0.64 0.64
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 2.99 3.70 0.65 0.08 1.06 0.66 0.80 3.00
Other equity 1 2.58 2.24 3.86 1.06 0.68 1.10 − 0.39 0.95 2.07
Investment fund shares − 3.42 10.04 24.70 6.91 6.55 6.49 10.79 7.66 5.12
Money market fund shares 0.46 − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.16 − 0.10 0.12 − 0.16 − 0.02 − 0.10
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 3.88 10.34 25.04 7.07 6.65 6.37 10.95 7.68 5.22
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.62 26.02 22.96 5.64 5.20 5.48 4.20 4.20 4.15
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 26.68 29.45 29.55 6.27 4.96 7.80 13.03 8.15 4.83
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.39 19.39 19.90 4.23 2.73 4.97 9.66 4.95 6.95
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 15.54 11.93 − 23.85 − 9.09 3.44 − 23.38 12.95 − 9.56 0.17
Total 146.72 142.56 153.26 35.62 32.88 39.68 51.62 44.33 39.61
  External financing
Loans 15.65 11.96 19.33 5.93 9.18 4.20 3.59 11.78 14.56
short-term loans − 1.16 − 3.31 − 1.98 0.50 − 1.26 − 2.04 1.00 − 1.26 − 1.51
long-term loans 16.81 15.27 21.31 5.43 10.44 6.24 2.59 13.04 16.07
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.59 18.89 23.60 5.75 9.10 8.35 2.30 10.24 13.76
Consumer loans − 0.99 − 0.30 1.21 0.13 1.33 − 1.71 1.57 2.15 1.40
Entrepreneurial loans − 1.95 − 6.64 − 5.49 0.04 − 1.25 − 2.44 − 0.29 − 0.61 − 0.60
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 15.17 12.60 18.87 6.10 9.60 4.17 3.27 11.60 15.09
Loans from other financial institutions 0.48 − 0.60 0.45 − 0.17 − 0.42 0.03 0.32 0.18 − 0.53
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 1.36 − 0.01 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.30 − 0.59 0.34 0.05 − 0.01
Total 17.01 11.94 19.20 5.91 9.48 3.61 3.93 11.82 14.55
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2014 2015 
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,848.7 1,912.4 1,998.0 1,941.2 1,957.7 1,998.0 2,014.3 2,045.4 2,054.0
Currency 105.5 113.6 129.3 119.0 122.3 129.3 133.4 140.6 143.6
Deposits 1,743.2 1,798.8 1,868.7 1,822.2 1,835.4 1,868.7 1,880.9 1,904.8 1,910.3
Transferable deposits 818.3 907.8 981.4 935.9 947.8 981.4 1,000.6 1,035.1 1,050.1
Time deposits 255.9 245.9 254.7 249.5 250.5 254.7 254.0 250.9 246.4
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 669.0 645.1 632.7 636.8 637.1 632.7 626.2 618.9 613.8
Debt securities 200.1 179.0 162.2 176.4 168.9 162.2 156.8 149.2 144.0
short-term debt securities 3.1 2.7 2.1 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.0
long-term debt securities 197.0 176.3 160.1 173.6 166.5 160.1 154.3 146.5 141.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors . 116.9 102.4 112.9 107.1 102.4 98.6 94.3 92.2
Non-financial corporations . 14.2 14.1 14.7 14.5 14.1 14.8 13.7 13.5
Financial corporations . 90.7 78.7 87.4 82.6 78.7 75.1 72.9 71.5
General government . 12.0 9.6 10.9 10.0 9.6 8.7 7.8 7.1
Debt securities of the rest of the world . 62.0 59.8 63.4 61.8 59.8 58.2 54.9 51.8
Equity and investment fund shares 820.2 885.9 951.4 923.4 928.9 951.4 1,051.1 1,018.4 982.1
Equity 446.8 487.6 508.9 502.8 497.2 508.9 563.4 537.0 518.3
Listed Shares of domestic sectors . 167.4 169.7 171.5 163.0 169.7 197.9 179.6 168.4
Non-financial corporations . 140.4 142.1 144.9 136.2 142.1 165.4 151.1 140.2
Financial corporations . 26.9 27.6 26.6 26.9 27.6 32.5 28.5 28.2
Quoted shares of the rest of the world . 55.8 64.0 60.6 63.2 64.0 74.6 71.7 67.9
Other equity 1 255.7 264.4 275.3 270.7 271.0 275.3 290.9 285.7 282.0
Investment fund shares 373.4 398.3 442.5 420.6 431.7 442.5 487.7 481.3 463.8
Money market fund shares 23.7 4.4 4.0 4.1 4.0 4.0 3.8 3.8 3.7Non-MMF investment fund shares 349.7 393.8 438.5 416.5 427.7 438.5 483.8 477.5 460.1
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 273.3 291.3 307.3 299.5 303.6 307.3 311.5 315.7 319.8
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 809.1 847.3 885.6 869.7 876.0 885.6 899.7 908.5 913.6
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 677.1 708.3 740.0 723.0 728.8 740.0 749.6 754.6 761.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 37.1 36.7 35.8 36.4 36.0 35.8 35.6 35.5 35.1
Total 4,665.5 4,860.9 5,080.3 4,969.6 4,999.9 5,080.3 5,218.5 5,227.2 5,210.1
  Liabilities
Loans 1,538.5 1,549.6 1,569.2 1,555.5 1,564.7 1,569.2 1,571.6 1,583.2 1,597.3
short-term loans 71.5 66.4 64.6 67.7 66.5 64.6 65.6 64.1 62.6
long-term loans 1,467.0 1,483.2 1,504.7 1,487.8 1,498.3 1,504.7 1,506.0 1,519.1 1,534.7
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,072.7 1,092.9 1,116.8 1,099.1 1,108.9 1,116.8 1,119.1 1,129.5 1,143.0
Consumer loans 194.3 188.7 188.9 189.9 190.6 188.9 189.2 191.2 192.2
Entrepreneurial loans 271.4 268.0 263.6 266.5 265.2 263.6 263.3 262.5 262.1
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,446.6 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,463.5 1,473.1 1,477.6 1,479.6 1,491.0 1,505.7
Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 91.2 91.7 92.1 91.7 91.7 92.0 92.2 91.6
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 14.9 15.0 14.9 15.9 16.7 14.9 16.3 16.1 16.2
Total 1,553.4 1,564.6 1,584.2 1,571.4 1,581.4 1,584.2 1,587.9 1,599.2 1,613.5
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2009 − 79.6 − 40.5 − 19.5 − 5.1 − 14.4 − 3.2 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 p − 2.4 − 16.3 − 7.3 + 2.9 + 18.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 3.1 − 7.7 − 3.1 + 2.3 + 5.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.9 + 8.6 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 pe + 16.4 + 12.2 − 0.1 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
2013          H1  p + 2.9 − 5.1 − 0.2 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3
         H2  p − 6.0 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2014          H1  p + 11.1 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         H2  p − 2.2 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 3.2 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2
2015          H1  pe + 20.6 + 8.4 + 3.2 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2009 1,783.7 1,079.7 585.3 133.3 1.3 72.5 43.9 23.8 5.4 0.1
2010 2,090.0 1,332.2 631.5 142.8 1.3 81.0 51.6 24.5 5.5 0.1
2011 2,118.5 1,341.5 646.6 146.7 1.3 78.4 49.6 23.9 5.4 0.0
2012 p 2,195.8 1,386.2 675.2 150.8 1.2 79.7 50.3 24.5 5.5 0.0
2013 p 2,181.9 1,389.5 656.4 153.4 1.3 77.4 49.3 23.3 5.4 0.0
2014 p 2,184.3 1,396.4 649.6 154.7 1.4 74.9 47.9 22.3 5.3 0.0
2014          Q1 p 2,171.0 1,386.7 648.6 153.2 1.2 76.1 48.6 22.7 5.4 0.0
         Q2 p 2,179.0 1,395.3 647.6 154.1 1.1 75.9 48.6 22.6 5.4 0.0
         Q3 p 2,180.2 1,391.4 650.2 154.5 1.1 75.4 48.1 22.5 5.3 0.0
         Q4 p 2,184.3 1,396.4 649.6 154.7 1.4 74.9 47.9 22.3 5.3 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,183.9 1,397.8 650.9 156.1 1.4 74.3 47.6 22.1 5.3 0.0
         Q2 p 2,150.0 1,380.7 631.5 155.7 1.4 72.5 46.6 21.3 5.2 0.0
         Q3 p 2,152.0 1,374.7 640.1 156.1 1.5 71.9 45.9 21.4 5.2 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2015 half-year figures are not directly compar-
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection able with the annual figures. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output
with the publication of the 2015 annual figures, no revised figures were released for of the four preceding quarters. 
  
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts
*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2009 1,090.9 554.7 415.6 120.6 1,170.5 624.8 197.8 65.0 58.3 224.6 − 79.6 974.3
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 63.9 59.4 258.0 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 67.5 61.4 237.2 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 p 1,222.1 623.9 454.2 144.0 1,224.5 644.4 212.9 63.1 62.2 241.9 − 2.4 1,082.6
2013 p 1,252.5 642.0 464.9 145.5 1,255.6 665.7 218.6 56.0 63.5 251.7 − 3.1 1,111.3
2014 p 1,299.6 665.1 481.9 152.6 1,290.7 691.1 224.6 51.5 63.2 260.3 + 8.9 1,151.5
2015 pe 1,346.0 696.0 501.2 148.8 1,329.5 726.3 230.8 48.0 63.1 261.4 + 16.4 1,202.2
as a percentage of GDP
2009 44.3 22.5 16.9 4.9 47.6 25.4 8.0 2.6 2.4 9.1 − 3.2 39.6
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 10.0 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.8 − 1.0 38.7
2012 p 44.4 22.6 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.4 7.7 2.3 2.3 8.8 − 0.1 39.3
2013 p 44.4 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.5 23.6 7.8 2.0 2.3 8.9 − 0.1 39.4
2014 p 44.6 22.8 16.5 5.2 44.3 23.7 7.7 1.8 2.2 8.9 + 0.3 39.5
2015 pe 44.5 23.0 16.6 4.9 43.9 24.0 7.6 1.6 2.1 8.6 + 0.5 39.7
Percentage growth rates
2009 − 1.9 − 5.3 + 0.8 + 6.4 + 4.9 + 5.5 + 4.6 − 5.1 + 10.7 + 5.1 . − 2.9
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.9 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 3.3 − 8.1 . + 6.0
2012 p + 3.3 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 6.5 + 1.4 + 2.0 . + 3.5
2013 p + 2.5 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 − 11.2 + 2.1 + 4.0 . + 2.6
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.7 − 8.1 − 0.5 + 3.4 . + 3.6
2015 pe + 3.6 + 4.6 + 4.0 − 2.5 + 3.0 + 5.1 + 2.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 + 0.4 . + 4.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and                                                            
social contributions plus customs duties. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 235.9 293.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.0 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,236.6 + 8.6
2013          Q1 p 178.0 148.6 2.6 187.8 53.7 74.9 22.5 6.0 2.9 − 9.8 128.5 132.3 − 3.8 281.3 294.9 − 13.6
         Q2 p 193.8 155.3 4.8 185.0 54.7 68.7 14.2 8.5 8.0 + 8.8 133.1 132.6 + 0.5 302.0 292.7 + 9.4
         Q3 p 183.8 151.8 2.4 192.3 55.2 70.9 20.1 11.6 3.2 − 8.5 131.6 132.6 − 1.0 290.4 299.9 − 9.5
         Q4 p 204.7 164.2 4.6 207.5 60.8 71.0 10.0 15.4 8.3 − 2.8 142.7 134.2 + 8.5 321.9 316.2 + 5.7
2014          Q1 p 188.1 153.6 2.0 193.8 56.7 77.8 20.1 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 295.9 304.9 − 8.9
         Q2 p 193.2 157.4 2.2 188.3 56.9 71.9 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 4.9 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.6 299.1 + 5.5
         Q3 p 192.2 157.5 3.4 193.6 57.0 71.2 17.7 11.3 4.0 − 1.4 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 303.1 305.6 − 2.5
         Q4 p 219.1 174.9 3.5 211.9 65.4 73.6 9.5 16.5 3.1 + 7.2 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 341.7 327.7 + 14.0
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2 p 207.9 167.7 1.5 185.3 59.4 73.3 7.2 9.2 3.0 + 22.7 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 324.6 301.8 + 22.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.2 − 0.3 337.9 335.8 + 2.0 218.8 219.0 − 0.2
2013          Q1 p 66.9 79.9 − 13.0 77.4 77.9 − 0.5 42.1 46.4 − 4.3
         Q2 p 78.7 77.8 + 0.9 81.5 78.1 + 3.3 51.7 48.4 + 3.4
         Q3 p 77.4 85.2 − 7.8 78.7 78.9 − 0.2 51.5 52.1 − 0.5
         Q4 p 90.2 92.7 − 2.5 85.8 88.6 − 2.9 60.3 57.9 + 2.4
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 49.9 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.9 52.2 + 2.7
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.5 − 0.6
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.2 61.2 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 57.5 53.2 + 4.3
         Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 58.1 56.5 + 1.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 ... 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 ... ... 27,241
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558
         Q4 ... 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 ... ... 6,618
2014          Dec . 75,920 42,431 29,654 3,835 . . 2,251
2015          Dec . 77,035 42,681 31,375 2,980 . . 2,279
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059
         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783
         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907
         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453
         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2014          Dec 81,479 43,673 21,849 12,511 6,744 2,568 17,180 13,234 3,946 1,591 17,139 1,523 373 5,559
2015          Dec 82,965 45,131 22,986 13,318 6,013 2,814 18,429 14,057 4,371 1,660 15,434 1,893 418 5,929
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2015: 52.3:45.5:2.2. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2015: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 14,921 15,930 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 . 11,249 6,290 2,801 ... ... ...
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 3,683 4,278 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 . 2,561 1,617 660 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,981 3,714 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 . 3,021 1,335 672 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 5,034 4,155 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 . 2,906 1,670 689 ... ... ...
2014          Dec 8,420 1,992 2,402 524 520 498 217 2,564 . 837 463 223 . . .2015          Dec 8,453 2,241 2,504 562 604 600 207 264 . 978 680 235 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 
p 275,555 194,511 79,947 277,370 236,954 16,698 − 1,815 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2013          Q1 62,211 42,779 19,173 64,193 54,940 3,871 − 1,982 28,616 26,044 2,356 106 110 4,292
         Q2 64,751 45,399 19,090 64,188 54,660 3,858 + 563 29,380 26,938 2,221 111 110 4,294         Q3 63,610 44,194 19,154 64,775 55,169 3,898 − 1,165 28,647 25,262 3,161 113 110 4,291         Q4 69,503 49,609 19,626 64,855 55,108 3,894 + 4,648 33,667 29,201 4,251 114 101 4,290
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2013          Q1 7,762 6,429 276 245 8,612 4,301 494 1,493 . 194 1,193 − 850 −
         Q2 8,041 6,870 310 − 8,230 3,969 384 1,498 . 204 1,266 − 189 −
         Q3 7,898 6,708 303 − 7,580 3,644 109 1,420 . 228 1,284 + 318 −
         Q4 8,935 7,587 335 − 8,153 3,497 96 1,630 . 287 1,606 + 782 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance forsures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2013          Q1 47,115 43,645 2,875 48,030 15,955 7,445 8,258 3,139 2,786 2,518 2,256 − 915
         Q2 48,604 45,199 2,875 48,577 15,815 7,486 8,227 3,142 3,007 2,465 2,336 + 26
         Q3 48,337 44,917 2,875 48,435 15,839 7,456 8,149 3,070 3,043 2,356 2,378 − 98
         Q4 52,127 48,392 2,875 49,451 15,295 7,759 8,200 3,218 3,264 2,409 2,958 + 2,676
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043
         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2008 19,785 19,608 19,163 2,605 9,054 4,225 868 941 + 622
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2013          Q1 5,907 5,871 5,916 805 2,489 1,359 212 294 − 9
         Q2 6,229 6,207 6,037 827 2,498 1,436 217 289 + 192         Q3 6,183 6,166 6,205 868 2,534 1,441 223 290 − 21         Q4 6,635 6,619 6,171 865 2,537 1,451 221 278 + 464
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2008 + 233,356 + 26,208 + 6,888 + 9,036 2008 1,666,170 4,440 519,017 176,872 155,902 809,940
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,783,669 4,440 556,202 188,858 136,638 897,531
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,090,037 4,440 688,938 208,244 135,883 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,118,535 4,440 629,678 208,005 123,907 1,152,5052012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,195,819 4,440 633,355 200,406 144,172 1,213,4452013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,181,924 4,440 623,685 190,921 150,379 1,212,5002014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 
p 2,184,325 4,440 611,873 190,343 138,430 1,239,239
2013          Q1 + 62,030 + 9,538 + 1,303 − 11,879 2013          Q1 2,184,951 4,440 625,566 194,817 148,833 1,211,296         Q2 + 73,126 + 8,483 + 11,024 + 9,979          Q2 2,185,626 4,440 618,479 201,034 141,755 1,219,918         Q3 + 48,764 − 11,984 − 13,555 − 18,090          Q3 2,166,992 4,440 619,743 191,759 148,347 1,202,703         Q4 + 62,862 + 13,436 + 8,521 + 15,389          Q4 2,181,924 4,440 623,685 190,921 150,379 1,212,500
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 
p 2,170,979 4,440 620,478 190,620 134,896 1,220,546
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 2,178,989 4,440 618,658 189,862 135,638 1,230,392
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 2,180,165 4,440 620,462 189,118 132,664 1,233,481
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 2,184,325 4,440 611,873 190,343 138,430 1,239,239
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 p 2,183,890 4,440 619,519 189,242 149,004 1,221,685
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 p 2,150,046 4,440 606,064 187,345 171,957 1,180,239
         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 p 2,151,964 4,440 610,050 188,220 194,192 1,155,062
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund 
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2009 1,657,842 105,970 361,727 174,219 9,471 594,999 2,495 300,927 59 103,462 4,442 71
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,605 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,307 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,241 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,793 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,802,340 56,911 416,586 248,589 6,354 666,922 1,580 289,587 20 111,350 4,440 2
         Q2 1,806,613 57,919 415,548 234,612 5,890 679,494 1,516 295,700 23 111,469 4,440 2
         Q3 1,794,764 54,808 417,120 247,942 4,970 672,215 1,464 280,055 28 111,721 4,440 2
         Q4 1,816,536 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,948 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,809,802 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,899 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 1,822,342 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 286,242 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 1,818,961 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 281,400 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 1,822,784 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 282,492 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 p 1,821,955 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,575 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,806,893 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,284 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,810,699 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 269,566 42 110,741 4,440 2
Central government7,8,9
2009 1,033,017 104,409 113,637 174,219 9,471 594,780 2,495 18,347 − 11,148 4,442 70
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013          Q1 1,122,570 54,962 113,866 248,589 6,354 666,499 1,580 17,469 − 8,811 4,440 2
         Q2 1,131,053 56,494 111,826 234,612 5,890 678,971 1,516 28,735 − 8,568 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,069 54,539 110,074 247,942 4,970 671,692 1,464 15,246 − 8,702 4,440 2
         Q4 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
State government
2009 505,359 1,561 248,091 .... 167,310 8 88,389 . 1
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,571 1,975 283,601 .... 154,545 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,822 950 299,750 .... 138,684 52 101,386 . 1
2013          Q1 541,400 1,949 302,720 .... 137,220 2 99,510 . 1
         Q2 538,458 1,425 303,722 .... 133,435 5 99,871 . 1
         Q3 538,070 270 307,046 .... 130,755 10 99,989 . 1
         Q4 546,334 125 313,412 .... 134,418 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 540,650 261 309,346 .... 132,537 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 543,169 1,098 314,024 .... 129,130 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 547,267 856 322,362 .... 125,767 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 550,200 0 326,188 .... 125,310 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 p 547,683 1,821 323,055 .... 124,140 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 p 538,480 2,040 320,492 .... 117,821 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 p 543,834 2,056 326,447 .... 117,081 5 98,245 . 1
Local government10
2009 119,466 . − . . 219 . 115,270 52 3,925 . .
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013          Q1 138,370 . − . . 423 . 134,898 18 3,030 . .
         Q2 137,102 . − . . 523 . 133,530 18 3,030 . .
         Q3 137,625 . − . . 523 . 134,053 18 3,030 . .
         Q4 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 140,198 . − . . 1,046 . 135,811 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 140,719 . − . . 1,046 . 136,332 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 141,274 . − . . 1,046 . 136,888 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 142,456 . − . . 1,297 . 136,674 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 p 147,230 . − . . 1,597 . 141,146 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 p 146,776 . − . . 1,847 . 140,442 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 p 147,194 . − . . 1,997 . 140,710 37 4,450 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From March 2009, in-
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities cluding debt of the Investment and Repayment Fund. 9From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 10Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2014   2015
  2013   2014   2015   2013   2014   2015   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 106.3 108.1 110.4 0.4 1.6 2.2 3.5 0.4 1.6 1.1 1.1 2.3 1.9Construction 101.3 104.0 103.8 − 1.2 2.6 − 0.2 11.6 1.7 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.0 0.0 0.2Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 103.9 105.2 106.9 − 2.4 1.3 1.6 2.5 0.6 0.7 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.8Information and communication 122.6 125.5 129.1 6.0 2.4 2.9 2.4 2.2 2.5 2.4 1.8 3.1 2.9Financial and insuranceactivities 99.1 99.8 98.8 0.5 0.6 − 1.0 0.6 1.9 − 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 1.5 − 2.0Real estate activities 102.6 103.6 105.0 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.3 0.9 1.0 0.9 0.8 1.3 2.1Business services 
1 104.0 106.6 109.6 0.6 2.4 2.8 3.0 1.7 2.6 2.2 1.9 2.9 2.7
Public services, education and
health 102.6 103.7 105.0 0.6 1.0 1.3 1.6 0.6 0.7 1.2 1.4 1.2 1.2Other services 98.4 98.5 98.9 − 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.3
Gross value added 104.4 106.0 107.7 0.3 1.5 1.6 2.6 0.9 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.6 1.6Gross domestic product 
2 104.4 106.1 107.9 0.3 1.6 1.7 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.6 1.8
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.0 103.9 105.9 0.6 0.9 1.9 1.0 0.6 0.5 1.6 2.3 1.8 2.1
Government consumption 103.0 104.8 107.7 0.8 1.7 2.8 1.1 1.9 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.9
Machinery and equipment 101.6 106.3 110.0 − 2.3 4.5 3.6 8.4 4.5 3.8 2.3 3.9 3.4 4.2Premises 107.5 110.7 110.9 − 1.1 2.9 0.2 12.3 0.5 − 0.0 1.1 − 1.8 0.7 0.8Other investment 
4 106.3 109.7 112.6 − 0.3 3.1 2.7 1.9 3.2 3.7 3.7 2.7 2.7 2.8
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2
Domestic demand 102.7 104.1 105.7 0.8 1.3 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.0 1.5 1.4 0.8 2.0Net exports 
6 . . . − 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 − 0.1 1.1 0.2 0.0 0.9 − 0.1
Exports 113.0 117.6 123.9 1.6 4.0 5.4 4.4 2.7 4.7 4.4 4.8 6.5 5.1Imports 109.9 114.0 120.6 3.1 3.7 5.7 4.7 3.3 2.4 4.6 5.8 5.4 6.2
Gross domestic product 
2 104.4 106.1 107.9 0.3 1.6 1.7 2.6 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.6 1.8
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,562.7 1,592.2 1,632.7 1.9 1.9 2.5 2.1 1.7 1.5 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.7
Government consumption 541.9 564.0 589.2 3.7 4.1 4.5 3.8 4.5 4.1 4.0 3.5 4.1 4.8Machinery and equipment 181.3 189.8 197.3 − 2.0 4.7 4.0 8.5 4.4 4.0 2.6 4.2 3.9 4.8Premises 277.2 291.8 297.2 1.6 5.2 1.9 15.6 3.3 1.8 2.7 0.2 2.4 2.4Other investment 
4 98.8 103.5 108.5 0.9 4.8 4.7 3.2 4.9 5.6 5.4 4.8 4.8 4.8
Changes in inventories 5 − 10.5 − 22.0 − 35.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,651.4 2,719.3 2,789.7 2.5 2.6 2.6 4.1 2.6 1.3 2.4 2.1 1.8 3.1Net exports 169.4 196.4 236.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,283.1 1,333.2 1,419.0 1.3 3.9 6.4 3.8 2.2 4.8 4.7 5.6 8.4 6.3Imports 1,113.7 1,136.8 1,182.0 1.3 2.1 4.0 2.6 1.5 1.1 3.1 3.4 4.6 5.0
Gross domestic product 
2 2,820.8 2,915.7 3,026.6 2.4 3.4 3.8 4.5 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.7 3.8
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 104.9 105.9 106.6 1.2 1.0 0.6 1.1 1.0 1.0 0.7 0.4 0.9 0.6Gross domestic product 104.7 106.6 108.8 2.1 1.7 2.1 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.0Terms of trade 98.3 99.7 102.5 1.4 1.5 2.7 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.7 3.1 2.6 2.3
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,430.8 1,485.3 1,542.8 2.8 3.8 3.9 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 4.1 3.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 665.8 690.9 722.3 0.9 3.8 4.6 8.5 0.3 4.2 1.5 3.7 2.5 4.2
National income 2,096.6 2,176.2 2,265.1 2.2 3.8 4.1 5.5 2.7 3.9 3.1 3.5 3.6 4.0
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,882.0 2,982.4 3,093.8 2.2 3.5 3.7 4.8 2.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 3.3 3.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2015. Initial annual ing households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer software and enter-
results for 2015: figures computed in January 2016. 1Professional, scientific, techni- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net increase
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2012 106.2 105.9 97.3 107.5 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.8
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.8 114.8
2014 107.9 108.4 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 x 108.4 106.0 97.4 110.2 106.1 117.6 102.8 101.8 111.5 109.2 113.0 121.6
 
2014          Q4 111.6 118.9 99.6 112.1 103.6 122.8 104.7 106.1 110.7 111.2 125.3 118.9
2015          Q1 r 105.3 r 84.6 103.7 108.5 106.2 114.3 104.0 99.3 110.4 107.5 105.5 126.4
         Q2 r 108.5 r 108.3 91.9 110.7 107.6 117.7 101.5 100.7 113.4 108.0 114.5 122.2
         Q3 r 109.1 113.8 93.4 110.5 107.4 116.7 100.3 103.2 112.2 110.9 112.1 119.3
         Q4 x 110.9 117.5 100.6 111.3 103.3 121.8 105.5 104.2 110.0 110.3 120.1 118.5
 
2014          Dec 105.3 115.9 101.9 104.3 90.3 119.7 93.9 100.0 96.3 102.7 136.1 96.6
2015          Jan 98.3 71.6 105.5 101.2 102.0 102.2 95.7 97.5 105.1 100.6 94.1 111.5
         Feb 102.6 79.4 100.3 106.2 103.2 113.2 103.2 94.7 107.6 105.9 102.2 128.9
         Mar r 115.1 r 102.8 105.3 118.2 113.3 127.5 113.2 105.6 118.5 116.0 120.1 138.7
         Apr r 107.5 r 105.6 96.5 109.2 106.7 115.9 102.2 98.6 112.9 104.8 110.9 122.7
         May r 107.4 r 107.8 89.6 109.7 106.9 116.1 100.5 100.6 112.6 106.4 111.7 122.3
         June r 110.5 r 111.4 89.6 113.1 109.3 121.1 101.9 102.9 114.7 112.7 120.8 121.7
         July 2,r 111.6 115.8 94.4 113.3 109.6 121.0 97.5 104.7 114.6 111.5 114.9 128.4
         Aug 2,r 102.4 110.5 91.0 102.7 102.7 104.1 90.9 101.0 106.0 105.2 104.5 98.7
         Sep r 113.2 115.1 94.7 115.4 109.9 124.9 112.4 103.8 116.0 116.1 117.0 130.7
         Oct x 113.9 118.4 98.9 115.2 110.2 123.3 109.7 106.7 117.8 112.4 114.8 132.3
         Nov x 115.8 120.0 102.3 117.0 109.7 127.1 113.0 108.7 117.4 115.6 119.6 131.6
         Dec x,p 103.0 114.0 100.7 101.7 89.9 114.9 93.7 97.2 94.7 102.8 125.9 91.7
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.2
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.8
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 4.1
2015 x + 0.5 − 2.2 + 5.1 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 1.8
 
2014          Q4 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.8
2015          Q1 r + 0.2 r − 3.8 + 4.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 2.4 + 3.1
         Q2 r + 1.3 r − 2.0 + 7.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
         Q3 r + 1.1 − 2.3 + 7.8 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 4.1
         Q4 x − 0.6 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 4.1 − 0.3
 
2014          Dec + 0.8 − 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 0.5
2015          Jan + 0.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 2.4 + 3.5
         Feb + 0.2 − 7.0 + 6.3 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.6
         Mar r − 0.1 r − 2.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 2.9 + 1.5
         Apr r + 0.7 r − 2.8 + 9.0 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 2.2 + 4.1 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.5 + 0.2
         May r + 2.3 r + 0.2 + 4.6 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 2.9 + 6.2 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.7
         June r + 0.8 r − 3.4 + 7.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 1.0
         July 2,r + 0.5 − 2.9 + 11.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.1
         Aug 2,r + 2.7 − 1.2 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 5.0 + 8.9 + 0.5 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 17.8
         Sep r + 0.1 − 2.6 + 5.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 5.9 + 0.4
         Oct x + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 2.2 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.9 − 1.8 − 1.3 + 5.1
         Nov x + 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 2.0
         Dec x,p − 2.2 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 7.5 − 5.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 p 114.6 + 2.0 103.0 − 0.9 122.8 + 3.5 114.6 + 3.4 106.6 + 4.1 117.3 + 3.2
2014          Dec 112.7 + 4.5 92.6 + 2.7 128.9 + 5.7 97.7 + 3.1 92.9 + 5.1 99.4 + 2.5
2015          Jan 112.8 + 0.5 107.3 − 1.4 116.8 + 2.4 111.6 − 2.9 104.8 + 3.6 114.0 − 4.8
         Feb 111.9 − 0.4 101.7 − 2.4 118.0 + 0.7 119.8 + 2.0 101.4 + 4.8 126.2 + 1.3         Mar 125.0 + 3.7 113.0 − 0.1 134.3 + 5.9 118.6 + 5.3 113.0 + 0.3 120.5 + 6.9
         Apr 116.2 + 3.4 104.4 − 1.1 125.2 + 6.0 111.2 + 3.9 104.2 − 3.6 113.6 + 6.6
         May 114.1 + 6.4 105.0 + 2.7 120.8 + 8.8 111.8 + 5.8 102.3 + 4.3 115.1 + 6.1         June 123.0 + 8.8 106.6 + 0.9 135.9 + 14.3 113.8 + 4.9 106.9 + 1.9 116.2 + 5.9
         July 116.5 − 0.1 105.1 − 1.2 124.3 + 0.2 118.7 + 3.5 108.0 + 10.3 122.4 + 1.6
         Aug 103.1 + 2.9 94.0 − 0.5 108.4 + 5.3 110.8 + 0.2 100.2 + 6.4 114.4 − 1.6         Sep 111.9 +
 0.0 100.2 − 1.6 120.0 + 0.9 113.3 + 0.8 115.5 + 6.0 112.5 − 1.0
         Oct 
113.5 − 1.3 102.1 − 4.7 120.5 + 0.0 121.5 + 6.0 114.5 + 5.6 123.9 + 6.1
         Nov 
117.2 + 2.2 105.5 + 1.2 125.4 + 2.5 116.6 + 2.9 110.0 + 4.9 118.9 + 2.2
         Dec p 110.2 − 2.2 90.7 − 2.1 124.4 − 3.5 106.9 + 9.4 98.2 + 5.7 109.9 + 10.6
From the domestic market
2011 109.8 + 10.4 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.4 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015 p 107.1 + 1.4 99.0 − 1.8 115.6 + 4.2 104.9 + 2.4 103.2 + 0.3 105.6 + 3.3
2014          Dec 97.2 + 3.4 87.8 − 0.1 108.0 + 6.2 88.4 + 4.6 84.8 + 4.2 89.7 + 4.8
2015          Jan 105.6 − 1.1 103.0 − 3.6 108.5 + 1.0 104.2 + 0.9 103.2 + 0.8 104.5 + 0.9
         Feb 104.9 − 1.2 96.7 − 5.8 112.2 + 2.7 110.5 + 1.7 100.6 + 0.4 114.0 + 2.1         Mar 121.2 + 3.8 108.2 +
 0.0 136.1 + 7.3 110.5 + 2.4 108.5 − 4.0 111.2 + 4.8
         Apr 
108.5 + 0.7 100.9 − 3.1 117.5 + 4.2 99.8 + 0.8 102.8 − 4.5 98.8 + 2.9
         May 106.2 + 2.2 101.6 + 0.3 111.7 + 3.5 101.0 + 5.9 94.4 + 1.5 103.3 + 7.3
         June 106.7 + 1.4 100.6 − 1.3 113.8 + 4.1 101.3 + 1.4 100.9 − 5.3 101.4 + 3.9
         July 111.9 + 3.1 101.4 − 2.5 122.8 + 8.6 109.5 + 1.1 106.1 + 4.4 110.7 + 0.0
         Aug 
99.9 + 2.0 93.9 − 0.1 104.9 + 4.0 106.4 + 3.3 99.7 + 4.1 108.8 + 3.1
         Sep 105.4 + 3.1 96.4 − 0.4 114.0 + 6.4 107.5 + 2.1 113.8 + 1.3 105.3 + 2.4
         Oct 107.4 − 1.5 98.4 − 3.5 116.2 − 0.1 109.0 + 2.2 112.8 + 1.9 107.6 + 2.2
         Nov 110.7 + 4.5 102.2 + 2.0 119.5 + 6.6 108.6 + 5.8 109.3 + 2.8 108.4 + 7.0
         Dec p 96.9 − 0.3 84.6 − 3.6 110.2 + 2.0 90.9 + 2.8 85.7 + 1.1 92.8 + 3.5
From abroad
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.2 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.5 + 0.1 107.8 + 3.6 97.4 − 3.6 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.7 − 0.5 118.4 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.7 100.9 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.6 123.4 + 4.2 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2015 p 120.7 + 2.4 107.6 + 0.2 127.3 + 3.2 122.8 + 4.1 109.6 + 7.3 127.3 + 3.1
2014          Dec 125.3 + 5.3 98.3 + 5.7 141.8 + 5.5 105.7 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.8 107.6 + 0.8
2015          Jan 118.6 + 1.8 112.3 + 1.1 122.0 + 3.1 118.0 − 5.5 106.2 + 6.1 122.0 − 8.5
         Feb 117.6 + 0.3 107.6 + 1.6 121.5 − 0.6 127.8 + 2.3 102.1 + 8.7 136.6 + 0.7         Mar 128.0 + 3.6 118.7 − 0.2 133.2 + 5.0 125.5 + 7.5 117.0 + 4.1 128.4 + 8.5
         Apr 122.4 + 5.2 108.5 + 1.1 129.9 + 7.1 120.9 + 6.2 105.5 − 2.9 126.1 + 9.1
         May 120.5 + 9.6 109.0 + 5.6 126.4 + 12.0 121.1 + 5.7 109.2 + 6.5 125.1 + 5.3         June 136.3 + 14.1 113.7 + 3.3 149.6 + 19.9 124.5 + 7.5 112.2 + 8.4 128.8 + 7.4
         July 120.3 − 2.4 109.4 + 0.1 125.3 − 4.2 126.6 + 5.3 109.6 + 15.7 132.4 + 2.7
         Aug 105.7 + 3.5 94.2 − 0.9 110.6 + 6.2 114.5 − 2.2 100.6 + 8.4 119.2 − 4.9         Sep 117.2 − 2.1 104.7 − 2.8 123.7 − 1.9 118.2 − 0.3 116.9 + 10.1 118.7 − 3.3
         Oct 118.5 − 1.1 106.5 − 5.8 123.2 + 0.1 132.1 + 8.9 116.0 + 9.0 137.7 + 8.9
         Nov 122.4 + 0.4 109.3 + 0.4 129.1 + 0.4 123.5 + 0.8 110.7 + 6.9 127.9 − 0.9         Dec 
p 121.0 − 3.4 97.8 − 0.5 133.2 − 6.1 120.5 + 14.0 109.0 + 9.0 124.5 + 15.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2010 99.6 + 1.3 99.7 + 6.0 99.6 + 9.6 99.7 + 4.6 99.6 + 2.8 99.6 − 2.7 99.6 + 5.7 99.6 − 5.5
2011 107.0 + 7.4 112.2 + 12.5 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.9 91.5 − 8.1 102.0 + 2.4 112.7 + 13.2 95.9 − 3.7
2012 114.7 + 7.2 121.4 + 8.2 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.8 + 0.3 108.0 + 5.9 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.7 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.6 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.6 − 0.5 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.2 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.1 − 3.3
 
2014          Nov 99.4 − 6.8 113.0 − 5.5 130.2 + 5.9 116.7 − 11.9 68.3 − 9.1 85.7 − 8.5 109.0 − 11.5 77.2 − 7.3
         Dec 102.0 − 5.1 122.1 + 1.5 154.4 + 12.8 115.2 − 5.0 79.3 − 6.6 81.8 − 13.6 109.8 − 4.6 72.9 − 17.2
2015          Jan 95.4 + 2.5 101.9 − 4.3 122.3 + 8.3 100.6 − 11.2 65.8 − 10.6 88.8 + 11.4 104.3 − 5.8 75.4 + 12.4
         Feb 104.9 + 2.6 113.5 + 0.6 136.7 + 2.0 105.7 − 7.5 90.9 + 35.9 96.3 + 5.0 103.6 − 2.6 93.4 + 9.5
         Mar 142.6 + 2.7 149.9 + 2.3 189.6 + 14.8 133.5 − 9.7 120.5 + 14.2 135.3 + 3.1 136.8 − 3.0 129.6 + 2.9
         Apr 126.9 − 5.3 133.1 − 0.2 171.4 + 0.8 118.5 − 2.5 100.9 + 5.3 120.8 − 10.3 118.1 − 5.8 118.2 − 7.9
         May 132.9 + 4.1 138.3 + 5.7 167.9 + 6.9 131.1 + 6.7 101.4 − 1.5 127.5 + 2.4 130.8 + 8.7 121.0 − 2.0         June 137.7 + 4.2 145.5 + 3.9 175.0 + 7.4 139.1 + 4.5 106.6 − 7.5 129.9 + 4.6 134.0 + 1.7 126.5 + 5.2
         July 131.9 − 3.4 139.3 − 0.4 184.5 + 28.1 120.3 − 18.3 107.1 − 1.9 124.5 − 6.5 120.7 − 13.5 122.3 − 6.2
         Aug 123.9 + 2.0 130.2 + 6.2 157.6 + 24.1 123.2 − 5.7 96.9 + 7.9 117.7 − 2.2 119.5 − 4.2 115.0 − 0.8         Sep 134.2 + 10.2 151.3 + 16.4 202.3 + 35.8 133.7 + 3.7 103.1 + 7.3 117.2 + 3.2 128.2 + 4.0 113.1 + 3.5
         Oct 117.7 + 3.5 128.0 − 1.0 158.4 + 4.2 116.4 − 10.0 102.8 + 21.7 107.4 + 9.6 120.4 + 1.1 98.6 + 6.4
         Nov 118.8 + 19.5 137.1 + 21.3 152.3 + 17.0 144.6 + 23.9 84.9 + 24.3 100.4 + 17.2 140.4 + 28.8 83.2 + 7.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.7 + 2.6 101.1 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.5 + 0.3 107.0 + 7.8
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 0.3 105.2 + 2.6 102.2 + 0.6 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.4 − 0.1 105.8 − 1.1
2013 106.3 + 1.7 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.8 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.1 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 3 108.2 + 1.8 102.8 + 1.5 111.6 + 2.4 105.0 + 1.9 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 111.0 + 7.7 107.0 + 2.4
2015 4 111.2 + 2.8 105.6 + 2.7 114.9 + 3.0 105.8 + 0.8 95.6 + 1.1 104.8 + 2.8 117.1 + 5.5 ... ...
 
2014          Dec 127.2 + 3.8 121.9 + 4.2 129.1 + 3.9 123.6 + 3.4 146.5 + 3.8 107.4 + 3.9 128.2 + 10.2 101.9 + 4.2
2015          Jan 101.7 + 2.8 98.1 + 3.7 105.0 + 3.4 89.5 − 1.4 102.0 + 2.1 91.4 + 3.9 112.1 + 6.6 95.9 + 4.7
         Feb 98.1 + 2.4 93.9 + 3.1 102.3 + 1.7 81.9 − 0.6 86.0 + 5.9 91.1 + 1.3 109.1 + 6.2 101.6 + 6.2
         Mar 113.0 + 1.5 107.0 + 1.8 115.9 + 0.1 106.1 − 3.6 89.8 + 4.7 113.4 + 1.2 119.1 + 8.5 128.3 + 8.2
         Apr 112.3 + 3.3 105.7 + 3.0 117.1 + 3.0 109.4 + 5.0 82.4 + 1.0 110.0 + 2.7 117.5 + 7.5 123.2 + 9.3
         May 111.9 + 4.2 105.4 + 3.7 117.4 + 5.1 108.6 + 1.8 81.7 − 3.2 109.0 + 6.1 113.9 + 6.6 120.5 + 10.0         June 108.6 + 1.6 102.7 + 1.4 114.2 + 0.5 105.7 + 3.0 82.0 − 0.2 102.6 + 3.3 113.3 + 3.7 121.5 + 9.7
         July 111.6 + 4.0 106.3 + 4.1 115.6 + 3.2 108.7 + 5.2 89.9 +
 0.0 103.3 + 4.0 120.1 + 4.9 118.4 + 9.0
         Aug 108.2 + 2.6 103.0 + 2.6 115.3 + 6.3 96.7 − 9.7 86.1 + 2.9 99.8 + 0.5 112.4 + 5.5 105.7 + 6.3
         Sep 108.5 + 3.4 102.9 + 3.7 110.2 + 3.8 112.8 + 4.9 93.5 + 2.0 102.2 + 3.5 113.3 + 4.7 114.6 + 7.0
         Oct 114.7 + 2.9 108.3 + 2.5 115.8 + 2.0 120.9 + 6.4 98.0 − 0.4 110.6 + 1.8 119.7 + 4.1 124.5 + 7.3
         Nov 116.0 + 2.9 110.0 + 2.4 116.8 + 3.5 105.4 − 2.1 111.7 + 2.0 114.1 + 3.1 123.5 + 6.5 124.4 + 10.5         Dec  
4 129.4 + 1.7 123.7 + 1.5 132.7 + 2.8 123.5 − 0.1 144.0 − 1.7 110.4 + 2.8 130.8 + 2.0 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2014 are provisional,
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business and particularly uncertain in recent months owing to estimat es for missing reports.
statistics, Tables II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In 4 Unadjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2011 41,577 + 1.4 28,687 + 2.4 8,579 19,091 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 42,060 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,738 19,600 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013 42,328 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,782 19,954 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 4572014 42,703 + 0.9 30,197 + 1.6 8,859 20,328 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015
8 43,032 8 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,795 859 6.4 569
2012          Q4 42,418 + 1.0 29,757 + 1.8 8,840 19,919 766 4,990 113 76 2,782 878 6.6 446
2013          Q1 41,880 + 0.7 29,385 + 1.4 8,697 19,771 701 4,972 234 102 3,131 1,109 7.4 444
         Q2 42,249 + 0.6 29,573 + 1.2 8,746 19,864 725 5,016 99 87 2,941 945 6.8 459         Q3 42,515 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,809 19,952 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471         Q4 42,666 + 0.6 30,118 + 1.2 8,877 20,230 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 42,226 + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,759 20,099 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,667 + 1.0 30,080 + 1.7 8,828 20,251 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487         Q3 42,903 + 0.9 30,284 + 1.7 8,895 20,341 799 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512         Q4 43,016 + 0.8 30,614 + 1.6 8,955 20,622 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 42,506 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,831 20,547 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,953 + 0.7 30,671 + 2.0 8,894 20,736 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822
9 6.3 560
         Q3 43,239 + 0.8 10 30,932 10 + 2.1 10 8,975 10 20,866 10 841 10 4,870 ... 10 34 2,759 827 6.3 595
         Q4 8 43,428 8 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,655 775 6.0 604
2012          Sep 42,391 + 1.0 29,754 + 1.8 8,865 19,858 787 4,958 66 54 2,788 862 6.5 485         Oct 42,494 + 1.1 29,823 + 1.9 8,866 19,936 780 4,972 85 70 2,753 846 6.5 468         Nov 42,494 + 1.0 29,809 + 1.8 8,848 19,965 766 5,010 98 85 2,751 864 6.5 451         Dec 42,265 + 0.9 29,528 + 1.7 8,747 19,856 714 5,018 156 72 2,840 924 6.7 421
2013          Jan 41,862 + 0.8 29,334 + 1.4 8,685 19,737 697 4,961 234 104 3,138 1,121 7.4 420
         Feb 41,853 + 0.8 29,345 + 1.5 8,682 19,749 698 4,962 245 104 3,156 1,132 7.4 448         Mar 41,926 + 0.7 29,423 + 1.2 8,701 19,798 698 4,969 222 98 3,098 1,072 7.3 463         Apr 42,083 + 0.6 29,562 + 1.2 8,744 19,863 718 4,994 113 100 3,020 1,001 7.1 460         May 42,288 + 0.6 29,637 + 1.2 8,762 19,899 734 5,036 86 74 2,937 935 6.8 457         June 42,376 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,763 19,863 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459         July 42,419 + 0.6 29,596 + 1.2 8,768 19,814 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,484 + 0.6 29,843 + 1.2 8,825 19,998 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,641 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,905 20,224 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,746 + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,899 20,252 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,730 + 0.6 30,149 + 1.1 8,888 20,249 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,523 + 0.6 29,884 + 1.2 8,781 20,158 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 42,170 + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,738 20,054 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,195 + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,749 20,085 728 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,312 + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,796 20,158 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,522 + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,825 20,240 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,684 + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,835 20,289 750 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481         June 42,795 + 1.0 30,175 + 1.9 8,853 20,292 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,833 + 1.0 30,121 + 1.8 8,859 20,217 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,857 + 0.9 30,312 + 1.6 8,903 20,358 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 43,020 + 0.9 30,663 + 1.7 8,991 20,603 812 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,118 + 0.9 30,676 + 1.6 8,979 20,641 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,067 + 0.8 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,642 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,862 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,863 20,563 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan 42,445 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,813 20,493 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,458 + 0.6 30,342 + 1.9 8,818 20,542 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,616 + 0.7 30,528 + 2.0 8,864 20,649 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,798 + 0.6 30,645 + 1.9 8,893 20,720 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 42,977 + 0.7 30,718 + 2.0 8,900 20,773 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815
9 6.3 557
         June 43,084 + 0.7 30,771 + 2.0 8,914 20,785 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,133 + 0.7 30,744 + 2.1 8,933 20,722 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,195 + 0.8
10 30,995 10 + 2.3 10 8,994 10 20,904 10 847 10 4,845 ... 10 26 2,796 851 6.4 597
         Sep 43,388 + 0.9 10 31,344 10 + 2.2 10 9,080 10 21,158 10 851 10 4,812 ... 10 40 2,708 799 6.2 600
         Oct 43,494 + 0.9 10 31,379 10 + 2.3 10 9,071 10 21,210 10 847 10 4,813 ... 10 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
         Nov 8 43,490 8 + 1.0 10 31,393 10 + 2.5 10 9,061 10 21,250 10 843 10 4,842 ... 10 68 2,633 764 6.0 610
         Dec 8 43,301 8 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,920 961 6.7 581
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 9From May
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- 2015 calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Unadjusted figures esti-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2013 and 2014, the estimated values
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 1.4 % for employees sub-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given ject to social contributions, by a maximum of 6.0 % for persons solely in jobs
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 21.3 % for cyclically
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located induced short-time work. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producer
and non- prices of
durable industrial Index of
consumer Services Con- products producer
goods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 132.2 113.5
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 141.9 110.4
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 133.1 101.0
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 120.8 96.8
2015 106.9 112.4 105.1 107.4 106.9 106.7 111.3 103.9 ... 104.9 100.9 80.1 92.5
 
2014          Mar 106.7 112.3 104.2 115.9 105.4 104.9 106.2 120.4 103.8 104.1 126.0 96.9
         Apr 106.5 112.0 104.2 116.7 104.7 105.1 106.1 121.1 103.9 103.8 126.2 99.3
         May 106.4 111.6 103.9 116.7 104.3 105.2 109.5 105.9 118.8 103.9 103.8 129.2 98.9
         June 106.7 111.5 103.5 117.3 105.4 105.3 105.9 117.7 104.0 104.0 133.0 97.4
         July 107.0 111.3 103.2 117.0 106.7 105.4 105.8 113.9 104.1 103.6 127.7 95.6
         Aug 107.0 110.6 103.5 116.4 106.9 105.6 110.0 105.7 111.5 104.1 103.5 123.6 96.3
         Sep 107.0 110.9 104.5 116.5 105.8 105.6 105.7 107.9 104.3 103.8 122.2 95.0
         Oct 106.7 110.9 104.5 114.8 105.4 105.8 105.5 103.7 104.2 103.5 111.9 95.5
         Nov 106.7 110.4 104.7 113.5 105.7 105.9 110.1 105.5 103.6 104.2 102.7 103.1 97.5
         Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 102.7 103.9 101.0 84.3 96.0
2015          Jan 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.3 106.1 104.2 8 102.4 104.4 100.2 71.4 97.7
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 104.8 104.7 101.6 86.2 97.2
         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.2 105.3 102.6 86.9 98.9
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 104.5 106.0 105.6 103.2 94.0 98.3
         May 107.1 113.2 105.1 110.9 106.2 106.5 111.1 104.5 104.8 105.4 103.0 96.9 96.4
         June 107.0 112.6 104.9 110.4 106.3 106.6 104.4 105.3 105.3 102.5 93.3 94.9
         July 107.2 111.8 104.4 109.8 107.8 106.7 104.4 104.5 105.4 101.8 85.5 94.8
         Aug 107.2 111.5 104.9 107.5 108.1 106.8 111.5 103.9 102.1 104.9 100.3 72.3 89.0
         Sep 107.0 112.1 105.9 105.7 107.0 106.9 103.5 107.4 104.6 99.6 71.8 87.0
         Oct 107.0 112.7 106.1 104.9 106.9 107.0 103.1 108.8 104.4 99.3 72.6 86.2
         Nov 107.1 112.9 106.0 105.0 107.1 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.5 104.5 99.1 71.4 85.9
         Dec 107.0 112.4 105.6 102.0 108.4 107.1 102.4 ... 104.1 97.9 60.2 83.6
2016          Jan e 106.1 112.4 105.0 99.5 106.8 107.3 ... ... ... ... 50.0 82.3
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 32.2 + 13.5
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.3 − 2.7
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 6.2 − 8.5
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 9.2 − 4.2
2015 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.8 ... + 0.9 − 2.6 − 33.7 − 4.4
 
2014          Mar + 1.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 7.6 − 10.0
         Apr + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.9 − 1.3 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.3 − 4.5
         May + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         June + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.6 − 3.3
         July + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 4.6 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 4.5 − 4.3
         Aug + 0.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 0.8 − 6.5 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 8.6 − 1.8
         Sep + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 10.7 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 9.9 − 2.4
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 14.5 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 14.0 + 0.2
         Nov + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.6 − 0.9 − 15.3 + 0.3 − 2.1 − 20.9 + 1.2
         Dec + 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 16.1 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 35.9 − 0.6
2015          Jan − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 8 − 14.3 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 44.8 + 1.8
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 12.2 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 33.3 + 0.0
         Mar + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.6 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 31.0 + 2.1
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.5 − 12.5 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 25.5 − 1.0
         May + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 25.0 − 2.5
         June + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 1.4 − 10.5 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 29.8 − 2.6
         July + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 6.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 8.3 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 33.0 − 0.8
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 8.4 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 41.5 − 7.6
         Sep + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 41.2 − 8.4
         Oct + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 8.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 4.9 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 35.1 − 9.7
         Nov + 0.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 − 7.5 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.8 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 30.7 − 11.9
         Dec + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 6.5 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 2.3 ... + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.6 − 12.9
2016          Jan e + 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 5.8 + 1.4 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 30.0 − 15.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May 2011 and
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From January 2015 onwards,
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal and crude oil (Brent). 6Food,

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2007
969.3 3.3 648.9 2.9 356.4 − 0.7 1,005.3 1.6 1,543.0 1.8 158.1 3.5 10.2
2008 1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 358.2 0.5 1,029.1 2.4 1,582.6 2.6 165.9 4.9 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 383.2 7.0 1,055.7 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 387.7 1.2 1,089.9 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 383.0 − 1.2 1,112.4 2.1 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.5 4.1 757.8 3.9 389.3 1.6 1,147.1 3.1 1,690.4 2.2 156.5 − 1.0 9.3
2013 1,168.3 3.1 779.7 2.9 398.5 2.4 1,178.2 2.7 1,719.8 1.7 157.1 0.4 9.1
2014 1,213.7 3.9 808.1 3.6 409.8 2.8 1,217.8 3.4 1,759.7 2.3 167.6 6.7 9.5
2014          Q2 296.5 3.9 193.5 3.8 100.5 1.5 294.0 3.0 435.5 2.0 39.8 6.0 9.1
         Q3 299.7 3.8 203.9 3.6 102.5 2.7 306.5 3.3 440.6 1.7 35.4 4.4 8.0
         Q4 334.8 3.8 222.0 3.5 102.6 4.7 324.6 3.9 447.5 3.1 36.7 13.0 8.2
2015          Q1 292.6 3.5 194.0 2.9 107.5 3.2 301.5 3.0 448.4 2.8 58.0 4.1 12.9
         Q2 309.0 4.2 200.6 3.7 105.2 4.7 305.8 4.0 448.0 2.9 41.7 4.9 9.3
         Q3 311.8 4.0 212.0 4.0 107.3 4.6 319.3 4.2 453.1 2.8 36.8 4.2 8.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2015. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2008 96.5 2.8 96.3 2.9 96.2 3.1 95.9 3.3 97.6 2.4
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.3 2.2 98.2 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.7 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.82013 107.1 2.5 107.1 2.5 107.4 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.12014 110.3 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.4 2.8 110.4 2.9 111.4 2.7
2015 112.9 2.4 112.7 2.3 113.0 2.4 113.0 2.4 . .
2014          Q3 112.3 2.8 112.2 2.7 112.6 2.8 110.9 2.8 109.7 2.6
         Q4 123.1 2.9 123.0 2.8 123.3 2.8 111.2 2.9 121.7 2.7
2015          Q1 104.5 2.2 104.4 2.2 104.3 2.3 111.7 2.4 107.6 2.5
         Q2 105.9 2.3 105.7 2.2 106.1 2.3 112.9 2.4 112.5 3.2
         Q3 115.2 2.5 115.0 2.5 115.3 2.4 113.7 2.5 112.8 2.8
         Q4 126.1 2.4 125.8 2.3 126.2 2.3 113.9 2.4 . .
2015          June 105.5 2.2 105.3 2.2 105.7 2.2 113.1 2.3 . .
         July 133.3 2.4 133.1 2.4 133.4 2.3 113.5 2.4 . .
         Aug 106.0 2.5 105.8 2.5 106.2 2.5 113.7 2.5 . .
         Sep 106.1 2.5 105.9 2.5 106.3 2.5 113.8 2.5 . .
         Oct 106.3 2.6 106.1 2.5 106.3 2.4 113.9 2.5 . .
         Nov 163.7 2.5 163.4 2.4 163.9 2.4 113.9 2.5 . .
         Dec 108.2 2.1 108.0 2.0 108.3 2.1 113.9 2.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2015. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.1 176.8 160.9
2012 1,904.7 1,178.7 380.6 490.5 240.6 726.0 189.9 179.1 125.9 561.6 1,343.1 719.0 380.1 624.1 180.0 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.3 635.9 191.3 166.8
2014 2,117.2 1,311.0 433.0 534.4 260.1 806.3 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.0 1,529.2 835.3 434.3 693.9 216.0 179.8
2014          Q3 2,043.4 1,263.4 403.1 522.2 259.4 780.0 206.8 190.0 136.0 586.1 1,457.3 793.2 407.0 664.0 200.6 172.0
         Q4 2,117.2 1,311.0 433.0 534.4 260.1 806.3 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.0 1,529.2 835.3 434.3 693.9 216.0 179.8
2015          Q1 2,257.4 1,399.4 456.7 558.9 284.4 858.0 220.3 212.5 139.0 607.7 1,649.8 910.0 454.1 739.7 224.9 184.3
         Q2 p 2,218.5 1,384.0 459.8 557.6 281.8 834.5 219.1 204.4 132.0 629.9 1,588.6 857.6 449.8 731.0 224.7 180.7
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.8 9.5 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014 100.0 61.9 20.5 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2014          Q3 100.0 61.8 19.7 25.6 12.7 38.2 10.1 9.3 6.7 28.7 71.3 38.8 19.9 32.5 9.8 8.4
         Q4 100.0 61.9 20.5 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2015          Q1 100.0 62.0 20.2 24.8 12.6 38.0 9.8 9.4 6.2 26.9 73.1 40.3 20.1 32.8 10.0 8.2
         Q2 p 100.0 62.4 20.7 25.1 12.7 37.6 9.9 9.2 6.0 28.4 71.6 38.7 20.3 33.0 10.1 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.7
2012 1,540.7 921.3 258.9 388.0 222.1 619.4 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.7 1,097.0 581.8 286.6 515.2 161.0 116.5
2013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 286.2 521.4 170.4 118.6
2014 1,693.7 1,016.3 278.4 425.8 246.5 677.4 187.0 143.6 102.1 456.2 1,237.5 667.4 325.9 570.0 194.4 126.4
2014          Q3 1,647.8 986.3 265.4 418.1 241.3 661.5 190.7 146.2 102.1 461.3 1,186.5 640.3 310.4 546.2 176.4 125.4         Q4 1,693.7 1,016.3 278.4 425.8 246.5 677.4 187.0 143.6 102.1 456.2 1,237.5 667.4 325.9 570.0 194.4 126.4
2015          Q1 1,810.1 1,084.9 291.7 445.3 269.4 725.2 202.3 162.9 108.4 470.3 1,339.8 730.0 341.4 609.8 202.0 134.5
         Q2
p 1,782.5 1,075.0 295.2 446.2 267.7 707.5 202.0 156.0 107.0 492.7 1,289.8 693.7 343.5 596.1 195.9 132.0
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.4 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.6 40.0 11.0 8.5 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2014          Q3 100.0 59.9 16.1 25.4 14.7 40.1 11.6 8.9 6.2 28.0 72.0 38.9 18.8 33.2 10.7 7.6
         Q4 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.6 40.0 11.0 8.5 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2015          Q1 100.0 59.9 16.1 24.6 14.9 40.1 11.2 9.0 6.0 26.0 74.0 40.3 18.9 33.7 11.2 7.4
         Q2 p 100.0 60.3 16.6 25.0 15.0 39.7 11.3 8.8 6.0 27.6 72.4 38.9 19.3 33.4 11.0 7.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.1
2012 364.0 257.4 121.7 102.6 18.4 106.5 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.9 246.1 137.1 93.6 108.9 18.9 44.2
2013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.8 48.2
2014 423.5 294.7 154.7 108.6 13.6 128.9 17.4 47.1 33.7 131.8 291.7 167.9 108.4 123.8 21.6 53.4
2014          Q3 395.6 277.1 137.7 104.2 18.1 118.5 16.1 43.8 33.9 124.8 270.8 152.9 96.6 117.9 24.2 46.5
         Q4 423.5 294.7 154.7 108.6 13.6 128.9 17.4 47.1 33.7 131.8 291.7 167.9 108.4 123.8 21.6 53.4
2015          Q1 447.3 314.5 165.0 113.6 14.9 132.8 17.9 49.6 30.6 137.3 310.0 180.1 112.7 129.9 23.0 49.8
         Q2 p 436.0 309.1 164.6 111.4 14.1 126.9 17.1 48.3 25.0 137.3 298.8 163.9 106.3 134.9 28.8 48.7
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.1
2012 100.0 70.7 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.3 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.6 37.7 25.7 29.9 5.2 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 8.0 31.1 68.9 39.6 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2014          Q3 100.0 70.0 34.8 26.3 4.6 30.0 4.1 11.1 8.6 31.6 68.4 38.7 24.4 29.8 6.1 11.8
         Q4 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 8.0 31.1 68.9 39.6 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015          Q1 100.0 70.3 36.9 25.4 3.3 29.7 4.0 11.1 6.8 30.7 69.3 40.3 25.2 29.0 5.1 11.1
         Q2 p 100.0 70.9 37.8 25.6 3.2 29.1 3.9 11.1 5.7 31.5 68.5 37.6 24.4 30.9 6.6 11.2
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Including cash
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added equivalents. 2 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2006 1,209.4 10.6 154.8 3.4 12.8 − 0.9 7.1 11.4 17.5 75.7 3.4 6.3 − 0.4 3.8 7.6 11.4
2007 1,234.1 4.4 173.6 15.1 14.1 1.3 7.8 12.7 18.4 95.6 27.5 7.7 1.4 4.2 8.4 13.1
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.3 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 177.9 − 0.3 12.4 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.7 6.6 190.8 3.3 12.3 − 0.4 5.1 10.1 17.5 96.9 − 7.1 6.2 − 0.9 1.8 6.1 11.0
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 188.5 − 2.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.0 9.9 18.2 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2014 1,586.1 1.0 200.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.6 10.2 17.2 109.2 7.4 6.9 0.4 1.8 6.2 11.1
2012          Q4 407.1 3.4 48.2 0.6 11.9 − 0.3 4.0 10.8 18.5 23.6 23.8 5.8 0.9 0.1 6.4 12.3
2013          Q1 376.2 − 1.2 45.4 − 5.9 12.1 − 0.6 2.4 8.3 15.7 26.4 − 10.9 7.0 − 0.8 − 1.4 4.5 10.0
         Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.2 − 1.0 12.3 0.1 5.1 10.3 16.1 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.4 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.1 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.2 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 − 0.1 50.2 8.9 13.2 1.1 3.7 8.7 16.2 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.1 10.2
         Q2 386.7 − 2.0 47.9 − 0.2 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 2.3 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1
         Q3 394.7 2.8 49.9 3.9 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.2 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7
         Q4 423.6 3.0 52.8 7.2 12.5 0.5 4.0 11.6 19.3 23.5 8.7 5.6 0.3 0.5 6.7 12.0
2015          Q1 409.8 7.2 51.2 1.9 12.5 − 0.7 4.5 9.7 17.2 28.8 − 5.9 7.0 − 1.0 − 0.8 5.9 11.4
         Q2 p 425.7 9.9 52.9 10.3 12.4 0.1 4.7 9.7 16.6 30.8 17.2 7.2 0.5 1.3 5.6 10.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2006 898.7 9.8 114.8 6.4 12.8 − 0.4 7.4 12.1 17.6 55.8 7.2 6.2 − 0.2 4.1 8.1 11.4
2007 900.5 3.8 129.6 16.9 14.4 1.6 7.8 12.7 17.6 73.8 33.1 8.2 1.8 5.0 8.6 12.52008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.2 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.42009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.1 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.3 7.6 143.1 5.5 12.0 − 0.2 5.2 10.2 15.9 83.0 2.8 7.0 − 0.3 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.7 140.2 − 2.2 11.7 − 0.2 4.3 9.9 15.4 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.82014 1,217.7 0.9 149.9 5.7 12.3 0.6 5.1 9.4 15.1 81.8 7.8 6.7 0.4 1.0 5.8 9.9
2012          Q4 311.7 3.8 34.3 5.2 11.0 0.1 3.4 10.5 15.7 15.9 14.1 5.1 0.5 − 1.2 5.3 10.7
2013          Q1 292.2 − 1.4 36.2 − 7.5 12.4 − 0.8 2.4 8.4 14.3 22.6 − 13.6 7.7 − 1.1 − 1.4 4.7 9.4
         Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 33.4 − 0.4 11.5 0.2 4.5 10.1 15.0 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.5 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.3 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.1 39.1 6.4 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.7 14.5 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.3 5.3 9.0
         Q2 297.2 − 2.3 36.1 0.3 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 − 0.2 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3 300.0 3.3 36.4 6.3 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 12.6 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3         Q4 322.9 2.8 38.4 10.1 11.9 0.8 3.3 10.6 15.6 15.5 9.1 4.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 10.3
2015          Q1 319.0 7.1 41.2 5.4 12.9 − 0.2 5.4 9.7 14.9 25.3 1.4 7.9 − 0.4 0.9 6.0 9.6
         Q2
p 329.0 10.6 40.1 11.3 12.2 0.1 4.4 9.5 15.2 24.1 17.9 7.3 0.5 1.4 5.3 9.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2006 310.7 12.9 40.0 − 5.0 12.9 − 2.4 6.8 11.2 16.7 19.9 − 7.0 6.4 − 1.3 3.2 6.4 11.22007 333.5 6.4 43.9 9.3 13.2 0.4 7.0 12.7 20.6 21.8 9.6 6.5 0.2 3.3 7.8 14.32008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.2 8.7 13.3 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.4 3.0 47.7 − 3.3 13.3 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.22014 368.4 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.2 12.7 23.2 27.4 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 7.2 14.1
2012          Q4 95.4 1.9 13.9 − 10.1 14.6 − 2.0 5.2 11.4 25.4 7.7 55.8 8.0 2.7 1.9 7.8 15.9
2013          Q1 84.0 − 0.6 9.2 1.4 10.9 0.2 2.4 7.8 20.0 3.8 14.9 4.5 0.6 − 1.6 4.4 12.3
         Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.6 11.1 20.1 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 49.8 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.5 11.9 − 1.8 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 10.0 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8         Q4 100.7 3.7 14.4 − 1.6 14.3 − 0.7 5.4 15.6 25.3 8.1 7.5 8.0 0.2 2.1 8.4 19.5
2015          Q1 90.9 8.0 10.1 − 12.1 11.1 − 2.5 3.8 9.6 22.2 3.5 − 44.9 3.9 − 3.1 − 2.6 5.6 14.3
         Q2
p 96.7 7.0 12.8 6.9 13.2 − 0.0 5.0 11.4 21.7 6.7 13.9 6.9 0.4 1.3 6.7 13.8
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial weighted return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, the Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups
taxes, depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ un- in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2015
Item 2012 2013 2014 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov p
Current account + 124,314 + 193,936 + 240,908 + 54,392 + 66,416 + 90,661 + 34,183 + 27,471 + 29,776 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,889,125 1,921,961 1,967,652 499,406 531,006 517,678 178,042 182,854 172,340
Imports 1,764,373 1,710,845 1,717,359 433,721 445,666 435,624 149,919 151,723 143,070
Balance + 124,750 + 211,116 + 250,293 + 65,684 + 85,339 + 82,054 + 28,123 + 31,131 + 29,270
2 Services
Receipts 615,336 645,414 699,410 168,921 189,654 201,160 67,002 63,630 60,454
Expenditure 556,310 576,931 628,406 161,041 169,779 181,465 59,335 59,653 56,115
Balance + 59,029 + 68,484 + 71,004 + 7,881 + 19,875 + 19,696 + 7,668 + 3,977 + 4,340
3 Primary income
Receipts 610,498 606,642 640,645 151,042 160,881 148,714 53,191 45,538 48,578
Expenditure 535,461 550,199 580,860 120,553 170,065 136,435 47,010 42,527 41,523
Balance + 75,035 + 56,441 + 59,783 + 30,489 − 9,184 + 12,281 + 6,182 + 3,012 + 7,055
4 Secondary income
Receipts 86,711 92,221 93,936 24,259 29,236 23,425 7,839 8,311 7,876
Expenditure 221,213 234,325 234,106 73,921 58,851 46,793 15,628 18,960 18,764
Balance − 134,500 − 142,106 − 140,172 − 49,661 − 29,615 − 23,368 − 7,789 − 10,649 − 10,888
Capital account + 11,011 + 21,594 + 20,052 + 1,178 − 27,678 + 5,778 + 1,496 + 2,566 + 2,059 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 130,276 + 320,540 + 303,484 + 35,467 + 37,923 + 45,103 + 49,031 + 36,379 + 37,174 C
1 Direct investment + 21,282 − 69,643 + 46,579 + 104,505 − 42,706 − 31,396 − 4,293 − 2,104 + 1,762
By resident units abroad + 511,890 + 584,150 + 141,404 + 193,745 + 97,028 + 106,407 + 33,773 + 40,534 − 3,411
By non-resident units in the euro area + 490,609 + 653,792 + 94,822 + 89,241 + 139,734 + 137,803 + 38,066 + 42,638 − 5,173
2 Portfolio investment − 148,060 − 9,649 + 72,823 − 112,779 + 126,695 + 121,144 + 20,349 + 25,483 + 43,427
By resident units abroad + 187,017 + 251,832 + 440,761 + 137,124 + 128,238 + 14,208 + 11,368 + 55,812 + 34,765
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 48,839 + 165,187 + 126,475 − 12,753 + 37,581 − 20,359 − 10,376 + 12,598 − 3,653
Long-term debt securities + 141,918 + 79,145 + 224,838 + 136,772 + 95,288 + 69,545 + 41,323 + 37,391 + 20,955
Short-term debt securities − 3,739 + 7,501 + 89,451 + 13,104 − 4,632 − 34,979 − 19,579 + 5,823 + 17,462
By non-resident units in the euro area + 335,077 + 261,481 + 367,938 + 249,902 + 1,544 − 106,935 − 8,980 + 30,329 − 8,662
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 164,812 + 194,155 + 291,580 + 144,569 + 25,622 − 4,998 + 3,799 + 16,799 + 23,704
Long-term debt securities + 186,924 + 58,916 + 99,037 + 83,651 + 1,266 − 90,048 − 16,882 + 21,138 − 22,841
Short-term debt securities − 16,659 + 8,412 − 22,678 + 21,683 − 25,346 − 11,889 + 4,103 − 7,607 − 9,525
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 31,970 + 14,372 + 41,760 + 22,616 + 1,305 − 1,671 − 3,830 − 693 + 13,665
4 Other investment + 210,335 + 380,752 + 137,954 + 15,333 − 44,994 − 45,646 + 28,507 + 19,697 − 24,152
Eurosystem − 12,878 + 57,789 + 55,790 − 1,524 + 2,973 − 18,206 − 15,426 + 3,968 + 894
General government + 996 − 10,141 + 10,330 + 18,079 − 7,289 + 2,707 − 435 + 1,264 + 1,979
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 95,018 + 262,952 + 103,673 + 11,528 − 67,947 − 34,187 + 20,378 + 5,877 − 27,449
Enterprises and households + 127,196 + 70,149 − 31,840 − 12,751 + 27,269 + 4,040 + 23,991 + 8,590 + 425
5 Reserve assets + 14,753 + 4,707 + 4,369 + 5,795 − 2,376 + 2,672 + 8,297 − 6,004 + 2,471
Net errors and omissions − 5,048 + 105,010 + 42,527 − 20,103 − 815 − 51,337 + 13,351 + 6,341 + 5,339 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2001 − 7,912 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,156 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,117
2002 + 41,701 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,367 − 4,010 + 8,029 − 2,065 − 29,661
2003 + 31,215 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,694 − 18,933 − 31,179 + 5,920 + 47,555 − 445 + 10,420
2004 + 100,835 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,748 + 16,895 − 30,479 − 119 + 112,832 − 1,470 + 12,116
2005 + 106,140 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,660 + 20,965 − 31,175 − 2,334 + 96,432 − 2,182 − 7,374
2006 + 135,939 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,759 + 41,571 − 32,320 − 1,328 + 157,134 − 2,934 + 22,523
2007 + 169,595 + 201,989 − 922 − 35,032 + 36,483 − 33,845 − 1,597 + 183,158 + 953 + 15,160
2008 + 143,317 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,608 + 24,865 − 34,462 − 893 + 121,326 + 2,008 − 21,097
2009 + 141,117 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,909 + 55,018 − 35,159 − 1,858 + 117,837 − 3,200 − 21,423
2010 + 145,101 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,477 + 51,101 − 39,669 + 1,219 + 92,759 + 1,613 − 53,560
2011 + 164,552 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,471 + 69,102 − 35,505 + 1,642 + 120,849 + 2,836 − 45,345
2012 + 190,727 + 199,960 − 10,694 − 35,905 + 66,811 − 40,139 + 1,427 + 157,461 + 1,297 − 34,693
2013 + 182,425 + 210,280 − 5,236 − 44,755 + 59,941 − 43,041 + 1,142 + 207,920 + 838 + 24,353
2014 + 212,117 + 225,997 − 6,351 − 39,967 + 66,744 − 40,658 + 2,826 + 243,320 − 2,564 + 28,378
2015 p + 249,074 + 261,219 − 5,640 − 37,150 + 65,219 − 40,214 + 1,249 + 260,280 − 2,213 + 9,957
2013          Q1 + 41,321 + 52,232 − 1,335 − 10,480 + 14,761 − 15,192 + 420 + 36,822 + 86 − 4,919         Q2 + 43,329 + 54,990 + 1,595 − 10,657 + 6,370 − 7,373 + 760 + 58,926 + 72 + 14,836         Q3 + 37,832 + 49,827 − 4,067 − 16,907 + 14,375 − 9,463 + 438 + 48,587 − 785 + 10,317         Q4 + 59,943 + 53,231 − 1,429 − 6,712 + 24,436 − 11,013 − 476 + 63,585 + 1,464 + 4,118
2014          Q1 + 48,048 + 52,914 + 1,177 − 7,378 + 17,521 − 15,009 + 2,182 + 60,123 − 565 + 9,893
         Q2 + 45,303 + 54,602 − 1,105 − 8,201 + 5,735 − 6,833 + 542 + 57,183 − 610 + 11,338         Q3 + 53,779 + 59,922 − 2,693 − 17,089 + 18,747 − 7,802 + 783 + 68,150 + 332 + 13,589         Q4 + 64,987 + 58,559 − 3,729 − 7,299 + 24,740 − 11,013 − 681 + 57,863 − 1,722 − 6,442
2015          Q1 + 56,786 + 60,382 − 1,619 − 6,553 + 18,947 − 15,990 + 249 + 56,475 − 21 − 560
         Q2 + 56,941 + 69,144 − 2,079 − 8,508 + 3,647 − 7,342 + 1,135 + 71,484 − 465 + 13,407         Q3 + 62,491 + 66,852 − 419 − 16,416 + 18,853 − 6,798 + 694 + 62,501 − 1,455 − 684         Q4 
p + 72,855 + 64,841 − 1,524 − 5,674 + 23,772 − 10,085 − 828 + 69,820 − 272 − 2,206
2013          July + 11,774 + 16,448 − 1,005 − 6,491 + 5,048 − 3,230 + 126 + 4,633 − 654 − 7,267         Aug + 7,501 + 12,882 − 1,776 − 6,786 + 5,027 − 3,621 + 184 + 24,787 + 425 + 17,102         Sep + 18,557 + 20,498 − 1,285 − 3,629 + 4,300 − 2,612 + 128 + 19,168 − 556 + 483
         Oct + 15,980 + 19,100 − 362 − 5,875 + 5,544 − 2,789 + 514 + 16,097 − 212 − 397
         Nov + 21,605 + 19,975 + 192 − 2,141 + 5,997 − 2,226 + 176 + 21,190 + 407 − 592         Dec + 22,357 + 14,156 − 1,258 + 1,305 + 12,895 − 5,998 − 1,166 + 26,299 + 1,269 + 5,107
2014          Jan + 13,841 + 15,951 − 748 − 2,882 + 5,238 − 4,466 + 1,500 + 1,320 − 375 − 14,022
         Feb + 12,859 + 17,070 − 9 − 2,817 + 5,842 − 7,236 + 433 + 23,601 − 898 + 10,309         Mar + 21,348 + 19,893 + 1,933 − 1,680 + 6,442 − 3,307 + 249 + 35,203 + 708 + 13,606
         Apr + 16,667 + 18,670 − 329 − 1,857 + 3,231 − 3,378 + 194 + 29,421 + 151 + 12,560
         May + 11,858 + 17,834 − 1,532 − 2,392 − 2,350 − 1,233 − 54 + 12,151 − 631 + 346         June + 16,778 + 18,097 + 756 − 3,951 + 4,854 − 2,222 + 402 + 15,611 − 130 − 1,568
         July + 20,181 + 22,461 − 1,837 − 5,393 + 6,036 − 2,923 − 8 + 18,353 + 431 − 1,821
         Aug + 10,717 + 14,220 − 675 − 6,974 + 5,875 − 2,403 + 439 + 14,135 + 166 + 2,979         Sep + 22,880 + 23,241 − 182 − 4,721 + 6,837 − 2,477 + 352 + 35,662 − 265 + 12,431
         Oct + 21,627 + 22,907 − 1,539 − 5,488 + 6,600 − 2,392 − 109 + 12,134 + 203 − 9,384
         Nov + 18,490 + 17,861 − 480 − 2,418 + 6,603 − 3,555 + 134 + 21,558 + 30 + 2,934         Dec + 24,870 + 17,792 − 1,710 + 607 + 11,537 − 5,066 − 706 + 24,171 − 1,955 + 7
2015          Jan + 14,512 + 15,591 − 1,190 − 2,372 + 5,551 − 4,258 + 27 − 3,047 + 372 − 17,586
         Feb + 15,510 + 19,584 − 872 − 2,372 + 5,873 − 7,575 + 37 + 35,137 + 266 + 19,590         Mar + 26,764 + 25,207 + 444 − 1,809 + 7,523 − 4,156 + 185 + 24,386 − 660 − 2,564
         Apr + 21,162 + 22,536 − 1,197 − 2,098 + 3,671 − 2,947 + 370 + 33,083 − 69 + 11,550
         May + 11,634 + 21,355 − 477 − 2,572 − 5,019 − 2,130 + 565 + 14,722 − 78 + 2,523         June + 24,145 + 25,253 − 404 − 3,838 + 4,995 − 2,265 + 200 + 23,679 − 318 − 666
         July + 24,489 + 25,482 − 973 − 5,683 + 7,053 − 2,362 + 469 + 22,466 − 1,170 − 2,493
         Aug + 13,161 + 16,699 + 421 − 6,432 + 5,697 − 2,803 + 43 + 18,365 − 180 + 5,161         Sep + 24,841 + 24,672 + 132 − 4,301 + 6,103 − 1,632 + 181 + 21,670 − 105 − 3,353
         Oct + 22,940 + 24,391 + 29 − 4,746 + 6,441 − 3,146 − 86 + 22,511 + 154 − 343
         Nov + 24,312 + 22,287 − 359 − 1,958 + 6,524 − 2,541 + 160 + 22,505 − 548 − 1,966         Dec  
p + 25,603 + 18,163 − 1,193 + 1,030 + 10,808 − 4,397 − 902 + 24,804 + 123 + 102
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2016
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2015
Ländergruppe/Land  2012  2013  2014 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  p Jan. / Nov. 
All countries 1 Exports 1,092,627 1,088,025 1,123,746 1,103,900 87,881 105,754 106,174 102,295 91,897
Imports 899,405 890,393 910,145 874,969 72,660 83,129 83,825 81,773 73,073Balance + 193,222 + 197,632 + 213,601 + 228,930 + 15,221 + 22,625 + 22,348 + 20,521 + 18,824
I Exports 747,932 743,067 761,914 745,414 57,817 71,991 72,405 70,265 ... European countries
Imports 622,784 625,934 642,738 604,595 48,771 57,717 57,988 56,951 ...
Balance + 125,148 + 117,133 + 119,176 + 140,819 + 9,046 + 14,274 + 14,417 + 13,315 ...
Exports 619,535 618,383 648,446 642,380 49,340 62,171 62,643 60,763 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 502,579 509,738 527,117 502,328 40,173 48,738 48,538 47,353 ...
Balance + 116,956 + 108,645 + 121,329 + 140,052 + 9,167 + 13,434 + 14,105 + 13,410 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 409,356 405,220 413,753 402,999 30,052 38,743 39,203 37,931 ...
countries Imports 340,314 343,487 350,550 330,038 26,078 32,094 31,582 30,800 ...
Balance + 69,041 + 61,732 + 63,203 + 72,961 + 3,974 + 6,649 + 7,621 + 7,131 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,551 56,217 55,807 53,727 4,460 5,327 5,243 5,269 ...
Imports 36,393 36,734 36,218 34,524 2,703 3,395 3,309 3,318 ...
Balance + 20,158 + 19,483 + 19,590 + 19,203 + 1,757 + 1,932 + 1,934 + 1,951 ...
Belgium and Exports 49,377 47,954 47,345 43,083 3,441 4,069 3,954 3,932 ...
Luxembourg Imports 40,407 41,965 42,548 37,195 3,242 3,575 3,339 3,410 ...
Balance + 8,970 + 5,989 + 4,797 + 5,887 + 199 + 494 + 616 + 522 ...
France Exports 102,439 99,250 100,580 95,537 6,259 9,205 9,486 8,830 ...
Imports 63,637 63,489 66,714 61,664 4,642 5,735 6,262 5,836 ...
Balance + 38,803 + 35,761 + 33,866 + 33,873 + 1,616 + 3,470 + 3,224 + 2,995 ...
Italy Exports 55,504 53,212 54,240 53,936 3,396 5,249 5,244 5,215 ...
Imports 47,946 46,911 48,522 45,352 3,364 4,122 4,343 4,312 ...
Balance + 7,558 + 6,301 + 5,718 + 8,584 + 31 + 1,128 + 901 + 903 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,280 70,975 72,736 73,363 6,296 7,002 7,033 6,867 ...
Imports 85,765 88,698 87,796 81,434 6,948 8,104 7,713 7,247 ...
Balance − 15,484 − 17,723 − 15,060 − 8,070 − 652 − 1,102 − 680 − 380 ...
Spain Exports 31,047 31,349 34,820 35,879 2,496 3,360 3,660 3,371 ...
Imports 23,206 23,639 24,804 24,229 1,586 2,283 2,274 2,366 ...
Balance + 7,841 + 7,709 + 10,016 + 11,650 + 911 + 1,077 + 1,386 + 1,005 ...
Other EU member Exports 210,179 213,163 234,693 239,381 19,288 23,428 23,440 22,832 ...
states Imports 162,264 166,251 176,567 172,290 14,095 16,644 16,956 16,553 ...
Balance + 47,915 + 46,912 + 58,126 + 67,091 + 5,193 + 6,784 + 6,484 + 6,279 ...
of which
United Exports 70,847 71,280 79,163 83,039 6,541 8,111 7,815 7,763 ...
Kingdom Imports 41,469 39,466 38,545 35,431 3,007 3,240 3,351 3,070 ...
Balance + 29,379 + 31,815 + 40,618 + 47,609 + 3,534 + 4,871 + 4,464 + 4,692 ...
Exports 128,398 124,684 113,468 103,034 8,477 9,820 9,762 9,502 ... 2 Other European
Imports 120,206 116,196 115,621 102,267 8,598 8,979 9,450 9,597 ... countries
Balance + 8,192 + 8,488 − 2,153 + 767 − 121 + 840 + 311 − 95 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 48,933 46,924 46,202 45,534 3,635 4,337 4,308 4,274 ...
Imports 37,775 38,321 39,392 39,505 3,245 3,492 3,834 3,981 ...
Balance + 11,158 + 8,603 + 6,810 + 6,030 + 390 + 844 + 474 + 294 ...
II Exports 340,980 341,213 358,337 356,173 29,834 33,634 33,551 31,850 ... Non-European
Imports 276,620 264,459 267,407 270,322 23,889 25,360 25,837 24,822 ... countries
Balance + 64,360 + 76,754 + 90,930 + 85,851 + 5,945 + 8,273 + 7,714 + 7,028 ...
Exports 21,920 21,803 22,505 22,062 1,815 2,073 1,952 1,793 ... 1 Africa
Imports 24,145 23,108 20,242 16,821 1,370 1,553 1,385 1,370 ...
Balance − 2,224 − 1,305 + 2,263 + 5,241 + 446 + 519 + 567 + 423 ...
Exports 128,703 130,427 135,293 145,038 11,948 14,365 14,204 12,805 ... 2 America
Imports 80,549 75,023 74,191 77,681 6,573 6,987 7,399 7,269 ...
Balance + 48,154 + 55,404 + 61,103 + 67,357 + 5,375 + 7,378 + 6,805 + 5,536 ...
of which
Exports 86,971 89,348 95,928 105,073 8,522 10,691 10,320 9,343 ... United States
Imports 51,070 48,582 49,207 54,368 4,486 4,937 5,280 5,073 ...
Balance + 35,901 + 40,766 + 46,721 + 50,705 + 4,036 + 5,754 + 5,040 + 4,270 ...
Exports 179,630 179,038 190,973 179,637 15,183 16,275 16,466 16,428 ... 3 Asia
Imports 167,873 162,960 170,050 173,154 15,718 16,529 16,863 15,977 ...
Balance + 11,757 + 16,077 + 20,923 + 6,484 − 534 − 254 − 397 + 452 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,503 32,754 35,462 35,821 3,166 3,165 3,387 3,576 ...
Imports 8,134 8,921 7,865 6,734 595 589 566 576 ...
Balance + 24,369 + 23,833 + 27,598 + 29,087 + 2,570 + 2,577 + 2,821 + 3,000 ...
Japan Exports 17,138 17,076 16,910 15,659 1,278 1,517 1,544 1,439 ...
Imports 21,910 19,492 19,007 18,583 1,586 1,671 1,870 1,713 ...
Balance − 4,772 − 2,416 − 2,097 − 2,924 − 308 − 155 − 326 − 274 ...
Exports 66,746 66,912 74,369 65,203 5,361 5,946 5,671 5,811 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 78,529 74,544 79,828 84,158 7,666 8,237 8,350 8,219 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 11,783 − 7,633 − 5,459 − 18,955 − 2,305 − 2,291 − 2,679 − 2,407 ...
Exports 45,651 45,894 48,476 47,482 4,011 4,337 4,506 4,148 ... New industrial countries
Imports 37,428 36,672 38,782 39,093 3,527 3,827 3,864 3,414 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 8,223 + 9,222 + 9,695 + 8,389 + 485 + 510 + 642 + 734 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,727 9,946 9,566 9,436 887 922 930 824 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 4,054 3,368 2,924 2,667 229 291 190 207 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,672 + 6,578 + 6,641 + 6,769 + 658 + 630 + 739 + 617 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2011 − 32,471 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,823 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,314 +64,707 + 1,081
2012 − 35,905 − 10,199 − 35,422 + 8,784 + 3,020 + 1,404 − 9,547 + 3,103 + 3,616 +62,193 + 1,0022013 − 44,755 − 12,063 − 37,713 + 8,181 + 3,522 − 858 − 6,358 + 3,076 + 1,069 +57,677 + 1,1952014 − 39,967 − 13,079 − 37,649 + 6,333 + 4,284 + 2,472 − 2,859 + 2,930 + 1,036 +64,859 + 8502015 
p − 37,150 − 13,008 − 38,895 + 8,543 + 5,235 + 4,102 − 4,551 + 2,998 + 775 +64,944 − 500
2014          Q2 − 8,201 − 3,080 − 8,568 + 1,721 + 1,063 + 619 − 351 + 782 + 50 + 6,526 − 841
         Q3 − 17,089 − 3,216 − 15,909 + 1,757 + 807 + 171 − 882 + 719 − 275 +20,018 − 996
         Q4 − 7,299 − 3,217 − 7,288 + 1,561 + 1,300 + 1,557 − 1,238 + 677 + 388 +20,667 + 3,686
2015          Q1 − 6,553 − 3,052 − 5,798 + 1,742 + 1,158 + 234 − 767 + 867 + 801 +19,225 − 1,078
         Q2 − 8,508 − 2,254 − 8,660 + 1,317 + 1,223 + 1,302 − 1,562 + 808 + 9 + 4,866 − 1,228
         Q3 − 16,416 − 3,352 − 16,757 + 2,803 + 942 + 548 − 770 + 748 − 366 +20,423 − 1,204
         Q4 p − 5,674 − 4,349 − 7,681 + 2,681 + 1,912 + 2,017 − 1,452 + 574 + 332 +20,431 + 3,010
2015          Feb − 2,372 − 816 − 1,825 + 221 + 381 − 88 − 385 + 280 + 283 + 5,873 − 283
         Mar − 1,809 − 1,085 − 2,569 + 614 + 605 + 397 + 300 + 304 + 244 + 7,698 − 420
         Apr − 2,098 − 740 − 1,785 + 504 + 342 + 84 − 627 + 303 − 36 + 4,127 − 420
         May − 2,572 − 770 − 2,688 + 429 + 561 + 245 − 677 + 309 + 39 − 4,629 − 430
         June − 3,838 − 744 − 4,186 + 384 + 320 + 974 − 258 + 196 + 6 + 5,368 − 379
         July − 5,683 − 1,145 − 4,895 + 1,090 + 216 − 116 − 766 + 262 − 173 + 7,583 − 357
         Aug − 6,432 − 886 − 6,858 + 784 + 575 + 133 − 402 + 261 − 87 + 6,177 − 393
         Sep − 4,301 − 1,321 − 5,004 + 929 + 152 + 531 + 398 + 225 − 105 + 6,663 − 454
         Oct − 4,746 − 1,374 − 4,509 + 693 + 463 + 189 − 517 + 228 + 123 + 6,730 − 411
         Nov − 1,958 − 1,529 − 2,010 + 1,038 + 668 + 346 − 773 + 213 + 118 + 6,848 − 441
         Dec  p + 1,030 − 1,447 − 1,162 + 951 + 781 + 1,482 − 162 + 133 + 91 + 6,853 + 3,863
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2011 − 35,505 − 21,001 − 4,475 + 6,718 − 14,504 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 494
2012 − 40,139 − 25,752 − 5,451 + 5,206 − 14,387 − 2,952 − 2,952 + 1,427 + 1,743 − 3162013 − 43,041 − 28,147 − 4,051 + 6,173 − 14,893 − 3,250 − 3,229 + 1,142 + 1,111 + 312014 − 40,658 − 27,541 − 5,242 + 7,953 − 13,116 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,826 + 2,736 + 902015 
p − 40,214 − 27,019 − 7,014 + 9,545 − 13,195 − 3,539 − 3,523 + 1,249 + 2,142 − 893
2014          Q2 − 6,833 − 2,662 − 763 + 4,998 − 4,172 − 869 − 863 + 542 + 811 − 269
         Q3 − 7,802 − 4,501 − 1,048 + 930 − 3,301 − 870 − 863 + 783 + 725 + 58
         Q4 − 11,013 − 8,390 − 1,651 + 740 − 2,623 − 866 − 863 − 681 + 266 − 947
2015          Q1 − 15,990 − 13,065 − 2,614 + 1,256 − 2,925 − 885 − 881 + 249 − 6 + 255
         Q2 − 7,342 − 1,999 − 1,162 + 6,118 − 5,343 − 884 − 881 + 1,135 + 1,159 − 24
         Q3 − 6,798 − 3,906 − 1,194 + 1,200 − 2,892 − 885 − 881 + 694 + 853 − 159
         Q4 p − 10,085 − 8,050 − 2,044 + 970 − 2,035 − 885 − 881 − 828 + 137 − 965
2015          Feb − 7,575 − 6,680 − 470 + 234 − 895 − 296 − 294 + 37 + 91 − 54
         Mar − 4,156 − 3,048 − 683 + 270 − 1,108 − 295 − 294 + 185 − 77 + 262
         Apr − 2,947 − 2,010 − 511 + 1,045 − 936 − 295 − 294 + 370 + 427 − 57
         May − 2,130 + 975 − 179 + 3,673 − 3,105 − 295 − 294 + 565 + 448 + 116
         June − 2,265 − 964 − 472 + 1,400 − 1,301 − 295 − 294 + 200 + 283 − 83
         July − 2,362 − 1,355 − 463 + 274 − 1,008 − 295 − 294 + 469 + 539 − 69
         Aug − 2,803 − 1,981 − 441 + 272 − 822 − 295 − 294 + 43 + 296 − 253
         Sep − 1,632 − 570 − 290 + 655 − 1,062 − 295 − 294 + 181 + 18 + 163
         Oct − 3,146 − 2,291 − 392 + 194 − 856 − 295 − 294 − 86 + 145 − 232
         Nov − 2,541 − 2,789 − 724 + 74 + 248 − 295 − 294 + 160 + 274 − 114
         Dec  p − 4,397 − 2,970 − 927 + 703 − 1,427 − 295 − 294 − 902 − 283 − 619
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2015
Item 2013 2014 2015 p Q2 Q3 Q4 p Oct Nov Dec p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 36,997 + 297,524 + 277,886 − 4,354 + 81,855 − 45,030 + 18,862 + 30,936 − 94,828
1 Direct investment + 53,360 + 88,717 + 110,789 + 22,813 + 17,615 + 30,967 + 5,194 + 20,343 + 5,429
Equity + 34,189 + 70,251 + 73,863 + 13,347 + 12,957 + 23,120 + 6,135 + 11,329 + 5,656
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 14,523 + 22,241 + 22,851 + 2,745 + 3,993 + 5,354 + 3,845 + 4,247 − 2,738
Debt instruments + 19,171 + 18,465 + 36,926 + 9,466 + 4,659 + 7,847 − 940 + 9,014 − 227
2 Portfolio investment + 143,233 + 149,521 + 136,772 + 27,266 + 31,956 + 20,932 + 13,644 + 6,758 + 531
Shares 2 + 19,019 + 10,610 + 19,901 + 10,708 + 1,382 + 7,552 + 965 + 4,194 + 2,392
Investment fund shares 3 + 31,939 + 38,324 + 34,842 + 8,142 + 4,632 + 4,620 + 3,898 + 1,077 − 355
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 87,772 + 99,162 + 85,028 + 11,149 + 31,789 + 9,329 + 9,619 + 250 − 539
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 4,503 + 1,425 − 2,999 − 2,733 − 5,847 − 569 − 838 + 1,236 − 968
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 24,286 + 31,783 + 25,480 + 5,855 + 2,398 + 5,526 + 2,762 + 4,176 − 1,412
4. Other investment 7 − 184,720 + 30,068 + 7,057 − 59,823 + 31,340 − 102,183 − 2,891 + 208 − 99,500
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 56,647 + 76,332 − 89,854 − 35,503 + 17,430 − 110,915 − 11,982 − 42,377 − 56,556
Long-term − 50,495 + 21,176 − 2,352 + 2,812 + 2,470 − 15,050 − 6,852 − 10,945 + 2,747
Short-term − 6,152 + 55,156 − 87,502 − 38,315 + 14,960 − 95,865 − 5,130 − 31,432 − 59,303
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 10,049 − 10,409 − 14,459 − 10,894 − 13,063 − 18,514 − 130 + 10,240 − 28,624
Long-term + 910 + 852 + 10,441 + 3,085 + 4,957 + 1,271 + 204 − 251 + 1,317
Short-term + 9,139 − 11,261 − 24,900 − 13,979 − 18,019 − 19,785 − 335 + 10,491 − 29,941
General government + 7,397 + 14,024 − 11,993 − 12,798 + 2,873 − 1,790 + 1,577 + 2,644 − 6,011
Long-term + 15,078 − 2,372 − 7,361 − 1,615 − 855 − 1,202 − 484 + 6 − 724
Short-term − 7,681 + 16,396 − 4,632 − 11,183 + 3,728 − 588 + 2,061 + 2,638 − 5,287
Bundesbank − 145,519 − 49,880 + 123,364 − 628 + 24,100 + 29,035 + 7,644 + 29,700 − 8,308
5. Reserve assets + 838 − 2,564 − 2,213 − 465 − 1,455 − 272 + 154 − 548 + 123
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) − 170,923 + 54,204 + 17,606 − 75,838 + 19,355 − 114,851 − 3,649 + 8,431 − 119,632
1 Direct investment + 44,384 + 5,508 + 51,060 + 18,894 + 11,604 + 5,880 + 4,608 + 6,404 − 5,131
Equity + 7,499 + 22,527 + 17,385 + 6,991 + 2,735 + 1,786 − 1,751 + 2,274 + 1,263
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 585 + 5,427 + 8,023 + 2,288 + 2,737 − 1,027 − 1,750 + 1,301 − 578
Debt instruments + 36,885 − 17,020 + 33,675 + 11,903 + 8,869 + 4,094 + 6,359 + 4,129 − 6,394
2 Portfolio investment − 21,263 + 21,679 − 87,864 − 25,410 − 19,813 − 49,106 − 329 − 4,262 − 44,515
Shares 2) + 5,024 + 8,328 + 9,929 + 8,739 − 5,291 + 4,866 + 2,101 + 3,321 − 556
Investment fund shares 3 + 6,086 − 5,642 + 5,164 − 3,756 + 3,637 + 584 + 1 − 949 + 1,531
Long-termdebt securities 
4 − 9,467 + 21,410 − 98,319 − 28,495 − 23,367 − 32,615 − 2,223 + 3,983 − 34,376
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 22,907 − 2,417 − 4,638 − 1,899 + 5,208 − 21,941 − 209 − 10,617 − 11,115
3. Other investment 7 − 194,044 + 27,017 + 54,410 − 69,322 + 27,564 − 71,624 − 7,927 + 6,289 − 69,986
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 158,237 + 32,495 − 39,813 − 45,222 − 516 − 99,753 − 10,496 − 17,009 − 72,248
Long-term − 16,733 − 14,555 − 18,140 − 7,942 + 1,063 − 1,468 − 1,171 + 768 − 1,065
Short-term − 141,504 + 47,050 − 21,673 − 37,279 − 1,578 − 98,285 − 9,325 − 17,777 − 71,183
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 8,583 + 4,141 + 9,504 − 17,300 + 1,263 + 4,697 − 6,174 + 9,446 + 1,425
Long-term − 13,790 − 5,331 + 12,343 + 8,537 + 5,114 − 1,830 − 952 + 1,160 − 2,037
Short-term + 5,207 + 9,473 − 2,839 − 25,837 − 3,851 + 6,527 − 5,222 + 8,287 + 3,462
General government − 1,577 − 5,594 − 12,542 − 17,550 − 482 − 656 + 1,249 − 1,714 − 191
Long-term + 9,302 − 914 − 3,863 − 68 + 0 + 289 + 85 − 250 + 454
Short-term − 10,878 − 4,680 − 8,679 − 17,483 − 482 − 945 + 1,163 − 1,464 − 645
Bundesbank − 25,647 − 4,025 + 97,261 + 10,750 + 27,299 + 24,088 + 7,494 + 15,565 + 1,028
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 207,920 + 243,320 + 260,280 + 71,484 + 62,501 + 69,820 + 22,511 + 22,505 + 24,804
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,222 37,7262003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,309 12,085
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,029 − 1,919
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,396 14,8722006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,724 − 30,3352007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,607 2,8852008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,941 − 7,166
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,701 75,585
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,295 251,4002011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,793 380,8692012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 426,026 494,9762013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 495,202 305,506
2013          May 832,746 169,105 118,228 13,272 8,712 28,893 602,185 589,189 61,455 405,918 426,828
         June 798,888 150,825 100,280 13,236 8,690 28,618 588,473 575,477 59,589 393,961 404,927
         July 807,165 158,611 109,338 12,960 8,690 27,623 589,421 576,469 59,133 398,251 408,914
         Aug 808,649 164,477 114,714 13,018 8,416 28,330 586,580 573,628 57,590 398,868 409,781         Sep 796,646 156,452 107,819 12,920 8,375 27,337 583,320 570,368 56,873 398,035 398,611
         Oct 785,449 154,486 106,477 12,941 7,981 27,086 574,449 561,497 56,514 421,360 364,089
         Nov 761,730 148,010 99,631 12,962 7,945 27,473 557,441 544,488 56,278 409,079 352,651         Dec 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 399,799 321,942
2014          Jan 716,868 149,930 100,432 13,030 8,080 28,388 512,785 500,357 54,153 402,189 314,679
         Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 389,297 329,020         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 376,533 311,024
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 397,660 295,296
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 400,885 280,003         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 394,597 283,539
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 372,693 287,828
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 374,337 306,987         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 380,316 316,486
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 392,583 289,207
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 399,026 283,943         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,837 281,967
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 451,674 299,388
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 442,744 301,808         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 433,272 334,584
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,347 326,090
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 438,633 319,867         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 443,611 312,651
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 449,950 313,297
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 447,730 333,556         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 470,839 303,589
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 478,529 308,165
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 494,483 318,837         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 495,202 305,506
2016          Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 487,611 320,360
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,892
2013 785,507 281,970 503,537 323,869 179,668 164,454 15,214 936,110 143,112 792,998 630,740 162,258 95,301 66,957
2014 822,028 278,523 543,506 357,855 185,651 170,854 14,797 939,809 150,429 789,379 624,860 164,519 98,104 66,415
2015 852,363 264,278 588,085 395,013 193,072 178,495 14,576 976,497 142,494 834,003 652,968 181,035 108,750 72,285
2015          July 868,111 290,231 577,880 384,202 193,678 179,084 14,594 963,361 151,949 811,411 636,027 175,384 101,233 74,151
         Aug 847,963 282,913 565,050 378,965 186,085 171,440 14,645 949,497 144,108 805,389 635,627 169,763 96,244 73,519         Sep 858,231 282,109 576,122 383,752 192,370 177,736 14,635 970,207 144,631 825,577 647,156 178,420 104,197 74,224
         Oct 860,304 280,056 580,249 387,585 192,664 177,977 14,687 971,934 136,130 835,804 657,703 178,101 103,348 74,752
         Nov 886,264 291,045 595,219 400,079 195,140 180,542 14,599 986,732 142,753 843,979 664,312 179,668 105,052 74,615         Dec 852,363 264,278 588,085 395,013 193,072 178,495 14,576 976,497 142,494 834,003 652,968 181,035 108,750 72,285
Industrial countries 1
 
2012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,181
2013 694,860 278,667 416,194 294,116 122,077 108,620 13,458 849,161 141,744 707,417 593,197 114,219 79,543 34,676
2014 720,924 273,624 447,300 321,894 125,406 112,308 13,098 851,172 149,212 701,960 585,678 116,282 81,103 35,179
2015 747,289 260,378 486,912 354,225 132,687 119,558 13,129 881,625 137,526 744,099 617,932 126,168 89,593 36,575
2015          July 761,079 286,157 474,922 342,891 132,031 119,035 12,996 872,480 148,566 723,913 601,746 122,167 84,492 37,675         Aug 741,152 277,985 463,167 338,339 124,828 111,787 13,041 857,866 141,022 716,844 601,297 115,547 78,502 37,045         Sep 752,039 277,023 475,016 344,665 130,352 117,297 13,054 876,722 141,936 734,786 611,470 123,315 85,762 37,553
         Oct 754,240 275,421 478,819 347,529 131,290 118,037 13,253 878,787 133,786 745,001 622,082 122,919 85,369 37,551
         Nov 779,059 286,827 492,232 358,416 133,815 120,809 13,007 893,328 140,340 752,987 628,778 124,209 86,444 37,766         Dec 747,289 260,378 486,912 354,225 132,687 119,558 13,129 881,625 137,526 744,099 617,932 126,168 89,593 36,575
EU member states 1
 
2012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,507
2013 586,790 264,116 322,674 235,608 87,066 76,539 10,527 710,428 127,372 583,057 503,394 79,662 53,339 26,323
2014 606,568 258,507 348,061 259,475 88,585 77,975 10,611 712,497 134,943 577,555 496,878 80,677 53,797 26,880
2015 613,734 242,218 371,516 276,868 94,648 84,071 10,577 725,496 127,114 598,383 513,560 84,823 58,469 26,354
2015          July 635,276 268,935 366,341 270,946 95,395 84,898 10,497 725,160 137,827 587,332 501,830 85,503 57,855 27,647         Aug 619,014 262,245 356,769 267,507 89,262 78,760 10,502 710,309 130,286 580,023 500,362 79,660 52,680 26,980         Sep 625,118 261,132 363,986 271,110 92,876 82,335 10,541 729,365 131,972 597,393 512,224 85,169 57,879 27,290
         Oct 625,705 259,336 366,369 271,816 94,553 83,841 10,713 729,407 124,664 604,743 519,527 85,216 57,848 27,368
         Nov 645,536 269,094 376,442 280,124 96,318 85,901 10,416 735,959 130,231 605,727 519,365 86,362 58,889 27,473         Dec 613,734 242,218 371,516 276,868 94,648 84,071 10,577 725,496 127,114 598,383 513,560 84,823 58,469 26,354
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,196
2013 427,049 197,297 229,752 173,609 56,143 49,968 6,175 602,056 101,150 500,906 447,404 53,502 36,670 16,832
2014 449,392 203,069 246,323 189,755 56,568 50,348 6,220 598,660 105,883 492,777 440,290 52,487 35,568 16,919
2015 457,947 195,011 262,936 201,414 61,522 54,913 6,609 589,407 91,735 497,672 444,542 53,130 37,976 15,155
2015          July 474,683 212,322 262,360 201,305 61,056 54,589 6,467 606,311 104,833 501,478 445,545 55,933 38,985 16,948         Aug 462,755 207,471 255,284 198,182 57,102 50,539 6,563 596,947 98,677 498,270 446,726 51,544 35,333 16,211         Sep 465,764 208,602 257,162 199,172 57,989 51,468 6,522 602,833 100,268 502,565 448,263 54,302 38,269 16,032
         Oct 460,546 202,962 257,584 197,702 59,882 53,175 6,707 600,446 93,002 507,444 453,314 54,130 38,043 16,087
         Nov 479,088 213,372 265,716 204,196 61,520 55,037 6,483 606,652 97,176 509,476 454,842 54,634 38,880 15,754         Dec 457,947 195,011 262,936 201,414 61,522 54,913 6,609 589,407 91,735 497,672 444,542 53,130 37,976 15,155
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,683
2013 90,640 3,303 87,337 29,751 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,946 1,368 85,578 37,543 48,035 15,755 32,280
2014 101,101 4,899 96,202 35,957 60,244 58,546 1,699 88,634 1,217 87,417 39,182 48,235 17,001 31,234
2015 104,086 3,093 100,994 40,788 60,205 58,758 1,448 90,701 997 89,704 34,836 54,868 19,157 35,710
2015          July 106,211 3,449 102,763 41,311 61,452 59,854 1,598 88,670 1,372 87,298 34,081 53,217 16,741 36,476         Aug 105,883 4,198 101,685 40,626 61,059 59,455 1,603 89,731 1,428 88,303 34,130 54,173 17,699 36,474         Sep 105,233 4,344 100,890 39,087 61,803 60,222 1,580 91,713 1,124 90,589 35,486 55,103 18,433 36,671
         Oct 105,111 3,891 101,220 40,056 61,164 59,730 1,433 91,534 932 90,603 35,422 55,181 17,979 37,202
         Nov 106,268 3,474 102,795 41,662 61,133 59,541 1,592 92,003 1,012 90,991 35,534 55,458 18,608 36,850         Dec 104,086 3,093 100,994 40,788 60,205 58,758 1,448 90,701 997 89,704 34,836 54,868 19,157 35,710
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are figures are due to substantial revisions. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia; from January
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as industrial
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and Curacao andextended survey and a new calculation method. Deviations from previously reported St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.10952015          Mar 1.4008 1.3661 6.7623 7.4593 130.41 8.6434 9.2449 1.0608 0.72358 1.0838         Apr 1.3939 1.3313 6.6863 7.4655 128.94 8.5057 9.3254 1.0379 0.72116 1.0779
         May 1.4123 1.3568 6.9165 7.4612 134.75 8.4103 9.3037 1.0391 0.72124 1.1150         June 1.4530 1.3854 6.9587 7.4603 138.74 8.7550 9.2722 1.0455 0.72078 1.1213
         July 1.4844 1.4124 6.8269 7.4616 135.68 8.9357 9.3860 1.0492 0.70685 1.0996
         Aug 1.5269 1.4637 7.0626 7.4627 137.12 9.1815 9.5155 1.0777 0.71423 1.1139         Sep 1.5900 1.4882 7.1462 7.4610 134.85 9.3075 9.3924 1.0913 0.73129 1.1221
         Oct 1.5586 1.4685 7.1346 7.4601 134.84 9.2892 9.3485 1.0882 0.73287 1.1235
         Nov 1.5011 1.4248 6.8398 7.4602 131.60 9.2572 9.3133 1.0833 0.70658 1.0736         Dec 1.5009 1.4904 7.0193 7.4612 132.36 9.4642 9.2451 1.0827 0.72595 1.0877
2016          Jan 1.5510 1.5447 7.1393 7.4619 128.32 9.5899 9.2826 1.0941 0.75459 1.0860
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
February 2016
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  4 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries countries  5 countries  4 countries  5 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.0 95.9 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.7 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.8 84.9 87.9 85.7 91.7 97.3 85.0 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.3 85.8 90.5 86.9 91.5 96.3 85.8 90.0 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.3 89.2 95.0 90.5 92.1 95.3 88.3 90.6 93.6 92.0 91.8
2003 100.7 101.3 100.1 100.5 106.9 101.4 95.5 94.4 97.4 94.8 97.1 96.6 96.8
2004 104.5 105.0 103.0 104.0 111.5 105.1 95.7 93.2 99.7 95.1 98.5 98.0 98.4
2005 102.9 103.5 100.8 102.0 109.5 102.6 94.6 91.9 98.8 92.9 98.5 96.9 96.7
2006 102.8 103.5 100.1 100.9 109.4 101.9 93.4 90.2 98.2 91.2 98.7 96.5 96.0
2007 106.3 106.3 101.9 103.2 112.9 103.9 94.3 89.4 102.1 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.2
2008 109.4 108.4 103.2 106.5 117.1 105.9 94.4 88.0 105.2 90.5 102.3 97.9 97.3
2009 110.8 109.1 104.0 111.2 120.0 106.9 94.6 88.8 104.3 91.0 101.9 98.0 97.6
2010 103.6 101.3 95.6 103.2 111.5 97.9 92.0 88.4 97.7 87.0 98.8 93.7 92.1
2011 103.3 100.3 93.4 101.9 112.2 97.3 91.6 88.2 97.0 86.2 98.2 92.8 91.4
2012 97.6 95.0 88.0 95.6 107.0 92.5 89.8 88.2 92.1 83.6 96.0 89.8 88.4
2013 101.2 98.2 91.1 98.8 111.9 95.6 92.2 88.7 97.9 85.7 98.4 91.6 90.4
2014 101.8 97.9 p 91.3 p 100.4 114.7 96.1 92.9 89.5 98.4 86.5 98.5 91.8 91.0
2015 92.4 p 88.4 ... ... 106.5 p 87.9 ... ... ... ... p 94.7 p 86.9 p 86.5
2012          Nov 97.0 94.4 88.0 94.8 106.7 91.9 90.1 88.3 92.8 83.9 95.8 89.3 87.9
         Dec 98.4 95.8 108.2 93.2 96.5 90.0 88.6
2013          Jan 100.1 97.4 109.8 94.4 97.5 91.1 89.5
         Feb 101.3 98.3 90.4 98.3 111.0 95.1 91.5 88.5 96.4 85.2 98.0 91.5 89.9
         Mar 99.8 97.1 109.2 93.8 97.6 90.9 89.1
         Apr 100.0 97.0 109.5 93.7 97.9 91.1 89.3
         May 100.1 97.2 90.6 98.0 109.7 94.0 92.0 88.6 97.4 85.3 98.1 91.1 89.4
         June 101.1 98.2 111.8 95.7 98.4 91.7 90.5
         July 101.0 98.2 111.8 95.6 98.6 91.8 90.5
         Aug 101.7 98.8 91.1 99.0 113.3 96.7 92.3 88.6 98.1 85.7 98.6 91.9 91.0
         Sep 101.6 98.4 113.2 96.5 98.6 91.8 90.9
         Oct 102.5 99.0 114.1 96.9 98.9 92.1 91.1
         Nov 102.2 98.8 92.1 99.8 114.1 96.7 93.1 89.0 99.7 86.6 98.9 92.1 91.2
         Dec 103.4 100.0 115.7 98.1 99.4 92.8 92.0
2014          Jan 103.0 99.5 115.8 98.1 99.2 92.5 92.0
         Feb 103.2 99.6 92.9 102.2 116.3 98.3 93.4 89.2 100.1 87.1 98.9 92.5 92.0
         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.1 99.3 93.1 92.5
         Apr 104.2 100.4 117.0 98.5 99.2 93.0 92.3
         May 103.6 99.5 92.7 101.8 116.1 97.4 93.3 89.5 99.4 87.2 98.8 92.6 91.6
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.6 98.7 92.3 91.3
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 96.0 98.7 92.2 91.1
         Aug 101.5 97.5 90.7 p 99.9 114.0 95.4 92.5 89.4 97.5 86.1 98.4 91.8 90.8
         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.1 91.1 90.0
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.2 97.6 90.4 89.5
         Nov 99.0 94.9 p 89.1 p 97.7 111.9 93.3 92.4 89.8 96.5 85.4 97.8 90.4 89.6
         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.7 90.3 89.9
2015          Jan 95.2 91.1 108.9 p 90.2 95.7 88.2 p 87.6
         Feb 93.3 89.5 p 83.9 p 92.2 107.0 p 88.7 90.5 90.4 90.6 83.1 95.2 87.4 p 86.8
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 p 86.0 94.2 86.1 p 85.3
         Apr 89.7 86.1 102.4 p 84.8 94.1 85.7 p 84.7
         May 91.6 87.9 p 82.3 p 90.1 104.7 p 86.6 90.1 90.4 89.3 82.4 94.5 86.6 p 85.6
         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 p 87.6 94.7 86.9 p 86.2
         July 91.3 87.5 105.1 p 86.7 94.4 86.4 p 85.7
         Aug 93.0 89.0 p 84.0 p 91.4 108.1 p 89.1 90.6 90.6 90.5 83.3 94.9 87.2 p 87.1
         Sep 93.8 89.7 109.6 p 90.3 95.2 87.6 p 87.8
         Oct 93.6 p 89.6 109.0 p 89.7 95.1 p 87.6 p 87.5
         Nov 91.1 p 87.1 ... ... 106.0 p 87.0 ... ... ... ... 94.2 p 86.3 p 86.0
         Dec 92.5 p 88.2 108.0 p 88.4 p 94.8 p 87.1 p 87.1
2016          Jan 93.6 p 89.1 109.9 p 89.8 p 95.1 p 87.7 p 87.9
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro-area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 5Euro-area countries and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 6Euro-area
Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, countries and countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where price and wage

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2015 see the index attached 
to the January 2016 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2015
– Approaches to strengthening the regulatory 
framework of European monetary union
– The importance of macroprudential policy 
for monetary policy
– German balance of payments in 2014
– Securities holdings statistics for analysing 
holdings of securities in   Germany and Eur -
ope: methodology and results
April 2015
– The evolution of labour market-  r elated gov -
ernment expenditure in Germany
– Structural developments in the German 
banking sector– Euro coins held for transaction purposes in 
Germany
May 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2015 and 2016 and 
an outlook for 2017
– Marketable financial instruments of banks 
and their role as collateral in the Eurosystem
– Inflation expectations: newer instruments, 
current developments and key determinants
July 2015
– Slowdown in growth in the emerging  market 
economies
– Adjustment patterns of enterprises in the 
German labour market during the Great Re -
cession – selected results of a special survey
August 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2015
– Recent developments in loans to euro-  ar ea 
non- financial corporations
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2014Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
83•

October 2015
– German households’ saving and investment 
behaviour in light of the low-interest-rate 
environment  
– Government personnel expenditure: devel -
opment and outlook
November 2015
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2014
– Deposit protection in Germany
January 2016
– The impact of alternative indicators of price 
competitiveness on real exports of goods 
and services
– Investment in the euro area
– The supervision of less significant institutions 
in the Single Supervisory Mechanism
February 2016
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEM -
MOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Be -
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20142, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20152, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 009 to 
2014, May 20152
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2011 bis 2012 , 
May 20152, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20151, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
40/2015  
Arbitraging the Basel securitization framework: 
evidence from German ABS investment
41/2015  
Do speculative traders anticipate or follow USD/
EUR exchange rate movements? New evidence 
on the efficiency of the EUR currency futures 
market42/2015  
Monetary-fiscal policy interaction and fiscal 
inflation  : a tale of three countries
43/2015  
The influence of an up-front experiment on 
respondents  ’ r ecording behaviour in payment 
diaries: evidence from Germany
44/2015  
Fundamentals matter: idiosyncratic shocks and 
interbank relations
45/2015  
Testing for Granger causality in large mixed-  
 frequency VARs
46/ 2015  
Credit risk stress testing and copulas – is the 
Gaussian copula better than its reputation?
47/ 2015  
The great collapse in value added trade
48/ 2015  
Monetary policy and the asset risk-taking chan -
nel
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2016  
86•

