Monthly Report
November 2016
Vol 68  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 18 November 2016.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The revision of the euro- area national accounts for 2015  ...................................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  20
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  21
How asset purchase programmes affect the consolidated balance sheet  
of the MFI sector  ................................................................................................................  28
Implementation of the EU Mortgage Credit Directive in Germany as reflected  
in the Bank Lending Survey, balance sheet statistics and interest rate statistics  ...................  36
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Price competitiveness in selected euro-area countries  .........................................................  42
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
5

Overview
German domestic activity 
back on its feet in the third 
quarter
Since the referendum in the United Kingdom, 
in which the country voted to leave the Euro -
pean Union (EU), observers perceived mount -
ing political risks to the global economy. Atten -
tion was centred on the threat that the uncer -
tainty regarding the way forward could encour -
age enterprises and households to restrain their 
investment and consumption. Against that 
background, the global economy turned out to 
be remarkably robust in the third quarter. In the 
quarter ended, the advanced economies even 
showed somewhat accelerated growth, a de -
velopment due mainly to the perceptible accel -
eration of US and Japanese economic growth. 
Aggregate output in the euro area grew at a 
relatively constant pace. The considerable eco -
nomic growth in the United Kingdom was strik -
ing, as it contrasts not only with diverse down -
ward scenarios but also with the general ex -
pectation that the economy would sour follow -
ing the Brexit vote. Within the group of 
emerging market economies, developments 
remained heterogeneous. The stable and rela -
tively strong growth of Chinese economic out -
put contrasted particularly sharply with the 
protracted problems faced by a variety of 
commodity- exporting nations.
Given the overall robust growth, the staff of 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has con -
firmed in the current issue of its World Eco -
nomic Outlook its global growth projections 
for this year and next from the July round. It 
once again revised significantly downwards its 
estimate of growth in real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) in the United States, especially for 
2016. However, its assessment of the current 
US output gap is now considerably narrower 
than as late as April. The IMF staff recently as -
sessed the outlook for some other economies a 
bit more favourably. It raised its growth projec -tions for the euro area slightly for this year and 
next, and even revised its projections for Japan 
perceptibly upwards. Among the emerging 
market economies, Russia’s outlook was less 
gloomy than before.
The UK referendum in the middle of the year 
impacted on the financial markets, too. Fears 
of an economic slump, primarily in the United 
Kingdom itself but capable of affecting other 
countries as well, and the associated expect -
ation of long-  term accommodative monetary 
policy drove down share prices and govern -
ment bond yields. However, the swift real eco -
nomic downturn expected for the United King -
dom in many quarters failed to materialise, and 
the markets subsequently recovered over the 
course of the third quarter. Towards the end of 
the period under review, expectations regard -
ing future monetary policy on both sides of the 
Atlantic dominated yield movements. The fi -
nancial markets were also affected by the out -
come of the US presidential elections, which 
caught many observers off- guard. In the con -
text of rising inflation rates and solid economic 
figures, the increase in expectations of a policy 
rate hike in the United States in December and 
of a more accommodative US fiscal policy are 
reflected in the rise in ten- year US  Treasury 
yields (84 basis points to 2.3%) and the rise in 
German Bunds with the same maturity (37 
basis points to 0.2%). On the other hand, fi -
nancial market developments in Japan were 
dominated by the Japanese central bank’s deci -
sion in September to change strategies. This 
means that not only is the central bank willing 
to allow inflation to temporarily overshoot the 
original target of 2% but that, moreover, yields 
on ten- year bonds will be stabilised at around 
the zero mark. There has therefore been no sig -
nificant yield rise in Japan since the end of 
June. The effective exchange rate of the euro 
has remained unchanged on balance since the 
start of the second half of the year. Its appreci -
ation against the pound sterling, linked to the Global economy 
remarkably robust
IMF confirms 
global growth projectionsNow that “Brexit shock” has died down, financial markets looking to monetary policy and US presidential election  outcomeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
6

referendum and the subsequent monetary pol -
icy measures taken by the Bank of England, 
were offset by losses against other currencies.
In the quarter under review, the Governing 
Council of the ECB left its policy rates un -
changed and did not take any new non-  
standard measures. In September, it instructed 
the relevant Eurosystem committees to assess 
the options conducive to ensuring the smooth 
implementation of the purchase programme 
now and in future. At its monetary policy meet -
ing in October, the ECB  Governing Council 
stated that recently published information had 
confirmed the baseline scenario of a continued 
moderate but steady recovery of the euro- area 
economy and a gradual rise in inflation. The 
Council reaffirmed its commitment to preserv -
ing the substantial degree of monetary accom -
modation which is necessary for inflation to 
approach a level of below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term.
In the quarter under review, the Eurosystem 
continued its purchases under the expanded 
asset purchase programme (APP) as planned. 
As at the end of September, moreover, the 
second operation in the second series of tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO II) was conducted. Its allotment volume 
tended towards the upper end of market ex -
pectations. The third operation in the TLTRO II 
series will be conducted in December of this 
year.
Developments in the monetary indicators per 
se continue to provide no indication of a grow -
ing need for monetary policy action. The broad 
M3 monetary aggregate rose considerably in 
the third quarter against the backdrop of his -
torically low interest rates and the continued 
moderate economic recovery in the euro area. 
Monetary growth was particularly supported 
by the continuation of the recovery of lending 
to the non- financial private sector, though the 
rise in lending to non- financial corporations ob -
served in the second quarter lagged behind 
that of the preceding quarters. It received a fur -ther boost from securitised lending by banks to 
domestic non- banks, which was dominated by 
the Eurosystem’s APPs. However, the positive 
effects of the asset purchases were partly offset 
by considerable outflows of funds from the 
euro area as foreign investors offloaded euro-  
area bonds on balance and euro- area investors 
continued to purchase foreign debt securities.
The third quarter of 2016 saw the German 
economy temporarily lose some momentum. 
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real GDP rose by no more than 
0.2% in the summer months after seasonal and 
calendar adjustment. However, different drivers 
were at play than in the preceding quarter. Ex -
ports, which had been making a key contribu -
tion to GDP growth in the second quarter, suf -
fered a setback, which was not entirely offset 
by resurging domestic activity. The underlying 
cyclical momentum remains quite strong, 
though. For the final quarter of the current 
year, GDP growth can be expected to continue 
where the faster pace of the first half of the 
year left off. This is signalled by the strong im -
provement in the sentiment indicators. Aggre -
gate capacity utilisation remains higher than 
average.
After the dip in the second quarter, domestic 
activity returned to the sustained strong level 
seen since the end of 2014. The more dynamic 
pace of domestic economic growth owed pri -
marily to government and private consump -
tion. Along with the particularly high mid- year 
pension increase and the delayed payment of 
the negotiated pay increase in the public sec -
tor, consumption received a strong boost from 
the ongoing advantageous income and labour 
market prospects and low energy prices. In the 
case of construction investment, the period of 
adjustment in the second quarter following 
higher- than- average production at the start of 
the year for weather- related reasons appears to 
have come to an end. Investment in machinery 
and equipment remained listless, but did not 
dampen economic activity to the same extent 
as it had in the second quarter.Monetary pol-
icy: expectations of a gradual rise in inflation con-firmed
Second TLTRO II 
operation 
 settled
Continuation of 
monetary growthGerman 
 economy lost 
momentum in 
2016 Q3, as 
weak exports …
… masked 
renewed increase in domestic activityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
7

German banks’ lending to domestic customers 
once again rose significantly in the summer 
months. The largest net inflows were seen in 
lending to households, which, as in previous 
quarters, was chiefly driven by loans for house 
purchase. Banks also distinctly expanded their 
credit business with domestic non- financial 
corporations, on balance.
The very healthy labour market developments 
seen in previous quarters experienced a dip pri -
marily between June and August. Unlike in 
winter and spring, employment grew only 
slightly in the third quarter. The reasons for this 
were twofold: weak growth in jobs subject to 
social security contributions and the renewed 
decline in low- paid part- time work. Nonethe -
less, the outlook for employment is favourable, 
as the leading indicators have recently im -
proved considerably. Unemployment decreased 
only a little recently, but this was partly due to 
the increasing number of refugees registering 
as job seekers after their applications for asy -
lum had been recognised. The expansion of la -
bour market policy measures merely dampened 
this effect, but did not offset it in full. Over the 
next few months, official unemployment is ex -
pected to continue decreasing slightly.
Negotiated pay rates moved onto a flatter 
growth path over the course of this year. Fol -
lowing on from a muted rise of 2.2% in spring 
2016, the third-  quarter increase was also no 
more than moderate, at 1.9%. Wage inflation 
was suppressed in the third quarter by both the 
low increases in negotiated wages from the 
second stage of earlier wage rounds and the 
new agreements concluded this year, which 
have been predominantly moderate. Further -
more, it was not uncommon for agreements to 
include months with a pay freeze, which led to 
delayed wage increases. It cannot be ruled out 
that a number of negotiated pay settlements 
were influenced not just by dominant deter -
mining factors such as the general economic 
situation, but also by the low inflation rate at 
present or the expectation of continued mod -
erate price increases over the term of the wage agreement. Actual earnings could recently have 
risen on a similar scale as in the first half of the 
year.
Turning to prices, the third quarter of 2016 saw 
a continuation of the previous quarter’s up -
ward trend at all stages of the economy. En -
ergy mostly played a minor role in this, how -
ever, unlike in the second quarter. Instead, 
prices excluding energy, in particular, rose at 
the upstream stages. At the consumer level, 
however, the increase in prices excluding en -
ergy was somewhat less considerable than in 
the second quarter. Lower energy prices stood 
in contrast to higher food prices caused by 
weather- related factors. After factoring out 
these two volatile components, consumer 
prices continued their moderate increase. Pro -
nounced price drops for clothing and footwear 
played a material role in the fact that the prices 
of industrial goods excluding energy barely 
rose. In contrast to this, rents grew somewhat 
more strongly than in previous quarters. Over -
all, prices rose by 0.5% year- on-year according 
to the national consumer price index, and thus 
at a considerably stronger rate than in the pre -
ceding quarter. According to the harmonised 
index, the increase strengthened to 0.4%.
In the final quarter of 2016, growth in the Ger -
man economy is likely to pick up again consid -
erably after the temporary slowdown in the 
third quarter. Sentiment has recently bright -
ened substantially. This is especially true of the 
manufacturing sector, in which there was also 
continued clear growth in capacity utilisation 
and a rise in order intake. It is therefore as -
sumed that industrial output will probably con -
tribute more strongly to aggregate growth in 
the last quarter of the year. Moreover, high 
capacity utilisation is likely to stimulate the pre -
viously declining level of investment in machin -
ery and equipment. Lastly, markedly higher ex -
port expectations in industry and the upward 
trend in orders received from abroad are indi -
cating a return to rising exports of goods, fol -
lowing the third- quarter slump. In the con -
struction sector, the indicators are still signal -Robust credit 
growth in  Germany
Dip in favour-able labour market develop-ments, but out -
look improved
Negotiated pay 
rates only mod-erately higher in summer 2016 as wellConsumer prices excluding 
energy and food 
up moderately
GDP growth 
likely to acceler-ate significantly in final quarter of the yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
8

ling lively activity. The ongoing favourable in -
come and labour market prospects combined 
with healthy consumer sentiment also suggest 
a distinct increase in private consumption ex -
penditure.
Germany’s public finances remain in a favour -
able position. As evidence of this, the surplus is 
likely to decline only a little this year (2015: 
0.7% of GDP) in spite of the expansionary fiscal 
policy stance. Positive cyclical factors and fur -
ther diminishing interest expenditure are easing 
the burden on government budgets. By con -
trast, the provision of support to refugees in -
volves significant additional annual expenditure 
year- on- year, since most refugees only arrived 
in autumn last year. In addition, central, state 
and local governments are stepping up their 
spending on transport infrastructure, amongst 
other things, and the social security funds’ 
benefits for healthcare, long- term care and 
pensions are clearly increasing. In the coming 
year, the surplus is set to remain practically un -
changed on the back of a continuation of the 
moderately expansionary fiscal policy. Eco -
nomic activity and falling interest expenses are 
likely to provide additional relief to government 
budgets. Expenditure related to refugee migra -tion could initially more or less stabilise, pro -
vided that the number of (new) migrants stays 
relatively low, as is generally expected at 
present. However, expenditure increases in 
other areas are likely to remain fairly high.
The Federal budget will probably end the cur -
rent year with another surplus and the refugee 
reserve is set to be topped up. There is to be no 
net borrowing in the coming year, as before. 
As in 2016, a sizeable withdrawal from the re -
serve is envisaged to balance out a planned 
deficit. In reality, however, the budget esti -
mates seem cautious for next year, too, which 
means that such recourse to the reserve may 
be avoidable under certain circumstances, as 
long as no additional strains on the budget 
emerge. The reserve was established to tem -
porarily cover the additional expenses, which 
were virtually impossible to calculate at first, 
arising from the very high levels of refugee mi -
gration at the time. Now, however, the ex -
penses for central government can likely be es -
timated reliably enough and are evidently well 
covered by the budget, too. It is therefore ad -
visable that the reserve be dissolved and the 
funds be used to redeem a portion of central 
government’s still high debt in the budget.Budget surpluses 
despite looser fiscal policy stanceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Since the referendum in the United Kingdom, 
in which the country voted to leave the Euro -
pean Union, observers increasingly perceived 
possible political risks to the global economy. 
Attention was centred on the threat that the 
uncertainty regarding the way forward could 
encourage enterprises and households to re -
strain their investment and consumption. 
Against that background, the global economy 
turned out to be remarkably robust in the third 
quarter. In the quarter ended, the advanced 
economies even showed somewhat acceler -
ated growth, a development due mainly to the 
perceptible acceleration of US and Japanese 
economic growth. Real GDP in the euro area 
increased comparatively steadily. Within the 
group of emerging market economies, devel -
opments remained heterogeneous. The stable 
and relatively strong growth of Chinese eco -
nomic output contrasted particularly sharply 
with the protracted problems faced by a variety 
of commodity- exporting nations. At the end of 
the period under review, however, there were 
increasing indications of economic improve -
ment, at least in Russia.
The considerable economic growth in the 
United Kingdom was particularly striking, as it 
contrasts not only with diverse downward 
scenarios but also with the general expectation 
that the economy would sour following the 
Brexit vote. A combination of different factors 
may have contributed to the robustness of the 
British economy. They include the rapid stabil -
isation of the financial markets following initial 
price fluctuations, a firming of confidence on 
the part of firms and consumers, and the ex -
pectation that the foreign trade regime would 
remain largely unchanged, at least in the short 
term. In addition, diverse metrics indicate that 
the heightened insecurity has lessened since 
the referendum. However, the lively economic 
activity in the second quarter already refuted the braking effect that many observers ex -
pected via this channel.1 Therefore, the signifi -
cance of political insecurity, in particular, on the 
operations of private actors in the short term 
may well have been overstated.
In view of the overall robust developments, the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff, in the 
current (October) issue of its World Economic 
Outlook (WEO), confirmed the global growth 
projections for this year and next from their 
July survey round (+3.1% and +3.4% on the 
basis of purchasing power parity weights). 
Nonetheless, they again considerably lowered 
their estimation of real GDP growth in the USA, 
particularly for 2016. Earlier projections had 
probably not taken the rather sluggish eco -
nomic activity in the first half of the year suffi -
ciently into account.2 It is also noteworthy that 
the staff rated the output gap in the USA this 
year considerably narrower than in April, des -
pite repeated downward revision.3 This was 
chiefly due to the perceptibly lower estimation 
of potential output; here, the IMF followed a 
revision pattern which had already been ob -
served in the past.4 The IMF staff recently as -
sessed the outlook for some other economies a 
bit more favourably. They raised their growth 
projections for the euro area slightly for this 
year and next, and even revised their projec -
tions for Japan perceptibly upwards. Among 
the emerging market economies, Russia’s out -
look was less gloomy than before.Economic 
momentum remarkably robust in the third quarter …
… particularly 
in the United 
KingdomIMF confirms global growth 
projections
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European setting, 
Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 20-21.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European setting, 
Monthly Report, May 2016, pp 11-12.
3 Whereas the staff lowered their projection for real GDP 
growth in 2016 from 2.4% in the World Economic Outlook 
in April to 1.6% as this report went to press, they raised 
their estimation of the output gap in the USA in the same 
year from -1.1% to -0.5%.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the reliability of inter -
national organisations’ estimates of the output gap, 
Monthly Report, April 2014, pp 13-35.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
10

The calming of markets for their export goods 
suggests that commodity- exporting economies 
such as Russia are gradually stabilising. The 
spot price for a barrel of Brent crude oil has 
been fluctuating within a comparatively narrow 
band around US$50 since mid-  August. After 
the OPEC member nations agreed on a new 
production target, prices initially picked up. 
However, growing doubts about the imple -
mentation of this target drove them back 
down. At the end of the period under review, 
the price of a barrel of Brent stood at US$48, 
which was more or less the same as its level 
three months earlier. Forward premiums also 
scarcely changed. The HWWI commodity price 
index excluding energy was similarly stable for 
a while. The lows experienced at the beginning 
of the year were clearly exceeded. As this re -
port went to press, industrial commodity prices 
picked up considerably.
At the consumer level in industrial countries, 
the dampening influence of the preceding fall 
in energy prices is gradually tapering off. In 
September, energy prices were only 2.7% lower 
than their previous year’s level. In June, the 
year-  on- year change had been -7.5%, and in 
September 2015 it had peaked at as much as 
-13.3%. The growth rate of consumer prices for 
the entire basket of consumer goods (headline 
inflation) accordingly rose from +0.6% to 
+0.9% between June and September. On the 
other hand, core inflation, which excludes food 
and energy prices, was still higher (+1.4%) at 
the end of the period under review, with only 
slight fluctuations. On the basis of current en -
ergy prices and their course in the previous 
year, headline inflation will probably return to 
normal in the coming months. The absence of 
renewed price declines, however, means that 
households’ real income and therefore con -
sumption might, in future, lack the stimulus 
they have experienced in the past few quarters.Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, real GDP in 
China was up by 6.7% on the year in the third 
quarter of 2016. Thus, the Chinese economy 
maintained the pace of growth achieved in the 
first half of the year. Private consumption, 
boosted by a sharp rise in incomes, continued 
to provide the greatest contribution to growth 
on the expenditure side. Households also bene -
fited from very moderate inflation. On the basis 
of the consumer price index, price inflation 
stood at 1.8% in the third quarter. Investment Commodity 
markets in calmer waters
Accelerating 
consumer price inflation in industrial  countries
Stable growth in China, but housing market continuing to heat upWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 11 November 2016, or 1 to 16 November 2016 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201630405060708090100110US dollar basis, 2011 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
405060708090100110
60708090100110Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
11

growth, on the other hand, appears to have 
remained anaemic. This affected housing con -
struction as well as machinery and equipment. 
New building construction even declined no -
ticeably, although real estate purchases were 
up by one- quarter from the previous year, and 
residential property prices rose sharply. The still 
extensive amounts of unsold property probably 
played a role in construction companies’ cau -
tion. Furthermore, observers appear to be hav -
ing doubts about the sustainability of the cur -
rent property market boom. Quite a few local 
authorities have therefore switched to regulat -
ing the demand for housing by means of pur -
chase and credit restrictions. The affected 
towns are experiencing a cooling of the hous -
ing market.
In India, the statistical office reported economic 
growth of 7.1% on the year for the second 
quarter, which is as far as its estimations cur -
rently reach. However, the pace of growth may 
be overstated to some extent. Official figures 
also indicate an extremely strong expansion of 
the manufacturing sector. On the other hand, 
the indicator for Indian industrial production is 
showing only a low year- on- year growth rate 
in the second quarter.5 Moreover, sentiment in 
the industrial sector was more on the subdued 
side, according to surveys. Consumer price in -
flation fell from 5.7% in the second quarter to 
5.2% in the third quarter. The central bank re -
sponded in October by lowering the bench -
mark rate.
In Brazil, the available indicators point to a con -
tinuation of the severe recession into which the 
economy slid just over two years ago. Even 
though the downward momentum has since 
eased, hopes of stabilisation have not yet been 
fulfilled. Many observers expect recovery in the 
year ahead, albeit probably a rather weak one; 
this assessment is primarily grounded in the ur -
gent need to bring Brazil’s parlous public fi -
nances onto a more sustainable path. The gov -
ernment, therefore, recently announced that it 
would tighten its austerity drive and reform the 
pension system. Consumer price inflation aver -aged 8.7% for the third quarter, thus still far 
exceeding the central bank’s target range. In 
view of falling inflation expectations, however, 
the bank slightly loosened its monetary policy 
in October.
In the third quarter, Russia’s real GDP was 
down by 0.4% on the year, according to an 
initial official estimate. This compares with a 
fall of 0.6% in the second quarter. After adjust -
ment for seasonal variations, economic activity 
viewed over the period may actually have ex -
panded slightly. This would mean that the deep 
recession experienced by the country since the 
second half of 2014 might be over. The sectors 
most affected by the economic crisis included 
the construction and manufacturing sectors. 
Energy production, on the other hand, proved 
robust, with oil production recently even reach -
ing a new record high. The recovery of oil 
prices since the beginning of the year also 
caused the rouble to stabilise. This meant that 
consumer price inflation eased again during 
the past few months. In October, it stood at 
6.1%, compared with 12.9% at the end of 
2015.
USA
In the United States, the economic upswing 
continued to accelerate in the third quarter of 
2016. Real GDP is initially estimated to have 
picked up by 0.7% (after seasonal adjustment) 
from the second quarter, in which it had ex -
panded by 0.4%. Meanwhile, the underlying 
pace of economic activity probably remained 
moderate. This is suggested by the fact that 
private domestic final demand rose more slug -
gishly in the quarter ended. In particular, and in 
accordance with expectations, the previously 
strong growth of private consumption was not 
repeated to the same extent. Moreover, ex -
penditure on capital goods was slightly re -Strong GDP 
growth trend in India possibly overstated
Continuing 
recession in  BrazilRecession in 
Russia presumed 
over
Noticeable 
acceleration of growth in the third quarter
5 The sub- index for manufacturing output fell by as much 
as 0.6%. However, the national accounts reveal a 9% 
growth in real value added for this sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
12

duced yet again. A key factor in the higher 
growth in GDP was the rebound in inventories. 
In addition, although exports rose sharply, this 
was caused by a ratcheting- up of exports of 
food products, animal feed and beverages.6 
This is another reason why the recent high 
pace of economic growth is expected to be dif -
ficult to maintain in the coming quarters. The 
moderate rise in employment over the past few 
months, which was admittedly high enough to 
keep the unemployment rate and labour force 
participation stable at a low level, is consistent 
with this picture. Price inflation, meanwhile, ac -
celerated noticeably as measured by the con -
sumer price index. Headline inflation climbed 
from 0.8% in July to 1.6% in October, while 
core inflation fell slightly to 2.1% in the period 
under review. The US Federal Reserve decided 
against a further normalisation of its decidedly 
accommodative monetary policy stance.
Japan
In the third quarter, the Japanese economy was 
able to follow up on the comparatively lively 
first half of the year. According to a provisional 
estimate, seasonally and price- adjusted GDP 
rose by 0.5% quarter- on- quarter, so that ag -
gregate GDP growth was actually significantly 
higher than in the second quarter (+0.2%). In 
arithmetic terms, growth in the third quarter 
was almost exclusively attributable to foreign 
trade, whereas domestic demand scarcely ex -
panded at all. While strong overall economic 
activity in the third quarter caused unemploy -
ment to fall to 3.0%, its lowest level in over 21 
years, upward pressure on prices continued to 
subside. Annual growth of the GDP deflator 
even returned slightly into negative territory for 
the first time since the end of 2013, and the 
inflation rate for the basket of consumer goods 
excluding energy and food products dropped 
to zero in September. This situation prompted 
the Bank of Japan to realign its monetary pol -
icy, so that in future it will combine monetary 
policy measures with the aim of controlling the 
yield curve at both the short and long ends, following adoption by the government of a 
comprehensive package of fiscal stimulus 
measures.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, according to a provi -
sional estimate, real GDP increased by 0.5% on 
the quarter after adjustment for seasonal fac -
tors, therefore broadly maintaining the pace of 
the first half of the year. A key factor in this was 
the consistently robust expansion of the ser -
vices sector, which is particularly significant for 
the UK economy. Manufacturing output, on 
the other hand, dropped noticeably in the third 
quarter after a steep rise in the preceding quar -Fairly robust 
growth, but inflation easing
Economic  activity decidedly robustContributions to US quarterly real GDP growth
Source:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis.  1 Private  consumption 
and  private  gross  fixed  capital  formation.  2 Government  de-
mand, inventory changes and net exports. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20163210123456
–––++++++Percentage points, seasonally adjusted, annualised rate
GDP (%)
Other demand 2Private domestic final demand 1
6 Just over three quarters of the entire increase in price-  
adjusted exports, by 2.4% on the quarter, fall into this cat -
egory. Nominal data from external trade statistics indicate 
that the demand for soy beans, in particular, was unusually 
strong, which is probably connected with crop failures in 
other cultivation regions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
13

ter. Construction activity, which had received 
very little new stimulus since the second quar -
ter of 2015, declined sharply, albeit from a high 
level. Developments in both aggregate output 
and the labour market remained favourable, 
with unemployment falling to a new cyclical 
low of 4.8% in the third quarter. The inflation 
rate, as measured by the year- on- year change 
in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP), picked up from 0.6% in July to 0.9% in 
October. At the upstream stages, there are al -
ready indications of a further rise in inflationary 
pressure as a result of the sharp depreciation of 
pound sterling. The expected inflation 
prompted the Bank of England to decide 
against a further easing of monetary policy, 
despite the gloomier economic outlook.
New EU member states
Economic growth in the new EU member states 
(EU-6)7 waned in the third quarter. This trend, 
which was relatively broadly based across re -
gions, was driven mainly by a setback in indus -
trial activity, which is likely to be only of a tem -
porary nature, however. The positive business 
climate is pointing in this direction, in any case. 
All in all, the macroeconomic outlook for this 
group remains favourable. Consumption activ -
ity, in particular, is expected to remain brisk. 
This is supported by the fact that labour mar -
kets have continued to recover over the past 
few months. Furthermore, there were recently 
signs of stronger growth in wages. However, 
consumer prices might increase slightly in the 
near future as a result of energy costs. In the 
third quarter, HICP in this group of countries 
was still down 0.3% on the year. Excluding en -
ergy and unprocessed food, prices were up by 
0.4% on the year.Slower growthAggregate output in industrial countries
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 USA, euro area, Japan and United Kingdom. 2 Distor-
ted by jump in Irish GDP.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20160.500.51.0
–++
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5
0.500.51.0
–++
0.500.51.0
–++–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5+3.0Seasonally adjusted, quarterly percentage change
USA
Euro area
United KingdomSelected industrial countries 1
Japan2
7 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
14

Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Aggregate output in the euro area grew mod -
erately in the third quarter. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the third quar -
ter of 2016 was up by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3% on the quarter and by 1.6% on the year. 
The growth rate declined slightly compared 
with the average of the first six months but the 
more favourable survey results posted recently 
promise somewhat stronger macroeconomic 
growth for the fourth quarter of 2016 and first 
quarter of 2017. Nonetheless, GDP growth in 
2016 will probably fall short of the 1.9% seen 
last year. However, the relatively high GDP 
growth for 2015 is mainly due to a major revi -
sion of Irish GDP as a result of relocation of 
activities by multinationals (see the box on 
pages 16 and 17). The underlying pace of the 
euro area’s recovery, which started in spring 
2013, is therefore largely unchanged.
Private consumption in the euro area is likely to 
show only slightly stronger growth in the third 
quarter than in spring. In comparison with the 
previous quarter, retail sales were up by 0.4% 
after seasonal and price adjustment and new 
passenger car registrations rose by 0.5%. One 
reason for the somewhat more subdued 
growth in private consumption compared with 
the previous year is probably the increase in 
consumer prices, which is dampening real dis -
posable income growth. Public consumption is 
likely to have made a positive contribution to 
growth again, in line with slightly expansionary 
fiscal policies in various member states.
Investment activity is likely to have provided a 
key impetus to growth in the third quarter, as it 
did in the second quarter.8 Following the fluc -
tuations in the first six months, which were due 
in part to weather conditions, construction in -
vestment appears to have gone back up mark -
edly in the third quarter. This is suggested by 
the development in construction output. In -
vestment in machinery and equipment should have held up well, too. Sales of capital goods 
in intra- trade showed an increase in any case.
Global economic growth has remained re -
strained, as is reflected in the euro area’s for -
eign trade: following a strong increase in the 
second quarter, goods exports to non-  euro-  
area countries rose only marginally in the third 
quarter after seasonal and price adjustment. By Underlying pace 
of economic growth largely unchanged
Private 
 consumption more on the subdued side
Investment likely 
to be fairly briskExports rising 
slowlyAggregate output in the euro area
Source:  Eurostat.  1 Affected  by  jump  in  Irish  GDP  since 
2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 1698100102104106Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, 
log scale
9698100102104106
94969810010210498100102104106
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area1
of which
8 Eurostat’s first publication from the beginning of Septem -
ber still showed a sideways movement in gross fixed capital 
formation for the second quarter. However, this has since 
been revised upwards to a distinct increase of 1.1% on the 
previous quarter after seasonal adjustment. One reason 
was an exceptionally strong increase in investment in 
 Cyprus during this period.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
15

The revision of the euro- area national accounts for 2015
According to the latest fi  gures from Euro-
stat, real gross domestic product (GDP) in the euro area rose by 2% in 2015 (1.9% after adjustment for calendar- day vari-
ations), thus topping the previous fi  gure by 
0.4 percentage point. Although GDP revi-sions are standard practice because key data for measuring aggregate economic 
output are often available only with a con-siderable time lag, the extent of this revision at such an early stage was striking. On aver-age of the period from 2004 to 2014, revi-
sions of annual GDP growth rates for the 
euro area at a similarly early date amounted to only 0.04 percentage point (measured in terms of the mean absolute deviation).
1
The new national accounts data would therefore seem to indicate that the euro- 
area economic upswing picked up consider-
ably more steam last year than initially re-ported. Other key macroeconomic indica-
tors are also now looking much more posi-
tive. For instance, according to the revised 
data, in 2015 labour productivity (measured here as real GDP per employed person) was 
up by 0.8% on the year instead of merely 
0.5%, and unit labour costs rose by only 
0.3% instead of 0.7%.
The revision of the euro- area fi  gures for 
2015 can be attributed almost entirely to a 
revision of national accounts data for Ire-land.
2 Ireland’s Central Statistics Offi   ce 
retroactively revised the estimate of domes-tic price- adjusted economic output in 2015 
by as much as 16%, pushing annual GDP 
growth up from just under 8% to 26%. 
Despite the fact that the Irish economy ac-
counts for a relatively small share of aggre-
gate euro- area output (just under 2% in 2014), this adjustment has increased Ire-land’s contribution to euro- area GDP growth in 2015 to ½ percentage point. The 
revision increased Irish labour productivity growth from 5% to 23%, while the new fi  gures put the fall in unit labour costs at 
17%. This has changed these indicators ac-cordingly for the euro area as well.
As Eurostat explained in a press release is-
sued in July of this year, the relocation of economic activities from outside the euro 
area to Ireland was the reason for the Irish GDP revision.
3 A few multinationals shifted 
part of their (intangible) capital stock to Ire-land.
4 These companies appear to be selling 
goods manufactured abroad to non- euro- area countries on a large scale, in what is known as offshore contract manufactur-ing.
5 Firms domiciled in Ireland place a 
manufacturing order with a foreign com-
pany. According to ESA 2010, which is the 
accounting framework currently in effect, the sale of the goods to third countries is 
1 The data are based on the OECD’s real- time data-
base, with the annual growth rates according to data 
from March and from September of the following year being compared with one another. Major revisions are usually undertaken only once the annual surveys have been incorporated into the national accounts, which is 
typically one- and- a- half years after the end of the re-
porting year.
2 Although, according to the OECD’s real- time data-
base, GDP growth rates were revised for some other 
euro- area countries (Finland, Germany and Slovenia) as well, these changes were much smaller, ranging from 
0.04 (Germany) to 0.8 (Slovenia) percentage point, 
and moreover were downward revisions (with the ex-ception of Germany).3 See Eurostat, Irish GDP revision, 21 July 2016. A re-location of business from another euro- area country to 
Ireland would have had no impact whatsoever on 
euro- area GDP .
4 The national accounts revision increased the Irish 
capital stock by nearly 40% or €300 billion. This must 
be viewed in the context of multinationals’ activities: 
external debt in connection with foreign direct invest-ment (FDI) rose from less than €200 billion in 2014 to over €500 billion over the course of 2015.
5 See Eurostat (2015), Manual on the changes be-
tween ESA 95 and ESA 2010, p 60, and IMF, Ireland – staff report for the 2015 Article IV consultation, March 2015, p 5.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
16

recorded as an Irish export in the national 
accounts as the products are regarded as 
being owned by the company domiciled in 
Ireland until their sale.
However, these multinationals’ transactions 
do not show up in the traditional foreign 
trade statistics, which measure cross- border 
physical goods trade, as the goods do not 
actually cross the Irish border. The discrep-
ancy between the national accounts and 
the foreign trade statistics is correspond-
ingly large: Irish goods exports (in nominal 
terms) as measured by the foreign trade 
statistics rose by a little over 20% in 2015, 
whereas according to the national accounts they went up by 70%.
6
The effect of these exports on GDP is offset in part in the national accounts by services 
imports as payments are due for the pro-
cessing services performed abroad. Imports 
of services did indeed rise sharply in terms 
of value last year, by 35%.
On balance, however, the difference be-
tween the additional export and import val-
ues yielded a sizeable surplus. This was at-
tributed to domestic value added, especially in manufacturing, where (both nominal and real) gross value added more than doubled 
on the year. By contrast, labour input rose 
only relatively little, with employment up by just 4%. Nonetheless, the absolute increase in net value added in euro was only half as large because write- downs on the enlarged capital stock likewise climbed sharply.
The very strong growth in Irish GDP in 2015 
is thus in considerable measure a refl  ection 
of a level shift owing to a relocation of multinationals’ business activities and thus cannot be interpreted in terms of cyclical importance. The revised euro- area GDP 
growth rate for 2015 accordingly refl  ects a picture of the cyclical trend which is biased upwards. This needs to be taken into con-
sideration in future studies of euro- area 
economic activity and its determinants.
6 The volume index for Irish goods exports rose by 
12% in the foreign trade statistics, whereas according 
to the national accounts real goods exports picked up by 55%.Key macroeconomic indicators for Ireland and the euro area for 2015 before and after the  revision to the national accounts
*
Year-on-year percentage change
Ireland Euro area
July Oct July Oct
Gross domestic 
product 7.8 26.3 1.6 1.9
Productivity 
(GDP per person 
employed) 5.1 23.2 0.5 0.8
Exports of goods 
and services 13.8 34.4 5.1 6.1
Imports of goods 
and services 16.4 21.7 5.9 6.1
* Data for Ireland based on the OECD’s real-time database. Data for the euro area according to Eurostat. Annual rates 
of change calculated from price-adjusted and seasonally 
adjusted data.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
17

contrast, imports from non- euro- area countries 
recorded a marked increase.
Following the weak previous quarter, industrial 
output returned to the flat growth path it had 
embarked upon at the beginning of 2013. In 
the third quarter of 2016, industrial production 
rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.4% on the 
quarter, which resulted in a year-  on- year in -
crease of 1.1%. The expansion in output was 
broadly based but, above all, significantly more 
consumer goods were produced in line with 
the generally favourable consumer environ -
ment. The production of energy, intermediate 
goods and capital goods was up moderately.
The economic situation improved in all euro-  
area countries in the third quarter, albeit to 
varying degrees. The French economy con -
tinued on its moderate growth path. GDP in -
creased by a seasonally adjusted 0.2% in the 
third quarter in comparison with the second 
quarter, when it had declined slightly. While private consumption once again moved side -
ways and corporate investment still tended to 
be weak, government consumption and public 
investment increased perceptibly. Exports 
picked up significantly as well. The very steep 
growth in imports contributed to a consider -
able build- up of inventories. Aggregate output 
in Italy in the third quarter rose by 0.3% com -
pared with the preceding quarter, which had 
seen a stagnation in economic output. In add -
ition, the revised GDP data published by the 
Italian statistical office in September now ap -
pear slightly less unfavourable for the previous 
years. According to the latest data, the reces -
sion ended already in mid-2013 and not at the 
beginning of 2015. This was followed by a 
fairly lengthy phase of extremely weak growth. 
In Spain, the robust recovery continued at an 
only slightly slower pace recently. In the third 
quarter, GDP rose by a seasonally adjusted 
0.7% on the quarter. The economy was also 
supported by a very good summer in the tour -
ism sector again. The steady increase in indus -
trial output over the past few quarters may 
have triggered investment in machinery and 
equipment. The other euro- area countries also 
saw an increase in economic output. Growth 
recorded in the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia 
and Cyprus was, in fact, quite strong.
Labour market developments in the euro area 
have been characterised by a slow decline in 
the unemployment rate alongside a distinct rise 
in employment. This is mainly due to steadily 
growing labour force participation among 
women. The seasonally adjusted standardised 
unemployment rate for the euro area de -
creased slightly to 10.0% in the third quarter. 
While unemployment showed a clear decline in 
Spain and the Netherlands, it trod water in Italy 
and rose distinctly in France. Employment 
showed a quarter- on- quarter rise of 0.4% after 
seasonal adjustment in the second quarter of 
2016 – the latest quarter for which data are 
available. Employment was up throughout the 
euro area, excluding Finland. However, the im -
provement in the labour market situation has 
not yet sufficed to strengthen wage growth. Industrial activ-
ity on moderate expansionary course
GDP growth 
regionally broad- basedRise in employ-ment alongside decline in unemployment 
rateLabour market in the euro area
148150152154
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Seasonally adjusted
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The labour 
force (employed persons and unemployed) as a proportion of 
the population, in the age group 15 to 64 in each case.
Deutsche Bundesbank681012Employed persons
Unemployment rate (standardised)
0%Million
70717273 Labour force participation 1%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
18

Hourly wages still showed only a subdued year- 
on- year rise of +1.2% in the second quarter.
In the third quarter of 2016, consumer prices in 
the euro area were up by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3% on the quarter, which once again consti -
tuted a marked rise. Energy had a weaker influ -
ence on inflation than before; this was be -
cause, although crude oil prices rose again at 
the end of the quarter, on a quarterly average 
they were up only slightly from the second 
quarter. By contrast, food prices increased in 
the third quarter in a similarly strong fashion as 
they had done in the second quarter. In add -
ition, prices of services rose by a significant 
0.4%. The price trend for industrial goods ex -
cluding energy remained flat. Annual HICP in -
flation showed a fairly steep increase of 
0.4  percentage point to +0.3% overall. This 
was partly due to the decline in energy prices in 
the third quarter of 2015 and also to weaker 
food price inflation. By contrast, despite the re -
cent fairly significant price increases for ser -
vices, inflation excluding energy and food re -
mained unchanged at 0.8% – due to a damp -
ening baseline effect of industrial goods as 
well. Broken down by country, in the third 
quarter inflation was below 0.5% only in Italy 
and the Netherlands and was negative only in 
Cyprus.
In October, consumer price inflation in the euro 
area showed a slight month- on- month increase 
to 0.2% after seasonal adjustment. This was 
due chiefly to energy, which became progres -
sively more expensive following the pick- up in 
crude oil prices. The price trend for other goods 
and services was flat, however. Annual head -
line HICP inflation was up slightly on the month 
to 0.5%. The increase was curbed slightly by 
the fact that food prices saw a sharper increase 
in October 2015 than this year. Excluding en -
ergy and food prices, the annual inflation rate 
was unchanged at 0.8%.
The forward- looking sentiment indicators are 
pointing to a distinct improvement in sales pro -
spects for the euro- area industrial sector in the coming months. Sentiment in the services sec -
tor has also rebounded. One reason for this 
may be that the widely feared negative effects 
of the referendum in the United Kingdom have 
not materialised up to now. Despite a slight 
setback, consumer confidence in the euro area 
is still well above the long- term average. In 
view of the gradual improvement in the labour 
market, private consumption is likely to be an 
important pillar of economic activity in the 
coming quarters, too. However, growth may 
be down from last year, in which falling energy 
prices had provided additional stimulus. Invest -
ment should gain momentum in light of the 
stable earnings and capacity utilisation in the 
manufacturing sector, which rose significantly 
from July to October, reaching the highest level 
since mid-2011. Overall, the economic recovery 
in the euro area appears to be moderate but 
fairly robust, and the output gap is slowly clos -
ing.Annual HICP 
inflation up quite signifi-cantly and posi-tive again; core inflation moving sideways
Slight increase 
in inflation in October due to energyContinuation of aggregate eco-nomic growth path towards the end of the year0.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++
00.51.01.52.0Consumer prices in the euro area*
Source: Bundesbank calculations on the basis of data provided 
by Eurostat. * Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP).
Deutsche BundesbankOverall index
and excluding energy and food
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016OctYear-on-year percentage change, quarterly
OctDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
19

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to keep key interest rates unchanged in the re -
porting period. The main refinancing rate 
therefore remains at 0%, while the marginal 
lending rate stands at 0.25% and the deposit 
facility rate at -0.40%. Furthermore, the Euro -
system continued to make purchases as part of 
the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP). These purchases are intended to run 
until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if ne -
cessary, and in any case until the Governing 
Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path 
of inflation consistent with its objective of 
achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term.According to the latest ECB staff projections 
discussed by the ECB Governing Council at the 
beginning of September, the baseline scenario 
for GDP growth and inflation in the euro area 
will remain broadly unchanged. Annual HICP 
inflation is set to rise to an average of 1.2% in 
2017, mainly owing to upward baseline effects 
in the energy component. ECB staff then ex -
pect the inflation rate to rise to 1.6% in 2018 
on the back of the continuing economic recov -
ery. In December, the Eurosystem will publish 
projections that for the first time extend 
through to 2019.
At its monetary policy meeting in October 
2016, the ECB Governing Council announced 
that the information that had become available 
since September confirmed its expectations of 
a continued moderate but steady recovery of 
the euro- area economy and a gradual rise in 
inflation, but cautioned that the baseline scen -
ario remains subject to uncertainty. The Council 
therefore expressed its ongoing commitment 
to preserving the substantial degree of monet -
ary accommodation which is necessary to se -
cure a sustained convergence of inflation to -
wards levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. The relevant Eurosystem com -
mittees have been tasked with evaluating op -
tions to ensure the smooth implementation of 
the purchase programme going forward. The 
ECB Governing Council will discuss the results 
of this evaluation, as well as the aforemen -
tioned new forecasts, at its monetary policy 
meeting in early December.
On 28 September, the second in the new series 
of four targeted longer- term refinancing oper -
ations (TLTRO II) launched in March 2016 was 
conducted. This operation saw 249 institutions 
taking up an overall volume of €45.3 billion, 
tending towards the upper end of market ex -
pectations. At the same time, repayments of 
funds provided under the first series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO I) ECB Governing 
Council leaves key policy rates unchangedBaseline 
scenario  for 
HICP inflation 
largely static
ECB Governing 
Council still expects moder-ate economic recovery and higher inflation
249 banks 
 borrow €45.3 billion in second TLTRO IIMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 1 
to 16 November 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 20160.500.2500.250.500.751.001.251.50
––++++++
025Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points%Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1
Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
20

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 27 July 2016 and 25 October 2016 saw 
a marked increase in euro-area liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors (see the 
table below). Compared with the average of 
the reserve maintenance period June-July 
2016, ie the last period preceding the review 
period, the liquidity needs rose by €57.3 bil-
lion to an average of €823.3 billion in the 
September-October 2016 period (correspond-ing period in the previous year: €557.5 billion). 
The sum of the autonomous factors fl  uctu-
ated within a broad corridor between €735.3 
billion and €863.4 billion. The increase in the 
average liquidity needs resulted mainly from 
the decline in the combined total of net for-
eign assets and other factors, which are con-
sidered together because of liquidity-neutral 
valuation effects. This sum declined by €56.9 
billion in total, which consequently absorbed 
liquidity. The rise in the volume of banknotes 
in circulation, which increased by an average 
of €7.6 billion in the review period, also raised liquidity needs. By contrast, the decline in 
government deposits with the Eurosystem, 
which decreased by €7.2 billion on balance, 
provided more liquidity. At an average of €168 
billion in the reserve maintenance period 
September-October 2016, they were, how-
ever, at a high level again. The minimum re-
serve requirement rose across the two reserve periods by a total of €1.9 billion to €117.8 bil-
lion in the September-October 2016 period, thus additionally pushing up the calculated 
liquidity  needs.
The outstanding tender volume totalled €541 
billion on average in the September-October 
2016 period and was therefore up by just 
under €22 billion on the corresponding value 
for the June-July 2016 period. This increase 
was attributable mainly to the allotment of 
the second targeted longer-term refi  nancing operation of the new series (TLTRO II), for 
which there was a demand totalling €45.3 bil-lion (see the chart on p 23). Furthermore, on 
Factors determining bank liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2016
27 July
to
13 September14 September
to 
25 October
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   9.1 +   1.5
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  37.7 –  30.5
3 Net foreign assets
1 +  18.9 +   2.8
4 Other factors 1 –  44.6 –  34.0
Total +   2.9 –  60.2
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –   4.1 –   6.1
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  12.1 +  19.8
(c) Other operations + 112.6 + 107.3
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –   0.1 +   0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  32.0 –  32.2
Total +  88.5 +  88.9
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  91.3 +  28.6
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.8 –   1.1
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14• and 15• of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
21

the settlement date, 28 September 2016, 
settlement was effected for the mandatory 
early repayments from the eight transactions 
of the fi  rst series (TLTRO I) amounting to €1.7 billion and voluntary early repayments arising 
from the fi  rst TLTRO I totalling €9.4 billion. The net supply of liquidity from the second 
TLTRO II and the early repayments therefore 
totalled €34.2 billion on the value date (cor-
responding effect for the fi  rst TLTRO II: €38.2 
billion). There is now a total of €497.2 billion outstanding from the TLTROs I and II. Against 
the backdrop of the high level of refi  nancing 
via these supplementary longer-term tenders 
(maturities of up to four years), the demand for regular refi  nancing operations continued 
to decline (see the chart on p 24). The volume 
of the main refi  nancing operation fell by 
€10.2 billion compared with the June-July 
2016 reserve period to an average of €37.4 
billion in the September-October 2016 period, while the outstanding volume of three-month 
tenders declined by €6.8 billion on the 
June-July 2016 reserve period to an average of €17.7 billion.
The liquidity provided via the Eurosystem’s 
purchase programmes increased again signifi  -cantly during the reporting period (see the ad-
jacent table). In the September-October 2016 
period, the purchase programmes recorded 
average balance sheet holdings of assets in 
the amount of €1,447 billion, which was 
equivalent to a share of 73% of the total cen-
tral bank liquidity provided via open market 
operations during this period on average. 
€1,319 billion of the liquidity stemming from 
the purchase programmes was accounted for 
by the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP). In the June-July 2016 maintenance 
period, the average balance sheet volume of 
all purchase programmes stood at €1,227 bil-
lion.
The excess liquidity rose further owing to this 
additional supply of liquidity by the Eurosys-
tem, despite being hampered in part by the 
increased demand for liquidity stemming from autonomous factors. In the September-October 
2016 reserve period, excess liquidity averaged 
€1,047 billion, which was €182 billion higher than its average level recorded in the June-July 
2016 reserve period. Almost two-thirds of this excess liquidity was held by credit institutions 
as excess reserves on their central bank ac-
counts and just over one-third in the deposit 
facility.
In light of this very high and still rising liquidity 
surplus, overnight rates in the period under 
review continued to move in line with the de-
posit facility rate (see the adjacent chart). Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 11 Novem-
ber 2016
Active programmes
CSPP +  24.3 42.2
PSPP + 185.3 1,165.1
ABSPP +   0.9 21.5
CBPP3 +  10.5 199.5
Completed programmes 
CBPP2 –   0.4 7.0
SMP –   6.1 102.0
CBPP1 –   3.4 13.8
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug Sep Oct Nov
20160.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn%
7008009001,0001,1001,200
Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketStoxx GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
22

Eonia continued to hover a few basis points 
above the deposit facility rate, but contracted 
slightly (from an average of -0.33% in the 
June-July 2016 period to just over -0.35% in 
the September-October 2016 period). By con-
trast, secured overnight money (GC Pooling 
Overnight, ECB basket) in the July-September 
2016 period, at a rounded average of  -0.40%, 
was only slightly higher than the deposit facil-
ity rate, and the average rate even dropped 
slightly below it to -0.41% in the September- 
October 2016 period. One particularity here, 
with a rate of -0.46% at the end of the quar-ter terminating in September, was that, on the 
one hand, it coincided with the end of the 
half-year period for Japanese banks, and, on 
the other, it was four days long in Germany 
owing to a weekend and a public holiday. At 
a rate of -0.96%, the repo funds rate (average 
rate for general collateral securities and spe-
cial securities) determined by ICAP BrokerTec 
for German government bonds shows banks’ 
preference to keep these papers on their bal-
ance sheets on that date. Also for GC Pooling, 
the reasons cited for the interest rates falling below the deposit facility rate include the 
focus on the securities provided as collateral. 
The underlying turnover for GC Pooling Over-
night was very low in the ECB basket. The 
average volume across both reserve mainten-
ance periods under review amounted to just 
€2.1 billion, compared with €8.3 billion in the corresponding periods last year. Although the 
corresponding overnight turnover in the ECB 
EXTended basket, which contains a broader pool of collateral, was slightly higher at an 
average of €3.9 billion, it likewise posted a 
decline (€6.6 billion in the previous year). 
Overnight money in this basket was, on aver-
age, traded at just under one basis point above the rate for the ECB basket in the 
period under review. Eonia turnover, which 
stood at an average of €9.8 billion, was also 
low in the two periods under review when 
compared with the two corresponding 
prior-year periods (€15.5 billion on average).Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor purchase programme (CSPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The 
marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Deposit facility 3
1,20090060030003006009001,2001,5001,8002,100
––––+++++++
Current account holdings in excess of the reserve requirement
April May June July August September October November
2016Three-month tendersPurchase programmes1
Second series
(TLTRO II) First series of targeted longer-termrefinancing operations (TLTRO I)Main refinancing operationsExcess liquidity 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
23

amounted to €11 billion in total, comprising 
voluntary repayments to the tune of €9.4 bil -
lion and mandatory repayments of €1.6 billion 
from institutions whose new net lending had 
failed to exceed their benchmark. The net li -
quidity effect therefore stood at €34.3 billion. 
The third in the series of four TLTRO II oper -
ations will be conducted in December of this 
year.
On 11  November 2016, the Eurosystem held 
assets in the amount of €1,165.1 billion as part 
of the public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP). The average residual maturity of the 
PSPP portfolio has risen and currently stands at 
8.4 years. The outstanding amounts purchased 
to date under the third covered bond purchase 
programme (CBPP3) and the asset- backed se -
curities purchase programme (ABSPP) came to 
€199.5 billion and €21.5 billion respectively. 
Purchases made under the corporate sector 
purchase programme (CSPP) totalled €42.2 bil -
lion as at 11 November. In sum, the volume of assets purchased under the APP is thus in line 
with the targeted average monthly volume of 
€80 billion.
In the period under review, excess liquidity 
grew by around €170 billion, thus continuing 
the upward trend seen since the launch of the 
APP . The increase was mainly driven by the 
continuation of the asset purchase programmes 
as well as the positive net liquidity effect stem -
ming from the TLTROs, which more than offset 
the decline in the regular tender operations. At 
last count, excess liquidity amounted to around 
€1,148 billion. Volumes are expected to con -
tinue rising throughout the rest of this year on 
the back of the monthly APP purchases.
With the ECB Governing Council leaving policy 
rates unchanged in the reporting period, the 
unsecured overnight money market rate (Eonia) 
again hovered within a narrow corridor be -
tween -0.32% and -0.36%, remaining close to 
the deposit facility rate. The secured overnight Purchase 
 volumes still in 
line with targetExcess liquidity continues to  follow positive trend
Lower market 
expectations of falling interest ratesOutstanding liquidity following open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve periods. The last period displayed 
is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201602004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,0002,200€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
24

rate (Stoxx GC Pooling) once again fell below 
the Eonia rate, reaching a new low of around 
-0.457% at the end of the quarter, but remain -
ing close to the deposit rate the rest of the 
time. The three- month Euribor declined at a 
noticeably slower pace, standing at -0.311% 
the current end, only around 1 basis point 
lower than the level recorded at the end of the 
last reporting period. There has been a signifi -
cant rise in money market forward rates lately 
across all maturities but particularly at the 
longer end of the range. This increase suggests 
that market participants now consider a further 
cut in the deposit rate much less likely than in 
previous months.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 continued 
its noticeable upward trajectory in the third 
quarter of 2016. A key factor driving monetary 
growth was once again an increase in over -
night deposits in a setting of low opportunity 
costs. Looking at the counterparts, monetary 
developments were supported, in particular, by 
the ongoing recovery in lending to the non-  
financial private sector. At the same time, the 
MFI sector further expanded its securities- based 
lending to the private sector. Another import -ant factor in the expansion of the money stock 
was the continued growth in securities- based 
lending to general government, which is being 
fuelled to a large extent by the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchases. However, these positive influ -
ences were partially cancelled out by substan -
tial outflows of funds from the euro area which 
are, in turn, probably closely linked to the Euro -
system’s monetary policy measures. At 5.0%, 
the annual growth rate of M3 was unchanged 
on the quarter, thus remaining at the level ob -
served since mid-2015.
The expansion of M3 between July and Sep -
tember was once again driven by considerable 
inflows to overnight deposits, which both 
households and non- financial corporations 
continued to expand. By contrast, small out -
flows were again observable from other short- 
term deposits held by the non- financial private 
sector, which include short- term time deposits 
and savings deposits. This mirrors the continu -
ation of a four-  year trend in which monetary 
growth has been fuelled primarily by rising 
overnight deposits. This development is doubt -
less chiefly attributable to the interest rate set -
ting, which has been marked by a very low 
yield spread of long- term government bonds 
over monetary assets, making it attractive per 
se to hold cash. In addition, interest rates on 
other short- term deposits have decreased more Monetary 
 developments still strongly influenced by monetary policyM3 growth still dominated by overnight depositsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2016 Q3 2016 Q2
Central government deposits – 21.5 4.3
Monetary aggregate M3 125.4 109.2
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 145.3 94.7
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 21.9 –  2.2
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 2.0 16.8
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 57.1 –  9.4
of which
Capital and reserves 12.6 26.8
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 69.7 – 36.2Assets 2016 Q3 2016 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 115.8 60.0
Loans 67.1 22.1
Loans, adjusted 1 70.1 57.4
Securities 48.7 37.9
Credit to general government in the euro area 66.8 121.0
Loans –   7.1 – 10.6
Securities 73.6 131.6
Net external assets – 115.9 – 60.4
Other counterparts of M3 –  19.5 – 16.5
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
25

decisively than those for overnight deposits, 
encouraging shifts within M3 into the highly 
liquid  monetary component.
In terms of the monetary counterparts, the 
mainstay of monetary growth in the reporting 
quarter was lending to the euro- area private 
sector. This included, in particular, loans to pri -
vate non- MFIs adjusted for securitisation and 
other one- off effects. Such loans continued to 
rise against the backdrop of historically low 
interest rates and the continued economic re -
covery in the euro area. However, growth in 
lending to non- financial corporations was con -
siderably weaker between July and September 
than in the two preceding quarters. This was 
due to the fact that the continued pick- up in 
medium and longer-  term lending was accom -
panied by comparatively high net redemptions 
in the short- term maturity segment, which is 
usually very volatile (see the above chart on 
page 27). Overall, the annual growth rate of 
loans to non- financial corporations, which has 
shown an upward drift since the third quarter 
of 2014, continued to rise, reaching 1.9% at 
the end of September.
The results of the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) 
indicate that growth in non- financial corpor -
ations’ demand for bank loans in the euro area 
in the third quarter expanded moderately, al -
though less strongly than in the preceding 
quarters. The respondents mainly put this in -
crease down to the low general level of interest 
rates and to businesses’ financing needs for 
corporate restructuring as well as for debt refi -
nancing and restructuring. However, enter -
prises’ use of alternative sources of financing, 
especially internal financing and the issuance of 
debt securities, had a dampening effect. Banks 
left their standards for lending to enterprises 
unchanged during the third quarter.
At country level, the increase in loans to non-  
financial corporations over the past few quar -
ters is mainly attributable to credit institutions 
domiciled in the two largest member states 
(see the lower chart on page  27). After a Smaller rise in 
loans to non- financial corpor-ations than in previous quarters
No further 
 easing of credit 
standards for loans to  enterprises
Discernible 
country- specific differences in loan dynamicsMonetary aggregates andcounterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year percentage growth rates; growth contributions in
percentage points; end-of-quarter data; seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial 
liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the
private sector 2
Financialcorporations 3
Non-financial
corporations
HouseholdsM3 
M3
Loans to the private sector 2Securities-based lending to
general governmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
26

weaker second quarter, credit institutions in 
Germany expanded their lending again in the 
third quarter. French banks, too, stepped up 
their lending once more, albeit at a slower 
pace, against the backdrop of relatively strong 
investment and the persistently weak internal 
funding of non- financial corporations domi -
ciled in France. Loans to enterprises by Italian 
and Spanish banks did not contribute any 
growth momentum to the euro- area aggre -
gate; lending, which is following a weak up -
ward trend in any case, appears to be faltering 
in both countries. It is reasonable to assume 
that, in Italy, demand from non- financial cor -
porations was limited owing to the relatively 
weak investment dynamics. On the other hand, 
business investment in Spain during the last 
few quarters was strong by historical stand -
ards. However, at the same time, non- financial 
corporations received ample funding from in -
ternal financing sources and the issuance of 
equity instruments, which is likely to have cur -
tailed their demand for bank borrowing in the 
third quarter, too.
Lending to euro- area households continued its 
upward trend in the third quarter of 2016 but, 
at an annual rate of 1.8% at the end of the re -
porting quarter, growth remained moderate. 
The main drivers of this growth were once 
again loans for house purchase, particularly in 
Germany and France. For the euro area as a 
whole, the household demand for mortgages 
continued to increase in the third quarter ac -
cording to the BLS data. The respondent bank 
managers stated that demand was mainly sup -
ported by the low general level of interest 
rates, the outlook on the housing market and 
the anticipated house price trend. On balance, 
credit standards in this segment were eased 
somewhat.
Despite the persistence of expansionary under -
lying dynamics in euro- area private consump -
tion, growth in consumer credit in the report -
ing quarter was again more subdued compared 
with the fourth quarter of 2015 and the first 
quarter of 2016. The banks surveyed in the BLS Moderate 
growth in loans to households driven by  mortgages
Growth in 
 consumer credit somewhat slowerLoans to non-financial corporations inthe euro area
*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Aggregate adjus-
ted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions 
arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201660402002040
–––++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 yearsTotal
Loans to non-financial corporationsin the euro area
*
60402002040
–––++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Loans  adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Additionally adjusted for po-
sitions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by 
MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area 1... France
... Italy
... Spain
... GermanyMFIs in ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
27

How asset purchase programmes affect the consolidated 
balance sheet of the MFI sector
Monetary developments in the euro area 
since 2015 have been heavily infl  uenced by 
the effects of the expanded asset purchase programme (APP), the impact of which can 
be visualised by the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector.
1 A comparison of 
this balance sheet at two points in time re-veals all the transactions carried out by the 
MFI sector –  including the Eurosystem  – with domestic non- banks and non- euro- 
area residents (see the table on page 25).
A basic distinction must fi  rst be made be-tween direct effects, meaning an increase 
in the money stock as a direct result of asset purchases by the central bank, and indirect 
effects, which are triggered by adjustment 
responses. Whether an asset purchase by the Eurosystem has direct effects on the monetary aggregate M3 and which items on the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector it affects depends on whether 
the seller belongs to the MFI sector, the do-
mestic money- holding sector or is a non- 
euro- area resident.2 This box seeks to shed 
light on this topic using the example of pur-
chases of bonds issued by euro- area gov-ernments. The information set out in the 
following applies mutatis mutandis to pur-
chases of domestic corporate bonds, ex-
cept that the item in question on the con-
solidated balance sheet of the MFI sector is 
not “securities- based lending to euro- area 
general government” but “securities- based 
lending to euro- area private sector non- 
MFIs”.
Government bond purchases have a direct 
effect on the monetary aggregate M3 only if the central bank ultimately purchases the 
assets from the stock of the domestic 
money- holding sector (primarily private cor-
porations or households). In this case, the transactions lead to an increase in securities- 
based lending to general government on 
the assets side of the consolidated balance sheet, while the payment transaction, in the form of overnight deposits, say, boosts the 
monetary aggregate M3 on the liabilities 
side.3
If, on the other hand, the seller of the gov-ernment bonds is a non- euro- area resident, 
the counterparts of M3 likewise see an in-
crease in securities- based lending to gen-eral government by the MFI sector. The payment transaction, however, drives up the liabilities of the central bank or a do-
mestic credit institution to the non- resident 
seller, thereby diminishing the MFI sector’s 
net external asset position.4 The monetary 
aggregate M3 remains static because do-mestic non- banks’ money holdings have 
not changed.
1 Further information on the consolidated balance 
sheet of the MFI sector can be found in Deutsche Bun-
desbank, The consolidated balance sheet of the MFI 
sector and its signifi  cance for monetary analysis, 
Monthly Report, July 2013, pp 55-56. The MFI sector 
chiefl  y comprises central banks, credit institutions and money market funds (MMFs) resident in the euro area. Since MMFs are only permitted to invest in longer- term 
assets to a very limited degree, they are not analysed 
separately here.2 The fourth category, bond sales by euro- area central 
governments, which is probably less signifi  cant in 
quantitative terms, is not discussed here.
3 Because the seller does not normally have an ac-
count directly with the central bank, the purchase 
price must be paid via the bank operating the seller’s 
account. This increases the bank’s central bank bal-
ance by the amount in question, while the bank credits 
the purchase price to its customer’s account. For the 
bank, this transaction effectively extends its balance 
sheet. However, the increase in the bank’s central bank 
balance is not visible on the consolidated balance 
sheet of the MFI sector overall because it does not lead 
per se to any change in claims and liabilities vis- à- vis 
the non- MFI sector and is eliminated through consoli-dation.
4 Since the seller will not normally have an account 
with the Eurosystem, the purchase price must be paid via the bank operating the seller’s account. If that bank 
is a euro- area MFI, this transaction will be settled as 
described in footnote 3 above.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
28

If the central bank purchases a government 
bond from a domestic credit institution’s 
stock, this transaction likewise has no direct 
impact on M3. The asset merely changes 
hands within the MFI sector, with the result 
that the overall stock of securities- based 
lending to general government attributable 
to the MFI sector remains unaltered by this 
transaction. At the same time, the central 
bank balance of the credit institution selling the asset is increased by the payment trans-
action. However, this does not appear on the consolidated balance sheet either, be-
cause the rise in credit institutions’ assets is 
cancelled out by an identical increase in 
Euro system liabilities.
As well as being directly affected by the 
asset purchases, the monetary aggregate is 
also affected indirectly by the various ad-
justment responses by MFIs and non- banks. 
These occur, for instance, via the portfolio 
rebalancing channel, ie as a result of invest-
ors responding to government bond pur-
chases by the central bank by adjusting 
their portfolios. Other forms of transmission 
are also possible, including the impact of 
monetary policy on market participants’ ex-
pectations (the signalling channel) and on 
the fi  nancial situation of credit institutions and borrowers (the bank capital and bal-ance sheet channel) and via the exchange 
rate channel.5
These types of indirect effects can have a 
positive or negative effect on the monetary 
aggregate. Indirect positive effects may stem, for instance, from an expansion of the MFI sector’s lending to the domestic 
money- holding sector in the form of loans 
or securities- based lending and the deposits this creates, which form part of the monet-
ary aggregate. By contrast, an indirect ef-fect that weakens the impact of the pur-
chase programme on the monetary aggre-
gate occurs if, say, the domestic money- holding sector uses the deposits it has received to purchase external assets, in 
which case – taken in isolation – there is a 
simultaneous reduction in the MFI sector’s 
net external asset position and the money 
aggregate M3. Other adjustment responses 
that likewise reduce the monetary aggre-gate may occur if the domestic money- holding sector uses the deposits it has re-
ceived to redeem outstanding MFI loans, if 
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The macroeconomic im-
pact of quantitative easing in the euro area, Monthly 
Report, June 2016, pp 29-53.Direct effects of a monetary policy asset purchase programme on M3
Illustration based on the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector
Deutsche BundesbankAsset buyer Asset sellers Effect on M3
No effectNo effectIncrease
InvestorsOther MFIsMoney-
holding 
sector
Non-residentsResidents
Central bankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
29

enterprises use capital market funding as a 
substitute for bank funding, or if short- term 
deposits included in M3 are shifted into longer- term MFI sector liabilities not in-cluded in M3.
6 Lastly, further down the 
road, the real economic effects of the pur-chase programme may lead to feedback ef-
fects on the items of the consolidated bal-
ance sheet.
It is diffi   cult to say how strongly these ef-fects are infl  uencing euro- area monetary 
developments at present. For one thing, a 
lack of statistical data about the actual sell-ers behind the transactions means that the 
direct effects of the bond purchases can only be estimated. For another, it is not 
readily possible to project how the balance 
sheet items in question would have de-
veloped in the absence of the Eurosystem’s 
bond purchases. That being said, a glance 
at the data provided by the consolidated 
balance sheet of the MFI sector does reveal a number of underlying trends.
7
If securities- based lending to general gov-
ernment in the euro area is broken down 
into loans originated by the Eurosystem and 
those originated by MFIs excluding the Eu-rosystem, as shown in the chart above, it is evident that the sharp growth seen over the last year and a half was driven by the Euro-system’s purchases as part of the asset pur-chase programme (APP) launched in March 
2015. By contrast, credit institutions resi-
dent in the euro area have signifi  cantly re-
duced their stock of euro- area government 
bonds since the beginning of 2015. This 
suggests that they were sellers, which prob-ably resulted in an appreciable share of the 
funds provided by the Eurosystem remain-
ing in the MFI sector.
If data from the consolidated balance sheet 
of the MFI sector are merged with those 
from the balance of payments statistics, there is evidence to suggest that non- 
resident investors are also likely to have sold 
large volumes of government bonds to the 
Eurosystem. The chart on the following 
page shows that the ongoing decline in the net external position observed since the end 
of 2014 coincided with outfl  ows of funds from the euro area in connection with net sales of domestic government bonds by non- residents. Inasmuch as these transac-
tions were sales to the Eurosystem, they did not lead to a direct increase in the monetary 
aggregates in the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector, but to shifts be-
tween two counterparts of M3: a rise in the MFI sector’s securities- based lending to gen-
6 These leakage effects are discussed in greater detail 
in N  Butt, S  Domit, M  McLeay, R  Thomas and 
L Kirkham, What can the money data tell us about the 
impact of QE?, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 
2012 Q4, pp 321-331.
7 All the following examples relate to purchases of 
government bonds. It is more diffi   cult to make similar 
statements about the corporate bond purchase pro-
gramme launched in June this year, as the data history 
is still short and it is harder to identify the bonds eli-
gible for purchase on the basis of the data sources 
used here. For one thing, the Eurosystem is only per-
mitted to purchase investment- grade bonds. For an-
other, the data series for the Eurosystem’s holdings of 
bonds issued by the euro- area private non- banking 
sector also include the asset- backed securities pur-
chased as part of the APP as well as bonds issued by 
agencies, which were eligible for the PSPP until May 
2016.Securities-based lending to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 20161000100200300400500600
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
... the Eurosystem
... other MFIsExtended by ...MFI sector as a wholeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
30

reported yet another increase in demand for 
consumer credit, which they attributed mainly 
to the low general level of interest rates and 
consumers’ strong propensity to purchase. 
Standards in this segment were eased some -
what.
In addition to granting more loans, the MFI 
sector also significantly increased its securities- 
based lending to the private sector in the third 
quarter of 2016, raising its holdings of bonds as 
well as shares and other equity. The increase in 
bond portfolios resulted from growth in Euro -
system holdings, which was presumably fuelled 
chiefly by purchases under the CSPP that was 
launched in June 2016. By contrast, credit insti -
tutions reduced their bond holdings on balance 
after they had built them up during the second 
quarter. This may indicate that banks purchased 
corporate bonds in April and May in anticipa -
tion of the CSPP and then sold them to the 
Euro system following the programme’s launch.Securities- based lending to general govern -
ment was once again a key driver of monetary 
growth. The rise in securities- based lending 
was due above all to Eurosystem purchases 
under the PSPP . However, its contribution to 
monetary growth was less pronounced than in 
the previous quarters, as the Eurosystem’s net 
purchases were partly offset by the mounting 
net sales by other MFIs (see the box on 
pages 28 to 31 for more information on the 
impact of government bond purchases on the 
consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector).
M3 was positively influenced in addition by 
considerable outflows in MFI longer- term fi -
nancial liabilities, which affected both long-  
term time deposits and savings deposits as well 
as bank bonds with a maturity of over two 
years. Thus the significant decline in bank fund -
ing via long- term debt instruments, which has 
been observed since the fourth quarter of 2011 
but had weakened somewhat in the second Clear rise in 
securities- based lending to  private sectorWeaker impact of Eurosystem government bond purchases on securities- based lending to public sector
Continued out -
flows in longer- 
term financial liabilitieseral government and a drop in the MFI sec-
tor’s net external asset position.
On the whole, the data support the notion 
that the direct effects of the Eurosystem’s 
government bond purchases on the monet-
ary aggregate M3 were signifi  cantly smaller than the reported purchase volumes.
When assessing the effects of the APP on 
money, it should be noted that there is no 
need for the asset purchases to have a dir-
ect effect on the money aggregates in order 
for the programme to be effective. In the 
models used to analyse purchase pro-
grammes, an increase in money or in bank 
deposits refl  ects the transmission of the programme, but it is not the cause of its 
effect.8 This is why, in the context of mon-
etary analysis, monetary developments are 
just one of several variables that can be used to assess the effects of a purchase programme and must be evaluated in the 
overall context of the consolidated balance 
sheet of the MFI sector and developments 
in the fi  nancial and credit markets.
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), op cit.Net purchases of euro-area government 
bonds by non-residents
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20163002001000100200300400
–––++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Memo item
MFI sector's net external asset positionForeign portfolio investment in debt securities 
issued by the public sector in the euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
31

quarter of 2016, resumed between July and 
September.
The decline in the MFI sector’s net external 
asset position had a substantial dampening ef -
fect per se  on monetary dynamics. This was in 
part a consequence of the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchase programmes. For one thing, it is likely 
that the Eurosystem ultimately again bought a 
sizeable amount of bonds from foreign invest -
ors in the reporting quarter, resulting in an out -
flow of funds from the euro area to non-  
residents (see the box on pages 28 to 31). The 
balance of payments data currently available 
for July and August indicate that non- resident investors once again sold appreciable volumes 
of government bonds issued in the euro area, 
which may well be connected with the PSPP . 
For another thing –  and this arguably had a 
greater impact on volumes  – the balance of 
payments data suggest that both non- resident 
investors and domestic non- banks continued 
to substitute domestic securities by foreign 
paper, which can probably be attributed not 
least to indirect effects of the purchase pro -
gramme, such as portfolio shifts or changes in 
market participants’ expectations.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
Driven once again by substantial increases in 
overnight deposits, deposits with German 
banks continued their positive growth trend of 
recent quarters during the third quarter of 
2016. Short- term deposits other than overnight 
deposits also recorded slight inflows. In add -
ition, long- term deposits continued to decline, 
albeit at a comparatively moderate rate. The 
main reason for the ongoing build- up of over -
night deposits is presumably the small and fur -
ther narrowing yield spread of alternative bank 
deposit instruments which, however, offer less 
flexibility (see the adjacent chart).
The sectoral breakdown in the reporting period 
showed little change against the prior quarters. 
Thus households were again primarily respon -
sible for the growth in short- term bank de -
posits in the reporting quarter as they boosted 
their overnight deposits substantially. Non-  
financial corporations likewise recorded an -
other increase in their overnight deposits, albeit 
to a lesser extent than in the preceding quar -
ters, whereas their stocks of short- term time 
deposits showed a somewhat bigger increase 
than before. In the quarter under review the 
demand for highly liquid bank deposits by the 
non- financial private sector was probably again 
supported by strong corporate profitability and 
high levels of disposable income among house -M3 growth 
 substantially dampened per se by MFI  sector’s net external asset positionDeposit growth still dominated by build- up of 
overnight deposits
Build- up in 
shorter- term deposits seg-ment driven by non- financial private sectorInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 2016012345% pa, monthly data
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2up to 2 years
over 2 years
up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
32

holds. Financial corporations, whose invest -
ment behaviour is influenced more by return 
considerations, further reduced their net de -
posits in this segment.
The quarter under review saw a continuation 
of the decline in long-  term deposits observed 
since 2010. As in the preceding quarters, this 
was chiefly attributable to the sustained net re -
duction in insurance undertakings’ time de -
posits with an agreed maturity of over two 
years. In addition, households reduced their 
long- term savings deposits further in net terms. 
They have now persistently cut their savings 
deposits redeemable at notice of over three 
months to such an extent that their current 
holdings amount to less than half the volume 
when European economic and monetary union 
was launched. The long- term time deposits of 
insurance undertakings have also seen con -
tinued net outflows since the crisis. Neverthe -
less, these volumes currently stand at much the 
same level as at the start of monetary union on 
account of considerable growth prior to the 
crisis which has only now levelled off.
German banks’ lending to the domestic non-  
bank sector once again rose significantly in the 
third quarter. The sole exception, as in the pre -
ceding quarters, was lending to general gov -
ernment, reflecting not least that sector’s low 
financing needs given the favourable state of 
public finances. By contrast, loans to the do -
mestic private sector, in particular, expanded 
considerably on balance. In addition, banks in 
Germany – unlike in the euro area as a whole – 
also slightly increased their holdings of private- 
sector securities again in the third quarter.
The largest net inflows in loans to the private 
sector related to lending to households, which, 
as in the preceding quarters, was mainly driven 
by loans for house purchase. Mortgage lending 
grew at approximately the same rate between 
July and September as it has since the third 
quarter of 2015. On balance, the year- on- year 
growth rate remained stable at 3¾% (see the 
box on pages  36 and 37). The demand for housing loans continued to be supported by 
the extremely low level of interest rates, with 
the MFI interest rate statistics revealing a fur -
ther rate drop in long- term residential mort -
gage rates during the third quarter to a new 
all- time low of 1.7% at the end of September.
This is consistent with the BLS finding that de -
mand tended to be boosted by the low general 
level of interest rates, the positive outlook for 
the housing market and for residential property 
price development as well as stable consumer 
confidence. The fact that bank managers sur -
veyed in the BLS nevertheless reported a mod -
erate decline in mortgage demand on balance Fall in long- term 
deposits due 
mainly to insurers
Further jump 
in lending to domestic  non-banks
Loans to the 
 private sector still driven by mortgagesLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
3-month accumulated fl  ows in € billion, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2016
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 26.6 26.8
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 2.1 7.9
over 2 years – 2.9 – 3.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 0.8 0.5
over 3 months – 2.1 – 2.4
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 3.2 – 0.9
Securities – 7.9 – 5.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 15.2 23.1
of which to households 3 11.3 11.0
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 0.3 8.1
Securities 4.9 4.9
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
33

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respond-ents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2016 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 20161.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–60–300+30+60–300+30+60
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 161.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
3003060
–++
60300306090
––+++Credit to non-financial corporations
% pa
%
%% pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...
... consumer credit
1.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
34

was prompted by the fact that some of them 
attributed it, amongst other things, to the loss 
of market share recorded by their institutions 
to other banks both within and outside the 
sample. The majority of BLS respondents did 
not adjust their standards for loans for house 
purchase. Against the backdrop of the Act im -
plementing the Mortgage Credit Directive and 
amending accounting rules (Gesetz zur Umset -
zung der Wohnimmobilienkreditrichtlinie und 
zur Änderung handelsrechtlicher Vorschriften), 
which entered into force in March 2016, credit 
standards were tightened somewhat only in a 
few individual cases and on a much smaller 
scale than in the previous quarter (see the box 
on pages 36 and 37).
Slight inflows were recorded in consumer credit 
to households in the quarter under review. 
Banks participating in the BLS likewise reported 
a marked rise in demand on balance, identify -
ing the main drivers as consumers’ stronger 
propensity to purchase, the low general level of 
interest rates and the high degree of consumer 
confidence. Demand was dampened, on the 
other hand, by the greater inclination for 
households to draw on their own savings. 
Standards for consumer loans remained largely 
unchanged.
Following a rather weak second quarter, banks 
markedly expanded their net lending to domes -
tic non- financial corporations in the third quar -
ter, as in the first three months of the year, re -
cording particularly strong growth in long- term 
lending.
This is consistent with the BLS survey results, 
according to which non- financial corporations’ 
demand for bank borrowing rose slightly, in net 
terms, in the third quarter. The respondents 
pinpointed the key demand factors as funding 
needs for debt restructuring, refinancing and 
renegotiations as well as the low general level 
of interest rates. For example, at the end of 
September, domestic enterprises paid interest 
amounting to 2.5% for small- volume and 1.2% 
for large- volume loans in the short- term seg -ment, while the respective interest rate on 
long- term loans in these categories stood at 
1.7%. By contrast, firms’ ample recourse to al -
ternative sources of funding such as internal 
financing or debt securities issuance had a 
dampening effect on demand if viewed in isol -
ation. Credit standards for lending to enter -
prises remained virtually unchanged.
The BLS conducted in October contained add -
itional questions on the impact of the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchases and the consequences 
for credit business of the negative interest rate 
on the Eurosystem’s deposit facility. Once 
again, German banks reported that the pur -Consumer credit 
up slightly
Marked rise in 
lending to  non-financial corporations …
… with virtually 
unchanged credit standards
Banks’ profitabil-ity dented by APP and nega-tive deposit facility rate2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016–10+1+2+3Year-on-year percentage growth rates; growth contributions in 
percentage points; end-of-quarter data; seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
321012
–––++Non-financial corporations 1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholdsUp to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lendingOverall
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseOverallDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
35

Implementation of the EU Mortgage Credit Directive 
in Germany as reﬂ  ected in the Bank Lending Survey, balance sheet statistics and interest rate statistics
On 21 March 2016, the Mortgage Credit Dir-
ective (MCD) of the European Union1 was 
transposed into German law, primarily 
through amendments and additions to the 
German Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch), the Introductory Act to the Civil Code (Einfüh-
rungsgesetz zum Bürgerlichen Gesetzbuch)  
and the German Banking Act (Kreditwesen-gesetz). The main objectives of the Directive 
are to improve consumer protection, to create 
a transparent and effi   cient single European 
market for loans for house purchase, and to 
contribute to sustainable lending and borrow-
ing.
To this end, it harmonises inter alia the credit 
assessment process as well as the provisions 
on consultancy services in lending and broker-
ing, and, in this context, imposes more com-
prehensive information and documentation 
requirements on credit institutions. Specifi  c-
ally, banks are obliged to assess creditworthi-
ness in detail on the basis of information on 
income and spending as well as other fi  nan-
cial and economic circumstances of the bor-
rower rather than mainly on a prospective in-
crease in the value of the residential property. 
The lender is allowed to sign the loan agree-
ment only if the assessment indicates that the 
borrower is likely to fulfi  l its contractual obli-
gations.2 If the lender contravenes these 
terms, the borrower may terminate the agree-
ment at any time without notice –  without 
the bank being able to demand prepayment 
compensation – or it may insist on a lowering 
of the loan rate to the market interest rate.3 
This means that contraventions not only have 
regulatory consequences, but also have civil law implications which can be enforced dir-
ectly by the borrowers concerned.
Against this backdrop, there has been a public 
debate in Germany over the past few months 
on whether the MCD has placed a strain on 
German banks’ lending. Indeed, the cited 
amendments to the legal framework are re-fl  ected in the responses provided by the sam-
ple of German banks surveyed as part of the 
Bank Lending Survey (BLS) in the second quar-
ter of 2016. Although the majority of the re-
spondent banks left their credit standards for 
loans for house purchase unchanged, a con-
siderable percentage of banks reported hav-
ing tightened their credit standards some-
what, while some institutions indicated tighter 
credit terms and conditions and a greater per-
centage of rejected loan applications. In the 
third quarter of 2016, however, credit stand-
ards were tightened somewhat only in a small 
number of individual cases.
The monthly balance sheet statistics reveal no 
abnormalities in aggregate credit growth. Net 
infl  ows to loans for house purchase have, on 
balance, been moving sideways in recent 
quarters at the level attained in the third quar-ter of 2015 (see the upper chart on page 37), 
and the annual growth rate, which went up to 3.5% in the course of 2015, accelerated 
even further in the second quarter and has 
since remained at values of around 3¾%. However, disaggregated analysis points to 
shifts in the dynamics of growth across the 
various categories of banks. For example, in 
the case of savings banks and credit coopera-
tives, which traditionally possess the largest market shares in this credit segment, there 
was a slowing of the previously rapid pace of 
growth. In the aggregate, however, this was 
offset by an increase in lending, above all on the part of the big banks and regional banks 
(see the upper chart on page 37). Despite the 
slower pace overall, growth in loans for house 
1 Directive 2014/ 17/EU of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 4 February 2014 on credit agree-
ments for consumers relating to residential immovable 
property and amending Directives 2008/ 48/EC and 
2013/ 36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/ 2010, OJ L 
60/ 34 of 28 February 2014.
2 The relevant provisions may be found in sections 
505a to 505c of the German Civil Code and section 
18a of the German Banking Act.3 See section 505d of the German Civil Code.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
36

purchase issued by the savings banks and 
credit cooperatives remains relatively high at 
the current end at 4.4%, or 5.8% compared 
with the previous year.
The transaction- related changes in the monthly balance sheet statistics considered 
here are comprised of new lending and re-
demptions combined. The balance sheet stat-
istics are a suitable measure of the (net) fund-
ing provided by banks, but not of their (gross) 
new lending. The latter cannot be calculated 
from the balance sheet fi  gures, since no infor-
mation on redemptions is available. Data on 
new lending volumes are collected, however, 
as part of the MFI interest rate statistics and 
this information is used to calculate weighted 
interest rates.4 Although these data include 
prolongations of existing loans, too, as these 
may generally also be accompanied by inter-
est rate adjustments, renegotiated loans have 
been reported separately in the interest rate 
statistics since December 2014, which means 
that the “real” new business volumes –  ie 
fi  rst- time new commitments – can be calcu-
lated. Thus, data on genuine new business is 
available for the assessment of new lending following the implementation of the Mort-
gage Credit Directive, even though the small 
number of data points since December 2014 
still makes them diffi   cult to place in context.
These data, too, do not provide any indica-
tions of a slowdown in lending for house pur-chase in connection with the implementation 
of the MCD (see the lower adjacent chart). 
The current volumes of new business are at 
the same level as the average monthly credit 
fl  ows of the recent past; this is true of both 
new business volumes adjusted for prolonga-
tions – “real” new business – and the fi  gures 
for new business, which include renegotiated 
loans.4 In contrast to the balance sheet statistics, the inter-
est rate statistics are based on a representative sample rather than a complete survey, which is then extrapo-lated to the banking system as a whole. For more in-formation on the sampling method, see Deutsche Bun-desbank, Extended MFI interest rate statistics: method-
ology and fi  rst results, Monthly Report, June 2011, 
pp 45-57. Both sets of statistics can provide valuable 
insights into the dynamics of the mortgage market. It 
should be noted, however, that only the absolute 
monthly new business volumes shown in the lower ad-jacent chart should be interpreted for the interest rate statistics. First, in contrast to the balance sheet statis-tics, no index series are available for calculating growth rates. Second, estimating the longer- term trend using 
cumulative 12-month fl  ows raises problems because 
their movements over the past few months were heav-ily driven by baseline effects.Loans to households for house purchase, by selected categories of banks(balance sheet statistics)
1 Mortgage Credit Directive of the European Union.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016630369121518
––++++++€ billion, change over the last 12 months
MCD 1 transposed
into German law
Savings banksCredit
cooperatives
Regional banksBuilding and loanassociations
Big banks
Loans to households for house purchase: volume of new business(interest rate statistics)
1214161820222426Monthly changes in € billion
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
1 Mortgage Credit Directive of the European Union.
Deutsche BundesbankMCD 1  trans-
posed into
German law
Total new business
(incl renegotiated loans)
Real new businessDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
37

chase programme had improved their liquidity 
position and their funding conditions. The in -
crease in liquidity in the past six months, which 
was used inter alia  for lending, was chiefly the 
outcome of bank customers’ portfolio shifts to -
wards bank deposits rather than the banks’ 
own sales of securities. However, the German 
banks taking part in the survey also reported 
on a broad front that the purchase programme was exerting pressure on their net interest mar -
gins and thus denting their profitability. The 
negative interest rate on the deposit facility 
was a second key factor in banks’ shrinking net 
interest income over the past six months. 
Owing to the negative deposit rate, both lend -
ing rates and margins in all surveyed business 
lines fell, while the effects on the credit volume 
were limited.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The UK‘s referendum decision to leave the EU 
dominated the financial markets around the 
middle of 2016. Fears of an economic slump, 
primarily in the United Kingdom itself but also 
affecting other countries, and the associated 
expectation of long- term accommodative mon -
etary policy drove down share prices and gov -
ernment bond yields. However, over the sum -
mer these initial fears failed to materialise, re -
sulting in the markets recovering over the third 
quarter. Towards the end of the period under 
review, expectations regarding future monetary 
policy on both sides of the Atlantic determined 
yield movements. The financial markets were 
also affected by the outcome of the US presi -
dential election, which caught many observers 
off guard. Against a backdrop of rising inflation 
rates and solid economic figures, the rise in 
ten- year US Treasury yields (+84 basis points to 
2.3%) and in German Federal securities with 
the same maturity (+37 basis points to 0.2%) 
reflects heightened expectations of key rates 
being raised at the December meeting of the 
Fed‘s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
and of a more expansionary US fiscal policy. 
Developments in the financial markets in Japan, 
meanwhile, were dominated by the Japanese 
central bank‘s decision in September to change 
strategies. Under its new strategy, the central 
bank is not only willing to allow inflation to 
temporarily overshoot the original target of 
2%, yields on ten- year bonds will, moreover, be 
stabilised at around the zero mark. There has 
therefore not been a significant rise in yields in 
Japan since the end of June. The effective ex -
change rate of the euro has remained un -
changed on balance since the start of the 
second half of the year. The euro‘s appreciation 
against the pound sterling, linked to the refer -
endum decision and the subsequent monetary 
policy measures taken by the Bank of England, 
was offset by losses against other currencies.Exchange rates
The euro weakened by 3.5% against the US 
dollar since the start of the third quarter of 
2016. It was priced at US$1.13 in mid-  August. 
Back then, various statements by members of 
the Fed‘s FOMC gave some market participants 
the impression that key rates in the United 
States could be raised as early as September. 
This put some pressure on the euro compared 
to the US dollar. However, expectations of a 
rate increase evaporated again at the start of 
September after US economic indicators disap -
pointed the markets. The euro recovered again 
somewhat as a result.
Nevertheless, the euro gradually dropped in 
value again from the end of September as the 
economic outlook for the United States im -
proved. Aside from the upwards revision of 
economic growth in the second quarter, a sur -
prising increase in industrial new orders and an 
unexpectedly strong recovery in the purchasing 
manager indices also contributed to this im -
provement. In this context, the probability that 
the market assigns to the US Fed raising key 
rates in December also grew. Thus the interest 
rate advantage the United States holds over 
the euro area increased in both the short and 
long- term maturity segment, helping drive 
down the euro. The US interest rate advantage 
in ten-  year government bond yields narrowed 
again temporarily at the end of October, how -
ever, giving the euro another boost. Following 
what was for many observers a surprising out -
come of the US presidential election, market 
participants speculated that extensive debt-  
funded public spending programmes could be 
approved next year. The subsequent steep rise 
in yields in the United States put the euro under 
downward pressure. It was trading at US$1.07 
against the US dollar as this report went to 
press.Now that “Brexit 
shock” has died down, financial markets looking to monetary policy and US presidential election  outcomeEuro down against the US dollar on balance
Euro- US dollar 
rate driven by expectations for US monetary and fiscal policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
39

The euro put in a mixed performance against 
the yen during the reporting period. Starting in 
mid- July, the euro was initially characterised by 
a period of weakness against the yen, lasting 
around a month. This development halted 
when the market interpreted the wording of 
comments by government representatives as a 
warning of market intervention. At the end of 
August it emerged that Japan‘s inflation rate in 
July had remained very low. Subsequently, the 
governor of the Bank of Japan emphasised that 
there was still plenty of scope for additional 
monetary policy easing measures. The ensuing 
appreciation in the euro soon petered out 
again, however, as uncertainty persisted about the Bank of Japan‘s monetary policy intentions. 
Consequently, even after the central bank‘s 
resolution to manage Japan‘s yield curve, fluc -
tuations in the euro- yen exchange rate con -
tinued without either currency gaining a lasting 
advantage. Towards the end of the period 
under review, the euro stood at ¥117, which 
was 2.7% higher than at the beginning of the 
third quarter of 2016.
Since the UK referendum vote at the end of 
June to leave the EU, the pound sterling has 
temporarily depreciated massively – including 
against the euro. In mid- October, the effective 
exchange rate, measured as the weighted aver -
age against the currencies of 19 important 
trading partners, was at its lowest level since 
these calculations were first started in 1972 – 
except for two days at the peak of the financial 
crisis at the end of 2008. Following an initial 
rise in the euro‘s value immediately after the 
referendum, the euro was trading at £0.83 at 
the start of the second half of the year. The sin -
gle currency continued its upward movement 
after the Bank of England lowered its key rate 
at the beginning of August and recommenced 
asset purchases. At £0.87, however, there was 
a three-  week correction in mid-  August. This 
was driven by a series of unexpectedly favour -
able UK economic figures, which strengthened 
the impression in the market that the decision 
to leave the EU would have no negative effects 
on the real economy in the short- term at least. 
Labour market and retail data, survey results on 
consumer confidence and purchasing manager 
indices were better than expected, for instance.
Throughout September, the euro displayed an -
other period of strength against the pound 
sterling. This may have initially been linked to 
the UK‘s surprisingly weak figures for manufac -
turing output. Subsequently, the main factor 
weighing on the pound were fears that British 
negotiators might not prioritise continued un -
restricted access to EU markets in negotiations 
over leaving the EU. When the British prime 
minister appeared to confirm these fears in a 
speech at the beginning of October, in which Euro somewhat 
stronger on  balance against the yenTemporarily, 
massive gains 
for euro against 
pound sterling
Pound sharply 
lower on 7 October 2016Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM J J A SOND
2015 20161.051.101.151.201.25
110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
9095100105Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange 
rate: US$1.1789 1
... yen Launch exchange
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchangerate: 103.11
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
40

she also gave a date for the beginning of exit 
negotiations for the first time, the euro‘s ap -
preciation accelerated. Early in the morning of 
7  October 2016, the pound sterling even 
moved sharply lower within a very short period 
of time in Asian trading. Though a subsequent 
countermovement quickly corrected the sharp 
decline, the euro‘s reference exchange rate 
against the pound was set 2.3% higher than 
the day before. When a court ruled at the be -
ginning of November that the British parlia -
ment would have to consent to the official 
introduction of negotiations on the United 
Kingdom‘s exit from the EU, this sparked hopes 
in the market of a more business- friendly nego -
tiation strategy on the part of the United King -
dom. This placed considerable pressure on the 
euro- pound exchange rate. As this report went 
to press, the single currency was therefore back 
at £0.86, which translates into a gain of 4.1% 
since the end of June.
The euro‘s effective exchange rate against the 
currencies of 19 important trading partners has 
remained unchanged in net terms since the 
start of the second half of the year (±0.0%). 
This development must be seen in the light of 
the sharp volatility over the last few years. In 
trend terms, there has, overall, been a nominal 
depreciation of the euro since the start of the 
financial crisis. This is a key reason why euro-  
area producers‘ price competitiveness improved 
during this period. Even the euro- area coun -
tries that were especially hard hit by the crisis 
have improved their competitive position in the 
global markets in recent years – in some cases 
considerably. This is a reflection of exchange 
rate developments as well as favourable devel -
opments in prices and wages by international 
standards (see the box on pages 42 to 44).
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
The international bond markets predominantly 
witnessed an increase in yields in the summer 
and autumn months. Yields on ten- year US Treasuries have risen by 84 basis points to 
2.3% since the end of June. The probability of 
the US Federal Reserve raising rates in Decem -
ber, calculated from futures contracts, stood at 
96% as this report went to press. By the begin -
ning of November, the drop in yields that took 
place at the end of June as a result of the Brexit 
decision had been reversed. There was another 
rise in yields following the US presidential elec -
tion, reflecting the expectations of a more ex -
pansionary fiscal policy. Ten- year Federal secur -
ities mirrored developments in the United 
States in a more muted form and were quoted 
at 0.2%, 37 basis points up on their mid-  year 
level. Yields on ten- year securities in the United 
Kingdom behaved in much the same way, ris -
ing 54 basis points since the end of June. The 
Bank of England‘s expansionary monetary pol -
icy measures of the start of August probably 
had a dampening effect on the yield rise – at 
least temporarily. In September, the Bank of 
Japan decided to pursue a yield curve control 
strategy, whereby the yield on ten- year Japan -Effective euro 
rate unchanged
Euro- area and 
US government bond yields have risenGovernment bond yields* in euro area 
and selected countries
Source:  Thomson  Reuters.  * Residual  maturity  of  ten  years. 
1 Brexit referendum. 2 US presidential election.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20160.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++% pa, daily dataUnited StatesEuro area Japan
United Kingdom
2 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
41

Price competitiveness in selected euro-area countries
In the fi  rst ten years after monetary union 
was established, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Por-
tugal and Spain suffered a perceptible loss 
in price competitiveness, not least as a re-
sult of above- average rates of wage and 
price growth. Price competitiveness did not 
pick up again until after the onset of the 
global fi  nancial crisis and the adjustments 
that this entailed.1 As measured by the indi-
cator based on GDP defl  ators against 37 
trading partners, price competitiveness has 
improved by between 4½% (Portugal) and 
21% (Ireland) since the second quarter of 
2008, when the US real estate crisis evolved 
into a global fi  nancial crisis. Overall, the countries under consideration here have meanwhile roughly recouped the loss of competitiveness that they suffered in the pre- crisis period; in the second quarter of 
2016, Greece even signifi  cantly improved its competitive position compared with the 
fi  rst quarter of 1999 (+9½%), and the indi-
cator also shows a slight gain in competi-tiveness for Ireland and Italy during this 
period (+1% and +2½% respectively).2,3
Recent calculations based on the productiv-ity approach now also paint a fairly positive 
picture of competitiveness in the countries 
worst affected by the crisis.4 According to 
these data, the competitive position of 
Greece is neutral and that of the Irish, Span-ish and Cypriot economies even favourable. 
By contrast, measured in terms of changes 
in productivity, the price competitiveness of Italy and Portugal is fairly unfavourable.
The fact that the euro has depreciated per-
ceptibly against the currencies of important partner countries in recent years, but espe-
cially since the spring of 2014, has been a 
decisive factor in boosting competitiveness 
in the world markets. At last count, the 
1 For more on improvements in individual euro- area 
countries’ price competitiveness following the onset of 
the fi  nancial crisis, see also Deutsche Bundesbank, Real economic adjustment processes and reform measures, Monthly Report, January 2014, pp 27-29.
2 The remaining countries have improved their com-
petitiveness in recent years, but their competitive pos-ition is still slightly less favourable than when monetary union was launched (Portugal: -5% and Spain: -2%).3 Greece did not join the monetary union until the be-
ginning of 2001 and had raised its price competitive-
ness signifi  cantly in the two years leading up to that event. The gain in the second quarter of 2016 com-
pared with the point at which it joined the euro area 
(fi  rst quarter of 2001) is therefore relatively small 
(+2%).4 This approach takes into account the fact that econ-omies that are catching up typically witness a relatively sharp increase in not only the price level but also prod-uctivity. The stronger the growth in a country’s relative productivity level against its trading partners, the more 
its relative price level can rise without a loss of price 
competitiveness. For more information on the different methods of establishing a benchmark for competitive-
ness, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Macroeconomic ap-
proaches to assessing price competitiveness, Monthly 
Report, October 2013, pp 31-45.Change in price competitiveness since the beginning of the crisis
*
* Measured by the indicator of price competitiveness based on 
GDP deflators against 37 trading partners. 1 Inverted scale: an 
upward bar (a negative value) indicates that price competitive-
ness has improved.
Deutsche Bundesbank22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0–
–
––
––
–
–
–
–
–Percentage change in 2016 Q2 versus 2008 Q2 1
CY ES PT IT IE GROverall price competitiveness
Price effectExchange
rate effectof whichDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
42

nominal effective exchange rate of the euro 
(against 19 trading partners) was around 
15.5% below the average value in the 
second quarter of 2008. The Irish economy 
in particular, for which foreign trade with 
non- euro- area countries – the United States 
or the United Kingdom, say – is compara-
tively important, benefi  ted from develop-
ments in the euro’s exchange rate.5 By con-
trast, the impact of exchange rate move-ments on Portugal’s price competitiveness is relatively small, as Portugal maintains 
close trade relations mainly with other euro- area countries – fi  rst and foremost Spain – 
and trade with non- euro- area countries is 
consequently limited.
Within the euro area, where the competi-tive position is not directly affected by ex-change rate movements, Portugal’s price 
competitiveness has deteriorated in recent 
years. On balance, it was somewhat less fa-
vourable of late than at the beginning of 
the crisis, having temporarily improved to a certain extent during the crisis period. Italy, too, was overall unable to raise its competi-
tiveness against the other euro- area coun-
tries − at best, it has stabilised its competi-
tive position in recent years. By contrast, the net price competitiveness of the Irish 
economy against its euro- area trading part-ners has improved perceptibly (+8½%) since 
the onset of the fi  nancial crisis (according 
to the offi   cial fi  gures), although it has again 
suffered a clear loss of competitiveness in 
recent years – as measured by relative price 
developments. The other countries con-
sidered here have also been able to raise 
their price competitiveness vis- à- vis their 
euro- area trading partners since the second 
quarter of 2008. Improvements range from around 5% (Cyprus) to 9% (Greece).
The indicator based on the unit labour costs 
of the whole economy paints a consistently 
more positive picture of the competitive position than price- based indicators. Ac-
cording to this indicator, all of the countries especially hard hit by the crisis have gained 
in price competitiveness within the euro 
area since the onset of the crisis, with gains in competitiveness very low for Italy (+1½%) and particularly high for Ireland (35%).
6 The 
indicator based on labour costs shows a 
5 Overall, the trade weight of the non- euro- area coun-
tries in the 37-strong circle of countries used to calcu-
late the indicators of price competitiveness added up 
to around 63% for Ireland and roughly 26% for Portu-gal.6 During the crisis period, the dismissal of unproduct-
ive workers probably also contributed to the favour-able productivity trend and helped drive down unit 
labour  costs.Employment protection for employees on permanent contracts and unemploy-ment rate
1 The  OECD’s  Employment  Protection  Indicator  (version  2) 
measures how strictly employment protection and temporary 
contracts are regulated. It is calculated as the weighted aver-age of the protection for employees on permanent contracts 
against (individual) dismissal and the specific requirements for 
collective dismissals. The scale ranges from 0 (lax regulation) to 6 (strict regulation). There are no data for Cyprus, and data for 
the other countries are available only up to 2013. 2 Annual 
average. Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank0123456
0 5 10 15 20 25IrelandSpainGreeceItaly2008Portugal2013Employment protection for employees
on permanent contracts 1
IrelandItalyPortugalSpainGreeceUnemployment rate in % 2
20082015Regulation Strict LaxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
43

notably pronounced and abrupt improve-
ment in price competitiveness for the Irish 
economy in the last two years. It should be 
noted, however, that Ireland’s GDP data, 
which are the denominator in the calcula-
tion of unit labour costs, are heavily infl  u-
enced by the non- distributed profi  ts of multinational enterprises. According to a press release issued by Ireland’s Central 
Statistics Offi   ce (CSO) in July 2016, Ireland’s real GDP growth rate for 2015 was revised upwards extraordinarily sharply (from 7.8% 
to 26.3%). The CSO and the European Commission attribute this, fi  rst and fore-
most, to corporate restructuring and the re-location of several multinational enterprises to Ireland.
7 The major overhaul of the GDP 
fi  gures caused an abrupt drop in the Irish 
economy’s unit labour costs, which means 
that the indicator based on labour costs 
probably overstates the improvement in the competitive position.The growth in competitiveness that has 
been achieved is probably also partly a re-
sult of the fact that the countries especially badly affected by the crisis have initiated a number of reforms in recent years. Accord-
ing to the OECD indicator on employment 
protection and the Doing Business indicator 
published by the World Bank, Greece, Por-
tugal and Spain have made clear progress 
on reforming their labour and product mar-kets in recent years. While the World Bank’s 
Doing Business Report has always taken a 
considerably more favourable view of the 
corporate environment in Ireland, the other 
countries have improved their position no-
ticeably in recent years. However, despite 
the progress made, most countries still have 
considerable adjustments to make before 
they can hold their own in the international 
competition to attract international busi-
ness and ensure competitive companies set-
tle there permanently. This is particularly 
true of Greece, Cyprus and Italy, which are 
still fairly low in the Doing Business indica-
tor’s ranking both in absolute terms (pos-
itions 60, 47 and 45 respectively out of 189 
countries) and compared with Ireland 
(ranked 17th). In addition, high unemploy-
ment in Greece and Spain suggests that 
structural change there is far from com-
plete.
7 See the CSO press release of 12 July 2016 and that 
of the European Commission of 21 July 2016.Corporate environment*
Ranking 1 Country
1 Singapore
2 New Zealand
3 Denmark
·
15 Germany
·17 Ireland
·23 Portugal
·
33 Spain
·45 Italy
·
47 Cyprus
·
60 Greece
* Based on the World Bank’s Doing Business indicator, 
which ranks economies on their ease of doing business. 
1 Overall, 189 countries were examined, with the country in which doing business is easiest ranked fi  rst; data as at 
June 2015.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
44

ese government bonds is to be kept close to 
0%. Since then, the Japanese yield has de -
coupled from the rest of the world and hovered 
around the zero lower bound, at 0.01% at the 
end of the period under review.
Yield spreads between the government bonds 
of other euro- area countries and Bunds have 
widened slightly by 10 basis points on balance 
since the middle of the year. They were at 1.1% 
as this report went to press. This was in part 
because the uncertainty surrounding the for -
mation of a government in Spain was resolved 
at the end of October and concerns that a rat -
ing downgrade might make Portuguese gov -
ernment bonds ineligible as central bank collat -
eral ultimately proved unjustified. Meanwhile, 
the spreads of Italian government bonds 
widened linked to a deterioration in the coun -
try‘s rating outlook. Concerns over the out -
come of Italy‘s constitutional referendum in 
December and the fraught situation in its bank -
ing sector continued to dominate the markets.
The Federal securities yield curve twisted during 
the period under review. While long maturities 
rose as uncertainty eased following the EU ref -
erendum in the UK and given the change in 
expectations regarding US monetary policy, 
short- term yields continued to fall. The decline 
in interest rates for short maturities  contrasts 
with the increase in time deposit rates in the 
money market in the reporting period. This re -
flects the increasing signals of scarcity in the 
market for Federal securities. The German Fi -
nance Agency (the state‘s debt management 
agency) cut its issuance planning for the fourth 
quarter from €34 billion to €27 billion (exclud -
ing inflation- linked securities) because of lower 
Federal government borrowing requirements. 
Then, a six- month money market instrument 
was auctioned in October at a record- low inter -
est rate of -0.72%, despite a simultaneous in -
crease in long- term yields. Overall, demand for 
the Federal government‘s primary market issues 
rose noticeably in the second half of the year, 
whereas total bids received had fallen short of 
the planned issue volume for a quarter of the auctions between January and June 2016.1 Sig-
nals of scarcity were also evident in the repo 
market. Repo rates for transactions backed by 
Bunds were quoted below the deposit facility 
rate, reflecting a special scarcity premium for 
Federal securities (see the above chart).2 There Little change 
in yield spreads of euro- area countries
Signals of 
 scarcity in the 
market for Fed-eral securitiesYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Last data point 
before the results of the Brexit referendum were announced.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.4
––––++
Residual maturity in years17 November 2016
30 June 201623 June 2016 1%
Repo rates*
Source: repofundsrate.com * Money market rates for overnight 
credit secured by German, French or Italian government bonds. 
1 Brexit referendum. 2 US presidential election.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20161.20.90.60.300.30.6
––––++% pa, daily data
Germany
France
Italy
Memo item
Deposit facility rate
2 1
1 However, the amount set aside for market management 
purposes meant that there was never a shortfall.
2 A repo is a money market loan in which collateral is 
handed over. If the objective is financial investment, the 
repo rate should not be below the deposit facility rate be -
cause money can be safely invested with the Eurosystem at 
this rate. Rates below the deposit rate therefore represent 
a premium paid to obtain a specific item of collateral such 
as Federal securities or French OATs. The difference be -
tween the repo rate and the deposit facility rate therefore 
reflects a premium based on the collateral.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
45

was also a scarcity of French government se -
curities, although  it was less pronounced. Par -
ticularly high premiums developed for Federal 
securities  with maturities around ten years. 
Traditionally, these are especially important for 
futures contracts and accounting purposes. In -
creasingly, the purchasing programme is also 
having the effect of reducing the volume avail -
able to the private sector. In summer, the yield 
on Federal securities with maturities up to eight 
years temporarily fell below the deposit facility 
rate, meaning that these securities were no 
longer eligible for central bank purchases. Con -
sequently, the Eurosystem‘s purchases focused 
on longer maturities during this period.
On balance, market- based inflation expect -
ations increased in the period under review. 
Following an all- time low of 1.25% in summer, 
the five- year forward inflation rate in five years 
based on swaps stood at 1.6% as this report 
went to press, which was 25 basis points 
higher than at the end of June. Five-  year spot 
rates reached a year high in November; having 
risen by 17 basis points since the end of June, 
they stood at 0.9% at last count. The waning 
base effect from last year‘s drop in oil prices 
and the consequently low rates of year- on- year 
inflation are likely to have been significant fac -
tors. However, there is still a gap between 
market- based and survey- based inflation ex -
pectations. The signals of scarcity in the gov -
ernment bond market described above also 
spilled over to the swap market through arbi -
trage relationships and tend to distort inflation 
swap rates to the downside. The increasing in -
fluence of liquidity distortions has been redu -
cing the economic value of market- based infla -
tion expectations for some time now.
Having declined during the summer, yields on 
the bonds of European enterprises have re -
cently returned to their mid- year level. By his -
torical standards, funding conditions are there -
fore still very favourable for enterprises. Cor -
porate bond spreads have fallen since the end 
of June, in some cases significantly, due to 
higher yields on Federal bonds. For instance, Forward 
 inflation rates have risen
Funding condi-
tions for enter-
prises still very favourable in spite of recently 
higher yieldsForward inflation rates* and inflation 
expectations in the euro area
1.00.500.51.01.52.02.5
––+++++%, weekly averages
2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources: Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising 
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco) realised across the next five or ten years. 1 Brexit referendum. 2 US presidental elec-
tion.
Deutsche BundesbankDifference between forward inflation rates 
and Consensus inflation expectationsFive-year forward inflation ratein five years based on swapsConsensus inflation
expectations
for six to ten years ahead
2 1
Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with residual maturity of seven to 
ten years. 3 Brexit referendum. 4 US presidential election.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20160100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating category
4 3Basis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
46

the interest rate spread of BBB- rated corporate 
bonds with a residual maturity of seven to ten 
years over Federal bonds of the same maturity 
stood at 2.0 percentage points at the end of 
the reporting period. This was 29 basis points 
lower than at the end of June. This develop -
ment can be attributed, not least, to the Euro -
system‘s Corporate Sector Purchase Programme 
(CSPP), which was adopted at the start of 
March 2016 and has been implemented since 
8 June 2016. Under this programme, the Euro -
system purchases debt securities issued by non- 
financial corporations with high credit quality 
ratings.3 As intended, the yield- reducing impact 
also spread – via portfolio- rebalancing effects – 
to non- purchased bonds. Starting from higher 
values, the yield decline in financial enterprises‘ 
bonds and high yield bonds – both non- eligible 
for the asset purchase programme – proved to 
be even more pronounced than for eligible 
highly rated bonds of real economy enterprises.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €310 billion in the third quarter of 
2016 and was therefore below its previous-  
quarter level (€332½ billion). After deducting 
redemptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers‘ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance amounted to €4 billion. Moreover, foreign 
borrowers placed debt securities worth €3 bil -
lion in the German market. Funds totalling €7 
billion net were consequently raised in the Ger -
man bond market in the reporting period.
German enterprises took advantage of the fa -
vourable financing conditions and issued debt 
securities to the value of €4 billion in net terms 
in the third quarter. This is primarily attributable 
to non- financial corporations, which mainly 
placed long- term securities in the market.
The public sector tapped the bond market to 
the tune of €3 billion from July to September 
2016. These figures include issues by resolution 
agencies set up for German banks, which are 
ascribed to the public sector for statistical pur -
poses. The Federal government itself mainly is -
sued five- year Federal notes (€10 billion), and to a lesser extent 30-year bonds and two- year 
Federal Treasury notes (both €3 billion) as well 
as Federal Treasury discount paper (€2 billion). 
This contrasted with net redemptions of ten-  
year Bunds totalling €18 billion. In the quarter 
under review, state governments issued their 
own bonds to the value of €1½ billion in net 
terms.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€3 billion, following net issuance of €14 billion 
in the second quarter. Here specialised credit 
institutions in particular redeemed debt secur -
ities (€5 billion), as did Pfandbrief banks in the 
public Pfandbriefe segment (€2 billion). This 
contrasted with net issuance of mortgage 
Pfandbriefe amounting to €5 billion.Moderate net 
sales in the bond market
Issuance of 
 corporate bonds mainly in the longer- term maturity  segment
Public sector 
borrowing  moderateFall in credit institutions‘ cap-ital market debtInvestment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2015 2016
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 70.9 65.1 34.7
Credit institutions 12.4 – 19.7 – 24.2
of which
Foreign debt securities 3.8 –  5.8 – 14.1
Deutsche Bundesbank 35.8 50.8 48.9
Other sectors 22.7 34.0 10.1
of which
Domestic debt securities 5.0 6.2 –  5.1
Non-residents – 17.7 – 24.8 – 27.9
Shares
Residents 6.8 11.0 10.1
Credit institutions – 14.5 1.9 0.6
of which
Domestic shares –  7.0 0.8 0.1
Non-banks 21.3 9.1 9.5
of which
Domestic shares 13.8 5.2 0.4
Non-residents –  5.2 –  5.3 1.2
Mutual fund sharesInvestment in specialised funds 14.7 19.8 17.4
Investment in retail funds 7.3 5.8 3.8
of which
Equity funds 2.9 0.8 1.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial markets, Monthly 
Report, August 2016, pp 39-48.<Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
47

The Bundesbank was the predominant buyer of 
debt securities in the German bond market in 
the third quarter of 2016, adding €49 billion 
worth of paper to its portfolio under the Euro -
system‘s asset purchase programmes. Domes -
tic non- banks increased their pension portfolios 
by a total of €10 billion, although €5 billion 
worth of domestic securities were sold. By con -
trast, non- resident investors parted with Ger -
man debt securities to the tune of €28 billion. 
On balance, these were mainly bonds issued by 
the public sector. Domestic banks also sold 
interest- bearing securities to the value of €24 
billion.The international stock markets have initially 
made significant gains since the beginning of 
the second half of the year, which more than 
compensated for what were in some cases 
substantial mark- downs in the immediate after -
math of the British decision to leave the EU. By 
August, the broad European Euro Stoxx index 
had fully recouped the temporary setback it 
suffered. The US S&P 500 index offset its losses 
even more quickly and reached a new all- time 
high in the middle of August of this year. In 
many areas, the overall positive share price de -
velopment was accompanied by favourable 
business figures and slightly better economic 
data than had initially been expected. The 
United Kingdom‘s economic data in particular 
were more positive than had initially been 
feared in the wake of the Brexit vote. The de -
preciation of the pound sterling raised profit 
expectations, particularly among large British 
firms with an international focus. In addition, 
the Bank of England‘s package of measures is 
having an expansionary effect, although con -
siderable uncertainty persists about the con -
crete form the UK‘s exit from the EU will take. 
For foreign investors, however, the consider -
able depreciation of the British pound reduces 
capital gains on the UK stock market.
The outcome of the US presidential election on 
8 November 2016 only resulted in short-  lived 
share price losses, followed by a clear recovery. 
Overall, the broad Euro Stoxx index has risen by 
6% since the end of June 2016, the British 
FTSE All-  Share index by 5% and the US S&P 500 
index by 4%. Analysts‘ earnings expectations 
lagged behind price developments on both 
sides of the Atlantic, meaning that the earnings 
yield as measured by the five- year average sug -
gests high valuations for these stock markets. 
The Japanese stock market displayed the 
strongest overall price increase of all the major 
economies during the period under review 
(+15%). The Bank of Japan‘s package of meas -
ures, which was announced at the end of Sep -
tember 2016, sent prices sharply higher, albeit 
with a slight delay, from the start of October.Bundesbank the 
main buyer of debt securities in purchasing programmesClear gains on 
the international 
equity markets
Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For euro area, calcu-
lated  from  options  on  Euro  Stoxx  50.  2 Brexit  referendum. 
3 US presidential election.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatilities 1Bank indices
%
2015 2016Beginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
Overall market indicesDaily data
60708090100110120
102030408590100110120130Euro area (Euro Stoxx)
United Kingdom (FTSE All-Share)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
3 2VStoxx
VIXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
48

While bank shares suffered what were in some 
cases significant losses in the middle of the year 
following the Brexit decision, they exhibited a 
clear upward trend in the ensuing months. 
Looking at the reporting period as a whole, 
bank shares significantly outperformed the 
market in the euro area (+27%) as well as in 
the United States (+28%). The gains were 
driven in part by the mostly positive surprises in 
the end- of- quarter results published by Euro -
pean and US banks. Nonetheless, European 
bank shares were, overall, trading significantly 
lower than at the start of the year. Holdings of 
non- performing loans continue to weigh on 
banks in several euro- area countries. Although 
the share of non- performing loans in the EU 
was reduced from 6.7% to 5.6% within three 
years, according to the IMF, Italy has a signifi -
cantly higher level at 18.0%. The current dis -
cussions about capital increases, unresolved 
legal disputes in the United States affecting in -
dividual institutions and the persistent low-  
interest- rate environment are depressing banks‘ 
business outlook.
Volatility on the stock markets also reflected re -
curring phases of uncertainty among market 
participants. The implied volatilities of many 
stock price indices, which are calculated from 
options, rose substantially especially shortly be -
fore the British referendum, both within and 
outside of Europe, and approached or even 
surpassed their year highs. However, the uncer -
tainty did not prove to be persistent, and sub -
sided just a few weeks after the referendum 
result was announced. Uncertainty did not pick 
up significantly again on a global scale until the 
run- up to the US presidential election on 8 No -
vember 2016, but quickly normalised again 
after the results had been announced.
Domestic enterprises issued €2 billion worth of 
new shares in the third quarter of 2016, the 
majority of which were unlisted securities. The 
volume of foreign equities outstanding in the 
German market climbed by €9½ billion. Ger -
man non- banks were virtually the sole net 
buyers of equity securities (€9½ billion). For -Bank shares still 
under scrutiny despite rallying
Price uncertainty 
following the US presidential election declin-ing again
Equity issuance 
and acquisitionMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2015 r 2016 r
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I Current account + 65.0 + 72.1 + 61.6
1 Goods 1 + 67.1 + 77.1 + 68.9
2 Services 2 – 13.9 –  5.0 – 13.0
3 Primary income + 18.4 +  4.5 + 16.4
4 Secondary income –  6.6 –  4.5 – 10.7
II Capital account +  0.7 +  1.6 +  0.4
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 64.1 + 58.5 + 58.4
1 Direct investment +  5.1 – 16.9 + 11.5
Domestic investment 
abroad + 14.1 + 11.3 + 19.6
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  9.0 + 28.2 +  8.1
2 Portfolio investment + 45.8 + 66.5 + 48.7
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 26.5 + 34.3 + 19.6
Shares
3 +  1.1 +  4.7 +  8.1
Investment fund shares 4+  4.6 +  7.9 +  8.7
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  0.2 –  1.3 –  0.5
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 26.6 + 26.4 +  5.8
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 20.5 + 17.9 –  4.5
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  5.9 –  4.7 –  2.9
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 19.4 – 32.3 – 29.1
Shares 3 –  5.2 –  5.7 +  1.2
Investment fund shares +  3.6 –  1.9 –  2.3
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 23.0 – 32.3 – 24.0
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 23.1 – 39.5 – 19.9
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  5.2 +  7.5 –  4.0
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  2.7 +  3.9 +  9.8
4 Other investment 10 + 11.9 +  4.1 – 11.4
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 + 18.9 – 30.0 – 30.0
Enterprises and  households
12 –  8.2 –  3.5 + 14.2
General government +  3.2 –  4.2 +  7.6
Bundesbank –  2.0 + 41.9 –  3.2
5 Reserve assets 13 –  1.5 +  0.8 –  0.3
IV Errors and omissions 14 –  1.6 – 15.2 –  3.6
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
49

eign investors and domestic banks expanded 
their share portfolios by €1 billion and €½ bil -
lion respectively.
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €21 
billion, after raising funds totalling €25½ billion 
in the previous three- month period. The fresh 
cash mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€17½ billion). 
Among the asset classes, it was primarily bond- 
based funds which recorded a high total inflow 
of funds (€7 billion). Mixed securities-  based 
funds and equity-based funds were also able to 
place new shares in the market (each to the 
value of €4 billion). Foreign funds distributed in 
the German market attracted new inflows to -
talling €8½ billion net in the third quarter of 
2016. Domestic non- banks were the main 
buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth €31½ 
billion to their portfolios. On balance, their 
focus was largely on German paper. Domestic 
credit institutions purchased investment fund 
shares for €1 billion, while foreign investors 
sold mutual fund shares worth €2½ billion.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €48½ billion 
in the third quarter of 2016, net capital exports were likewise recorded in the field of direct in -
vestment; these amounted to €11½ billion.
In summer 2016, the direct investments of do -
mestic corporations abroad came to a net total 
of €19½ billion. Domestic investors increased 
their equity capital by €16½ billion. This was 
primarily achieved in the form of new cross-  
border investment (€12½ billion) and reinvested 
earnings (€10 billion). In addition, German en -
terprises increased intra- group lending by €3½ 
billion in the same period. Financial credits 
were granted, but some trade credits re -
deemed. Countries which received substantial 
direct investments from Germany were, among 
others, the Netherlands (€7 billion), the United 
States (€4 billion) and Sweden (€3 billion).
Foreign investors increased their direct invest -
ment in Germany from July to September 2016 
(€8 billion). This was achieved through an in -
crease in claims from debt instruments, which 
grew by €4½ billion. Here financial credits in 
particular were granted. Claims from equity 
capital also increased in the period under re -
view (€3½ billion), which was primarily driven 
by reinvested profits. A regional breakdown 
shows that investors from the following coun -
tries upped the value of their direct investment 
in Germany particularly sharply: Malta (€5 bil -
lion), the Netherlands (€4½ billion) and the 
United States (€2½ billion).Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund shares
Direct invest -
ment sees 
 capital exportsGerman direct investment abroad
Foreign direct investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
50

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The third quarter of 2016 saw the German 
economy temporarily losing some momentum. 
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the third quarter rose by only 0.2% on 
the quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. Following a decline that lasted into the 
second quarter, industrial output at least 
showed no further fall and construction activity 
moved onto a clear expansionary course; the 
slowdown in services sector activity, which had 
been very dynamic previously, is therefore likely 
to have been the key factor behind the weaker 
rise. Furthermore, the driving factors on the de -
mand side changed compared with the previ -
ous quarter. Exports, which had been making a 
key contribution to GDP growth in the second 
quarter, suffered a setback, which was not en -
tirely offset by domestic activity becoming 
stronger again. The underlying cyclical momen -
tum continues to be quite strong, however. For 
the final quarter of the current year, it is to be 
expected that the GDP growth rate will con -
tinue where the faster pace of the first half of 
the year left off. This is indicated by the strong 
improvement in the indicators of sentiment. 
Utilisation of aggregate capacity continues to 
be higher than average.
After the dip in spring, domestic activity re -
turned to the sustained strong level seen since 
the end of 2014. The more dynamic pace of 
domestic economic growth was due primarily 
to government and private consumption. 
Along with the particularly strong pension in -
crease in the middle of the year and the delayed 
payment of the negotiated pay increase in the 
public sector, private consumption received a 
strong boost from the ongoing favourable 
underlying conditions. First and foremost 
among these is the positive outlook for in -
comes and the labour market, although lower 
energy prices should also be mentioned. In the case of construction investment, the period of 
adjustment in the second quarter following the 
weather- related exceptionally high level of out -
put at the beginning of the year appears to 
have come to an end. Investment in machinery 
and equipment was still lacking stimulus, but 
did not dampen economic activity to the same 
extent as it had in the second quarter.
German exports experienced a lull in the third 
quarter of 2016 after making a strong contribu -
tion to GDP growth in the first half of the year. 
Exports of goods were, in fact, slightly down 
on the quarter in price and seasonally adjusted 
terms. They showed a marginal rise in nominal 
terms, however, as export prices went up. 
While the data available up to August show the 
value of exports to other euro- area countries 
following their tendency in the first half of the 
year with a moderate increase, exports to non- German econ-
omy lost some momentum temporarily in 2016 Q3
Stronger 
 domestic activity again …… is masked by weaker exports
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16949698100102104106108110
–8–6–4–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
51

euro- area countries fell slightly in terms of 
value. This was due chiefly to weak demand for 
German products in the OPEC countries as well 
as to exports to the United Kingdom, which 
had been declining since the preceding quarter. 
In the case of exports to the UK, however, the 
fall was substantially smaller than it had been 
in the second quarter and thus before the ref -
erendum on EU membership. Following the 
sharp decline in the previous quarter, exports 
to the United States also showed no more than 
a slight increase. On the other hand, there was 
a strong rise in business with China. Goods ex -
ports to Russia –  following the downward 
movement of the past few years – also saw a strong expansion. In this connection, German 
exporters are likely to be benefiting from the 
slow recovery of the Russian economy follow -
ing its severe recession.
The subdued development in industry and ex -
ports also left its mark in terms of investment. 
Investment in machinery and equipment in the 
third quarter of 2016 is likely to have shown a 
slight fall on the quarter. This is suggested by 
German industrial enterprises’ domestic sales 
of capital goods, which – in contrast to export 
sales – showed a marked fall. Furthermore, the 
no more than weak increase in new registra -
tions of commercial motor vehicles indicates 
that investment in firms’ motor vehicle fleets 
has, on the whole, been marked by restraint.
After the weather- related period of adjustment 
in the second quarter, which led to a decline, 
construction investment picked up again in the 
summer months. Investment activity is likely to 
have shown an increase, especially in private 
housing construction.
Seasonally adjusted private consumption 
picked up with greater momentum in the third 
quarter than in the previous three- month 
period. Energy prices for consumers fell slightly 
in the third quarter. This meant that consumers’ 
purchasing power was reduced less by price in -
creases than was the case in the second quar -
ter. Disposable incomes were also boosted by 
the exceptionally large 4½% pension increase 
as of 1 July and the delayed payment of the 
negotiated pay rise, including back payments, 
for central and local government employees. 
The continuing positive outlook for incomes 
and the labour market ensured that the under -
lying conditions remained favourable. Follow -
ing the decline in the second quarter, price-  
adjusted retail sales increased slightly in the 
summer months. A negative factor in this re -
gard was, above all, weak demand for textiles, 
clothing and footwear in September 2016. This 
effect was probably due to the exceptionally 
warm weather in that month, however, which 
means that a countermovement is to be ex -Investment in 
machinery and equipment lack-ing momentum
Construction 
investment up again following bounce- back effects in the second quarter
Buoyant con-
sumption activ-ity mainly due to car purchases90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 
1 Adjusted using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16July-
Aug8090100110120130
July-
Aug
8090100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
0204060Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 18090100110120130
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
52

pected for the following months. Passenger car 
sales imparted significantly more momentum 
to private consumption in the third quarter. 
New car registrations by private users showed 
a considerably stronger increase than before.
Imports gained some momentum in the third 
quarter in price and seasonally adjusted terms. 
This was due chiefly to the resurgence in do -
mestic demand. The increase was perceptibly 
higher in nominal terms than it was in price-  
adjusted terms, as imports had been becoming 
more expensive again since the second quarter. 
The increase in nominal goods imports was 
broadly based regionally. More goods, espe -
cially from outside the euro area, were in de -
mand. Imports from Russia and the United 
States stood out in this context. Considerably 
fewer goods were imported from China, how -
ever. Nominal imports from the OPEC countries 
also declined.
Sectoral trends
Seasonally adjusted industrial output in the 
third quarter remained at its prior- quarter level. 
As incoming orders increased somewhat at the 
same time, there was a closing of the gap be -
tween the unexpectedly sharp rise in output at 
the beginning of the year and the relatively 
subdued intake of orders. Industrial output 
could therefore pick up momentum again in 
the near future after tending to go down fol -
lowing the strong start to the year. With regard 
to sectoral developments, capital goods manu -
facturers registered a slight increase in the third 
quarter at ¼%, while producers of intermedi -
ate and consumer goods recorded losses of 
output (-¼%).
Despite industrial output stagnating on an 
average of the third quarter, Ifo Institute data 
show a marked increase in the level of capacity 
utilisation of tangible fixed assets in the manu -
facturing sector at the end of the period under 
review. At 85¾%, it reached a five- year high in 
October and was almost 1 percentage point up on the figure for July and well above the multi- 
year average considered as normal utilisation.
Seasonally adjusted construction output in the 
third quarter was clearly up on the second 
quarter by 1%. The third quarter saw the end 
of the period of adjustment which followed the 
peaks in output – aided by the prevailing mild 
weather – in late 2015 and early 2016, leading 
to strong bounce- back effects in the spring, 
and the construction sector is clearly on a path 
of growth again. The expansion in the main 
construction sector was particularly strong at 
2%. According to the Ifo Institute, the assess -
ment of the business situation by enterprises in 
the construction sector was decidedly optimis -
tic, hitting an all- time high. This, together with 
the very high level of equipment utilisation, 
likewise paints a very positive picture of con -
struction activity.
For the services sectors as a whole –  which 
were still very buoyant in the second quarter – Subdued pick- up 
in imports
Industrial output 
persists at prior- quarter level
Capacity utilisa-
tion in industry risen to a  five-year highConstruction sector back on an expansionary 
course in Q3
Mixed develop-
ments in servicesOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Industry
859095100105110115
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
53

the cyclical indicators point to a slower pace of 
growth in the summer months. Stagnation in 
industry is likely to have had the main negative 
impact, leaving its mark on the wholesale trade 
and elsewhere. Following the decline in sales in 
the second quarter, there are signs of a further 
clear downward movement in the current re -
porting period. In line with this, the assessment 
of the business situation in this sector – accord -
ing to the Ifo Institute – showed a slight deteri -
oration in the third quarter. Price- adjusted retail 
sales (excluding motor vehicles) were, by con -
trast, slightly up on the quarter. The volume of 
motor vehicle sales – statistical data are avail -
able up to August  – is likely to have shown 
strong growth, in fact. This is also indicated by 
the figures on newly registered motor vehicles, 
which are already available up to and including 
October. The rest of services excluding trade 
probably showed quite subdued growth. This is 
suggested at all events by the weaker rise in 
employment in this sector.
Employment and labour 
 market
The very positive development on the labour 
market over the past few quarters suffered a 
dip, above all, in the months from June to Au -
gust. Unlike in winter and spring, employment 
showed no more than a marginal increase in 
the third quarter. This was due to weak growth 
in jobs subject to social security contributions 
as well to a fall again in low- paid part-  time 
work. Even so, the outlook for employment is 
favourable, as is suggested by the recent 
marked improvement in the leading indicators. 
Unemployment, too, showed only a small de -
crease at the end of the period under review. 
This, however, was due in part to the increas -
ing number of refugees registering as job seek -
ers after their applications for asylum had been 
approved.
Seasonally adjusted employment in Germany 
went up by 24,000, or just under 0.1%, in the 
third quarter of 2016. The increase was thus much smaller than in the first half of the year. 
This is due mainly to the moderate growth in 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions. According to the initial figures of the 
Federal Employment Agency for July and Au -
gust, the number of employees subject to so -
cial security contributions in those two months 
rose by no more than an estimated 0.1% (or 
20,000 persons) compared with the average of 
the second quarter. Exclusively low- paid part-  
time employment showed a further marked de -
cline at the end of the period under review. 
There was little change in the number of self-  
employed persons.
Heterogeneous developments across sectors 
are behind the weak growth in jobs subject to 
social security contributions. There was a sig -
nificant decline in employment mainly in manu -
facturing, trade, and the financial and insur -
ance industries. This contrasted with a rise, al -
beit one that was less dynamic than before, in 
the health and welfare sector, business- related 
services (excluding temporary agency employ -
ment), the educational sector and in the com -
paratively small information and communica -
tion sector. According to the data available so 
far, the hesitant recruitment practice in con -
struction in spring is still continuing.
A large part of the increased year- on- year de -
mand for labour was covered by immigration. 
According to the immigration monitor figures 
of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB), 
more than two- thirds of the 428,000 increase 
in the number of workers subject to social se -
curity contributions and low- paid part- time 
workers within the past 12 months up to Au -
gust 2016 was due to non- German nationals. 
The vast majority came from other EU coun -
tries. The influx of refugees is also gradually 
making itself felt, although their employability 
in the German labour market is often limited. 
There was a year- on- year increase of 41,000 in 
the number of persons employed subject to so -
cial security contributions or working in low-  
paid part- time jobs coming from the most sig -Dip in the posi-
tive develop-ment on the labour market, but outlook improved
Perceptibly 
slower employ-ment growth in Q3 than beforeIncrease mainly 
in some services 
subsectors, decrease in industry
Additional 
demand for labour still being covered to a considerable extent by  immigrationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
54

nificant war- torn and crisis- stricken countries of 
Asia and Africa.1
The official unemployment figure fell slightly in 
the third quarter as well. On an average of the 
reporting quarter, a seasonally adjusted 2.68 
million persons were registered as unemployed. 
This was 20,000 fewer than on an average of 
the second quarter of 2016; in the first half of 
2016, however, there was a noticeably more 
rapid fall in the number of persons who were 
out of work. In October, the unemployment 
figure went down again more sharply to what 
was now 2.66 million. The unemployment rate 
fell from 6.1% in the third quarter to 6.0% at 
present. There was, in fact, an even consider -
ably steeper fall in unemployment among Ger -
mans and non- German nationals who do not 
come from the main war- torn and crisis- stricken 
countries. The statistics are increasingly reflect -
ing the fact that many refugees are now regis -
tering as looking for work. The number of refu -
gees registered as unemployed was, however, 
reduced by the fact that labour market policy 
measures have been expanded.2 Underemploy -
ment as defined by the Federal Employment 
Agency –  where persons taking part in such 
measures are also counted – therefore showed 
a perceptible increase.
The leading indicators of employment and the 
steeper rise again in September suggest that 
the subdued upturn of the summer quarter 
could make way for more dynamic growth. In Unemployment 
declining slightly despite rising number of  refugees seeking work
Very good 
 outlook for employmentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.  3 From May 2009, 
unemployed excluding persons newly registered on the books of private employment agencies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Oct40.541.041.542.042.543.043.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.031.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.54.0
–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
Million
Million200300400500600Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Officially unemployed 3UnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug
1 See Institute for Employment Research (IAB) (2016), 
Zuwanderungsmonitor Oktober 2016, Aktuelle Berichte 
des IAB, Nuremberg. The IAB counts the Middle Eastern 
countries of Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan as 
well as the African countries of Eritrea, Nigeria and Somalia 
as being among the most significant countries at war or in 
crisis.
2 Since June 2016, the Federal Employment Agency has 
been publishing labour market statistics in the context of 
forced migration, which are based on residence status 
rather than the nationality of the asylum seekers’ main 
countries of origin; these show 157,000 unemployed 
persons in October. The shortness of the time series does 
not allow either a year- on- year comparison or seasonal 
adjustment, however. For more details, see Federal 
Employment Agency, Geflüchtete Menschen in den Arbeits-
marktstatistiken – Erste Ergebnisse, Hintergrund infor matio-
nen, Nuremberg, June 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
55

particular, the Ifo employment barometer, 
which surveys the employment plans of trade 
and industry over the coming three months 
and which was already clearly expansionary, 
showed a further considerable improvement in 
September and October. The Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s BA-  X job index, which contains 
information on both the existing number of re -
ported vacancies and their dynamics, rose to its 
highest level since its introduction. Some sec -
tors with a slower pace of growth in recruit -
ment lately, such as manufacturing and trade, 
reported more unsubsidised vacancies to the 
Federal Employment Agency. Job vacancies in 
the health and welfare sectors and in other 
business- related services are also pointing up -
wards, as is the construction sector to a certain 
extent. The IAB labour market barometer, too, 
is well into positive territory. The results of the 
autumn survey of the Association of German 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) 
on enterprises’ staffing plans, spanning a some -
what broader horizon of 12 months, remained just as positive as the survey undertaken in 
early summer. The unemployment subcompo -
nent of the IAB labour market barometer, 
which projects developments in unemployment 
over the coming three months, is now percep -
tibly above the neutral threshold. This points to 
a further slight reduction in registered un -
employment in the coming months.
Wages and prices
Overall, negotiated rates of pay (including one- 
off payments and ancillary agreements) have 
moved onto a flatter growth path over the 
course of this year. Following a muted rise of 
2.2% in the second quarter of 2016, the in -
crease in the third quarter, at 1.9%, was also 
no more than moderate. Wage growth was 
suppressed by both the low increases in nego -
tiated wages from the second stage of earlier 
wage rounds and the new agreements con -
cluded this year, which have been moderate on 
the whole. Furthermore, it has not been un -
common this year for agreements to include 
months with a pay freeze, which has led to 
delayed wage increases. It cannot be ruled out 
that, in a number of cases, the negotiated pay 
settlements were influenced not just by domin -
ant determining factors, such as the general 
economic situation, but also by the low infla -
tion rate or the expectation of continued mod -
erate price increases over the term of the wage 
agreement. In many industries, the new col -
lective agreements provide for staggered wage 
increases, with a somewhat higher wage in -
crease in the first stage being followed by a 
lower increase in the second stage, usually in 
the following year. In the industrial sectors, the 
negotiated wage increases in the third quarter 
of 2016 were, on average, higher than in the 
services sectors. In the second quarter, the op -
posite had been the case, owing to higher 
rates of wage growth being recorded in the 
services sectors and the level of negotiated 
rates in some industry sectors being dampened 
by months with a pay freeze and negative base 
effects from the previous year’s one- off and Negotiated pay 
rates in 2016 Q3 also only mod-erately higher
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 201600.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
56

special payments. Towards the end of the 
period under review, actual earnings could 
have risen to a similar extent as they did on 
average in the first half of the year.
Turning to prices, the third quarter of 2016 saw 
a continuation of the previous quarter’s up -
ward trend at all stages of the economy. Unlike 
in the second quarter, however, energy played 
mostly a minor role, while prices excluding en -
ergy rose in particular. That said, at the con -
sumer level, prices excluding energy rose some -
what less strongly than in the second quarter.
Seasonally adjusted import prices in the third 
quarter rose more or less as strongly as in the 
second quarter. Although the previously strong 
increase in crude oil prices has since plateaued, 
energy prices continued to rise, albeit only 
moderately. This is probably attributable to 
both lagged effects of the previous rise in crude 
oil prices as well as a widening of margins at 
refineries. For the first time in over a year, im -
port prices excluding energy recorded an up -
ward movement, and quite a significant one at 
that. This was mainly due to increases in the 
price of industrial raw materials and food. If 
these are excluded, we still see a shift to rising 
prices, but one that is much less pronounced. 
Domestic producer prices accelerated slightly. 
This was partially attributable to energy price 
inflation not being much lower than in the pre -
ceding quarter, despite the unchanged crude 
oil prices, but also to the higher prices seen for 
goods excluding energy. Here, however, price 
inflation of non- energy raw materials and food 
played a significantly smaller role than in the 
case of imports. Overall, year- on- year prices fell 
less strongly than in the second quarter, with 
domestic sales prices down by 1¾% and im -
port prices by 2¾%.
Construction prices in the third quarter went 
up by 2.1% on the year, which was somewhat 
more pronounced than in the previous two 
years. On the real estate market, the signifi -
cantly elevated price momentum witnessed 
since the second quarter continued. According Prices continuing 
to rise at all stages of the economy
Slight rise in 
import prices excluding com-modities and food for the first time in a long while
Slightly higher 
rise in construc-tion prices  continuesExport pricesImport, export, producer, construction and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Not seasonally adjusted. 3 National consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 20169295100105110
97100105110
97100105 105110115
97100105110
10123
–+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Consumer prices
Year-on-year change 2Consumer prices 3Constructionprices
 2Producer prices1Import pricesLog scale
%
Oct95100105
OctDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
57

to the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks 
(Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken – vdp ), 
prices of owner- occupied housing in the third 
quarter rose by 6.4% on the year.
Consumer prices showed a moderate increase 
of 0.2% in the third quarter in seasonally ad -
justed terms, following a rather strong rise of 
0.6% in the previous three- month period. This 
was due chiefly to the fact that the consider -
able rise in energy prices seen in the previous 
quarter did not continue. Prices for petroleum 
products rose only slightly and were masked by 
lagged effects on consumer prices for gas and 
levies caused by the drop in crude oil prices re -
corded up to the fourth quarter of 2015/first 
quarter of 2016. Marginally lower energy prices 
contrasted with higher food prices caused by 
weather- related factors. After factoring out 
these two volatile components, prices con -
tinued to rise by 0.3% in seasonally- adjusted 
terms. There was hardly any increase in the 
price of industrial goods excluding energy. Sig -
nificant price reductions in the case of clothing 
and footwear contributed considerably to this, 
which probably also had to do with the mild 
weather conditions in September. The price 
trend was rather modest in the case of other 
goods, too. The prices of services excluding 
rents rose only moderately. By contrast, rent in -
creases were slightly more pronounced than in 
the preceding quarters. Overall, the annual rate 
of inflation rose by 0.5% as measured by the 
national consumer price index (0.1% in the pre -
vious quarter) and 0.4% as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
(0.0% in the previous quarter).
There was a fairly marked seasonally adjusted 
month- on- month rise of 0.3% in consumer 
prices in October. Prices for petroleum products 
rose significantly owing to the higher crude oil 
prices. Prices of industrial goods excluding en -
ergy also rose somewhat more sharply owing 
to a reversal of the marked price reductions for 
clothing and footwear seen in the third quarter. 
In addition, rents once again rose at a slightly 
higher rate. By contrast, the moderate price trend for services excluding rents continued, 
while consumers had to pay no more for food 
than in the previous month. Year- on- year price 
inflation increased from 0.7% to 0.8% as meas -
ured by the CPI, and from 0.5% to 0.7% as 
defined by the HICP . Excluding energy and 
food, the inflation rate remained at just over 
1% according to both definitions. Headline in -
flation in November is also likely to increase to 
just shy of 1% owing to price rises for dairy 
products.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy is likely to grow much 
more strongly in the final quarter of 2016 fol -
lowing the temporary slowdown in the sum -
mer months. Sentiment in the German econ -
omy has brightened significantly of late. This is 
especially true of the manufacturing sector, 
which additionally saw continued marked 
growth in capacity utilisation and a rise in new 
orders. It can therefore be assumed that indus -
trial output in the final quarter of 2016 will 
probably make a significant contribution to ag -
gregate growth. Moreover, the high level of 
capacity utilisation is likely to stimulate invest -
ment in machinery and equipment, which had 
been declining in the previous two quarters. 
Ultimately, markedly higher export expectations 
in industry and the upward trend in orders re -
ceived from abroad indicate that goods exports 
will start to increase again following the lull in 
the third quarter. In the construction sector, the 
indicators are still pointing to buoyant eco -
nomic activity, which means that construction 
investment is likely to remain an important 
driver of domestic growth. The ongoing fa -
vourable income and labour market prospects 
combined with positive consumer sentiment 
also suggest a distinct increase in private con -
sumption expenditure. The short- term impact 
on the German economy of the announcement 
that the United Kingdom intends to leave the 
European Union could be noticeably weaker 
than some initially feared.Moderate rise 
in consumer prices excluding energy and food continues
Prices increased 
fairly signifi-cantly in  OctoberGDP growth could pick up considerable momentum in Q4Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
58

Sentiment in the German economy has im -
proved significantly on a broad front of late. In 
the industrial sector, the Ifo Institute’s surveys 
on business, production and export expect -
ations are pointing to a more favourable out -
look. Business expectations in trade and in the 
services sector rose somewhat more moder -
ately, but are nonetheless at a high level, which 
indicates that these sectors are also likely to see 
a stronger pick- up in economic activity than 
has recently been the case. By contrast, the 
business and export expectations surveyed by 
the German Chambers of Commerce and In -
dustry (DIHK) fell slightly. However, as these re -
sults are based on a significantly longer time 
horizon (12 months) than in the case of the Ifo 
surveys, this somewhat less favourable assess -
ment of the economic outlook is unlikely to 
have a material impact on the final quarter of 
2016.
Industrial orders rose by a seasonally adjusted 
½% in the third quarter, with the main impetus 
coming from abroad. Orders from both the 
euro area and the rest of the world grew 
sharply, which is likely to boost German exports 
in the final quarter of the year. Motor vehicle 
orders from the euro area, which increased 
very significantly, stood out here in particular. 
By contrast, German industrial enterprises suf -
fered significant losses with regard to domestic 
orders, which was due primarily to the weak 
flow of orders recorded by domestic producers 
of consumer goods. The lack of large- scale do -
mestic orders also made itself felt. Excluding 
this, the volume of domestic orders would have 
been able to maintain its previous- quarter level. 
As large- scale orders are usually processed over 
a long period of time, and thereby have less of 
an impact on production in the short term than 
in the case of smaller order volumes with 
shorter processing times, the drop in domestic 
orders is therefore unlikely to place a percep -
tible strain on German industry in the fourth 
quarter.
The construction sector is likely to remain on 
an expansionary path in the final quarter. This is Pick- up in eco-
nomic sentiment 
broadly based
New industrial 
orders predom-inantly from abroadDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16758090100110120
–40–30–20–1000+10+20+30
708090100110120
8090100110
July-
Aug
July-
Aug90100110120130
–20–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
59

indicated, in particular, by the sentiment indica -
tors surveyed by the Ifo Institute, which show 
very optimistic expectations among construc -
tion enterprises. Business expectations even 
climbed to their highest level in over two dec -
ades. Only during the construction boom 
shortly after the reunification of Germany was 
the economic outlook for the construction sec -
tor deemed to be more favourable. In contrast 
to the sentiment indicators, the number of 
building permits and their estimated costs have 
fallen recently, as has the number of new con -
struction orders. However, this should be inter -
preted merely as a partial normalisation follow -
ing the exceptionally sharp rises at the turn of 
2015-16. Given that both indicators are con -
tinuing to exceed their respective prior- year fig -
ure to a much greater extent than in the case of construction output, the recent downturns 
do not dampen the optimistic outlook for the 
construction sector.
The dynamic consumption activity is likely to 
continue in the final quarter of the year. Al -
though the consumer climate index calculated 
by the market research institution Gesellschaft 
für Konsumforschung (GfK)  decreased slightly, 
it remains at a very high level. The ongoing 
fairly favourable outlook in the labour market 
together with sound income growth does not 
indicate that a major deterioration in consumer 
sentiment is on the cards. Moreover, it is likely 
that the exceptionally low expenditure on 
clothing and footwear in September owing to 
the warm weather will lead to a countermove -
ment in the fourth quarter.Construction 
sector remains on growth path
Dynamic growth of private con-
sumption set to 
continueDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances are continuing to 
shape up well. Although the fiscal balance may 
dip slightly this year, it is set to remain in comfort -
ably positive territory (2015: 0.7% of gross do -
mestic product (GDP)). The country’s fiscal stance 
is distinctly expansionary on the expenditure side, 
which is partially obscured by favourable cyclical 
factors and a further decline in interest expend -
iture. For example, spending on support for refu -
gees has increased significantly on the year. This 
is largely due to the fact that the majority of asy -
lum seekers did not arrive until autumn of last 
year, meaning that the costs incurred in 2015 as 
a whole were still comparatively low. In addition, 
expenditure by central, state and local govern -
ment in areas such as child day care and trans -
port infrastructure is rising, and the social security 
funds’ expenditure on healthcare, pensions and 
long- term care is increasing markedly.
The debt ratio stood at 70.1% at the end of the 
second quarter of 2016. The ratio’s decline com -
pared with the level recorded at the end of 2015 
(71.2%) is solely attributable to growth in nom -
inal GDP in the ratio’s denominator. The gross 
debt level rose, however. While liabilities were 
reduced markedly at state government level,1 
central government liabilities increased signifi -
cantly. Factors contributing to the latter develop -
ment included mounting debt as a result of 
financing  the accumulation of money market 
deposits and the provision of cash collateral for 
existing derivative transactions by its bad bank 
(FMS Wertmanagement). In the absence of fur -
ther one- off effects, the debt ratio decline is set 
to accelerate as the year progresses.
As things currently stand, it appears that the sur -
plus will remain broadly unchanged and the debt 
ratio will continue to fall in the year ahead. Cyc -
lical factors and further diminishing interest ex -
penditure are likely to provide additional relief for 
public finances. Furthermore, the lion’s share of the proceeds from the frequency auction in sum -
mer 2015 will be recorded in the national ac -
counts in 2017 (on an accrual basis as the fre -
quency bands become available).2 By contrast, 
the structural primary surplus is set to shrink once 
again, in an indication of ongoing moderately ex -
pansionary fiscal policy. On the revenue side, tax 
cuts should be more or less offset by fiscal drag3 
and the raised contribution rate for the public 
long- term care insurance scheme. On the ex -
penditure side, spending in connection with refu -
gee migration may remain broadly stable: while, 
on the one hand, the level of assistance needed 
by refugees who are already in Germany is slowly 
tapering off, the relatively low number of (new) 
migrants  generally expected would, on the other 
hand, entail only limited additional spending. 
However, significant expenditure hikes are ex -
pected in other areas, such as long- term care and 
pensions, in the coming year as well.42016: renewed 
surplus and …
… receding 
debt ratio
Similar surplus 
and further fall in debt ratio in 2017* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to the national accounts and the Maastricht ratios. 
The subsequent more detailed reporting on the budgets of 
central, state and local government and of the social secur -
ity funds is based on the figures as defined in the govern -
ment finance statistics (which are generally in line with the 
budget accounts).
1 The mid- year acquisition of HSH Nordbank’s risk assets at 
the market price of €2½ billion (pushing up the debt level) 
is taken into account here. The haircut applied in connec -
tion with the transfer of a total of €2½ billion decreased 
state government’s fiscal balance in the national accounts 
by €1½ billion due to recourse to the second loss guaran -
tee. The loss retained by HSH Nordbank amounted to €1 
billion.
2 This will temporarily improve the balance by €4 billion.
3 In this context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the 
overall revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation 
and the countervailing impact of the fact that specific ex -
cise duties are largely independent of prices.
4 Factors such as the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the 
EU are causing uncertainty, although the short- term impact 
of this on Germany’s public finances appears manageable. 
There are risks stemming from pending court proceedings 
in connection with the phasing- out of nuclear energy and 
in relation to the nuclear fuel tax. In addition, a federal 
foundation that is expected to be recorded in the general 
government sector is planned; this is to cover the future 
costs of radioactive waste disposal (see also footnote 32 on 
p 68). The transactions are unlikely to have an impact on 
general government’s fiscal balance in the national ac -
counts for the foreseeable future. The Maastricht debt level 
would fall if financial resources transferred to the fund 
were invested in German government bonds and thus con -
solidated in the general government sector.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
61

Germany’s general government budget has re -
corded a marked structural surplus in the past 
two years. The national fiscal framework re -
form in 2009 is likely to have contributed sig -
nificantly to the fact that the highly favourable 
setting for Germany’s public finances5 was util -
ised to achieve this sound budgetary position 
and thus, not least, to provide to some extent 
against foreseeable demographic burdens. In 
the light of the latest long- term sustainability 
analyses, a structural primary surplus matching 
the level recently achieved (and the associated 
rapid reduction of the debt ratio) does not ap -
pear overambitious by any means. In fact, the 
projections reveal that there is still a consolida -
tion gap that will need to be closed at a later 
date.6
Irrespective of this, it is still advisable for Ger -
many to maintain moderate structural sur -
pluses. As was demonstrated in 2015 when 
refugee migration spiked, safety margins below 
the budget ceilings make it possible to keep 
public finances on a steady course within stipu -
lated borrowing limits, ie without the object -
ives of the budgetary rules being undermined 
by a purportedly inevitable need to water them 
down.7 By contrast, with respect to calls for 
Germany to provide additional fiscal stimulus 
with the particular aim of supporting the econ -
omies of other euro- area member states, it 
should be noted that the impact on these other 
states would likely be rather limited.8 Two 
much more crucial factors are structural re -
forms in individual euro- area countries –  in -
cluding Germany – and the stabilisation of the 
regulatory framework of European economic 
and monetary union.9 The latter point also 
covers binding fiscal rules, with Germany tak -
ing centre stage as a stability anchor.
There are various fiscal policy approaches that 
Germany could pursue to improve its economic 
framework conditions. For example, greater 
prominence could be given to areas of expend -
iture that boost growth and employment (such 
as infrastructure provision, education and child 
day care) and, in general, efficiency reserves could be exploited. With respect to pensions, 
long- term care and healthcare, it is important 
to note that demographic change will give rise 
to long- term spending pressure. This should be 
taken into account when deciding on any fur -
ther benefit increases, even if these can be 
temporarily covered by existing reserves – with 
the impact perhaps going virtually unnoticed at 
first – or if their effect will not be fully felt until 
further down the road. In the case of the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme, due consider -
ation has to be given to the long term. In this 
context, it is important to make reliable early 
policy decisions so that, if necessary, insured 
persons can secure a pension level that suits 
their wishes by building up a supplementary 
private pension. Further rises in the statutory 
retirement age in line with life expectancy 
should not be ruled out. Instead, they could 
make a key contribution to stabilising the pro -
vision of pensions via the statutory pension in -
surance scheme at a level deemed appropriate 
while keeping contribution increases within 
sustainable bounds.10Structural 
 surpluses appro-priate given demographic situation …
… and also 
advisable as safety margin below budget limits
Approaches 
to improving 
underlying 
 conditions5 Despite the rise in the debt ratio, the interest expenditure 
ratio has dipped by around one percentage point over the 
last ten years owing to falling interest rates. The decline in 
structural unemployment has reduced labour market-  
related expenditure on a similar scale. Tax revenue has 
largely exceeded expectations perceptibly in recent years, 
with profit- related taxes rising especially sharply.
6 See Federal Ministry of Finance, Vierter Bericht zur Trag -
fähigkeit der öffentlichen Finanzen , February 2016; and 
European Commission, Fiscal Sustainability Report 2015, 
Institutional Paper 18, January 2016.
7 It is recommended that safety margins be maintained 
below the strict national budget limits, mainly in view of 
the considerable uncertainty in estimating the structural 
budget situation, which has seen some substantial down -
ward revisions in the past. In the absence of any margin 
below the limit prior to such revisions, they may necessitate 
short- term and potentially procyclical consolidation meas -
ures. By contrast, if safety margins are factored in as a mat -
ter of course, these can be temporarily depleted in the 
event of unpleasant surprises so that the necessary adjust -
ments can be spread over a longer period.
8 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The international spill -
over effects of an expansion of public investment in Ger -
many, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 13-17.
9 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Approaches to strength -
ening the regulatory framework of European monetary 
union, Monthly Report, March 2015, pp  15-39; and 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Approaches to resolving sovereign 
debt crises in the euro area, Monthly Report, July 2016, 
pp 41-62.
10 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term 
pension developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, 
pp 68-77.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
62

It is appropriate for the Federal Employment 
Agency to hold comparatively high reserves 
formed from surpluses built up during favour -
able economic periods in order to absorb the 
strong cyclical fluctuations in its finances. How -
ever, in view of the reserves now available, 
thought could be given to lowering the contri -
bution rate in order to reduce expected further 
surpluses. Should central, state and local gov -
ernment be left with budgetary leeway after 
achieving the desired safety margins, it stands 
to reason that the tax burden be reduced. The 
tax ratio has once again reached the relatively 
high level recorded at the turn of the millen -
nium. Against this background, it would be 
worth considering cutting income tax, not least 
the solidarity surcharge.11
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue12 in the 
third quarter of 2016 amounted to only 1½% 
and was thus distinctly weaker than in the first 
half of the year (see the adjacent chart and the 
table on page  64). This was attributable to 
shifted payments of non- assessed taxes on 
earnings (earlier distribution dates) during the 
year, as well as exceptional tobacco tax devel -
opments.13 Following strong growth in the first 
half of the year, revenue from both tax types 
subsequently fell. The increase in wage tax re -
ceipts was dampened year-on-year by a tax 
cut.14 Despite the aforementioned decline in 
tax payments on dividends, revenue from 
profit- related taxes climbed by 3%. In particu -
lar, high growth in revenue from corporation 
tax and assessed income tax continued un -
abated. By contrast, the rise in turnover tax rev -
enue was markedly smaller: while develop -
ments over the course of the year are generally 
highly volatile, these were compounded by the 
negative impact of a one- off effect.According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
forecast to rise by 3½% for the year as a whole. 
Given a favourable development in the macro -
economic reference variables for tax revenue,15 
this will be curbed by the fact that large- scale Reduce burden 
of taxes and social  contributions
Subdued growth 
in Q3 …
… owing mainly 
to expected one- off factorsFull- year  revenue rise dampened by tax refunds and reductionsTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201601234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
11 As an add- on to income taxes imposed by central gov -
ernment, the solidarity surcharge is linked to the existence 
of particular financing needs and was (re)introduced in the 
mid-1990s to cover costs relating to reunification. Central 
government’s special- purpose grants to the east German 
states for infrastructure reconstruction in eastern Germany 
will be discontinued at the end of 2019. Any undesirable 
distributional effects that arise as a result of phasing out 
the solidarity surcharge could be mitigated by making ad -
justments to income tax rates and child benefit.
12 Including transfers to the EU budget – which are de -
ducted from German tax revenue – but excluding receipts 
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for 
the quarter under review.
13 Tobacco companies have been required to print “shock 
images” on tobacco product packaging since 20  May 
2016. In the run- up to this legislation being introduced, the 
pre- production and purchase of tax stamps was temporar -
ily ramped up significantly.
14 At the beginning of the year, the basic tax allowance 
and child tax allowance were raised and the other income 
tax thresholds “shifted to the right” (specified tax rates only 
apply to higher taxable income). The simultaneous raising 
of child benefit, which is deducted from revenue, likewise 
reduces wage tax receipts in the government finance stat -
istics.
15 This estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur -
rent macroeconomic projection. According to this, GDP is 
expected to rise by 1.8% in real terms and 3.4% in nominal 
terms in 2016 (May: +1.7% and +3.6%, respectively). The 
corresponding growth rates for 2017 are 1.4% and 3.1% 
(May: +1.5% and +3.3%, respectively), while increases of 
1.6% and 3.2% are assumed for 2018 (May: +1.5% and 
+3.2%, respectively). In the medium term, nominal growth 
of around 3% per annum is still forecast.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
63

tax refunds remain on the cards in the final 
quarter of 2016 owing to court rulings, some 
of which were made some time ago (mainly 
regarding corporation tax and local business 
tax).16 Furthermore, this will be accompanied 
by shortfalls resulting from amendments to tax 
legislation. The main change in this regard is 
the aforementioned cut in income tax. The 
gradual changeover to downstream taxation of 
pensions will also continue to cause revenue 
shortfalls to a limited extent.
A renewed rise in tax revenue growth, amount -
ing to 4%, is expected in 2017. While growth in 
the macroeconomic reference variables for tax 
revenue will fall somewhat compared with this 
year, it is assumed that the bulk of the signifi -
cant strain placed on tax revenue by court rul -
ings will be lifted.17 The impact of legislative 
changes will also reduce revenue growth a little 
less than in 2016.18 Average annual growth 
rates of 3½% are forecast for the years 2018 to 
2021. The projected developments are shaped primarily by macroeconomic growth assump -
tions and fiscal drag. Legislative changes that 
have already been approved will only slightly 
dampen the impact of fiscal drag over the re -
mainder of the forecast horizon. The tax ratio 
(as defined in the government finance statis -
tics) is therefore projected to increase signifi -
Renewed rise in 
growth expected for 2017 and subsequent yearsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2016 1,2Q3
2015 2016 2015 2016
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 453.4 472.5 + 19.1 +  4.2 +  3.6 153.3 155.5 + 2.2 +  1.4
of which
Wage tax 129.1 132.6 +  3.5 +  2.7 +  3.0 43.3 44.7 + 1.4 +  3.2
Profi  t-related taxes 3 72.9 80.9 +  8.0 + 10.9 +  7.4 22.8 23.5 + 0.7 +  3.2
Assessed income tax 36.1 39.4 +  3.3 +  9.1 +  8.9 10.7 11.9 + 1.2 + 11.5
Corporation tax 15.7 21.3 +  5.6 + 35.4 + 19.8 4.5 5.5 + 1.1 + 24.6
Investment income tax
4 21.0 20.1 –  0.9 –  4.2 –  4.5 7.6 6.0 – 1.6 – 21.0
Turnover taxes 5 155.8 161.0 +  5.2 +  3.3 +  3.5 53.2 53.9 + 0.7 +  1.3
Energy tax 24.4 24.6 +  0.3 +  1.0 +  1.0 10.2 10.1 – 0.0 –  0.1
Tobacco tax 9.9 9.9 –  0.0 –  0.2 –  2.5 4.0 3.0 – 1.0 – 24.4
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2016. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ grant and invest-
ment grant deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover 
tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
16 In 2016, these predominantly relate to the rulings by 
the Federal Fiscal Court of 25 June 2014 (I R 33/ 09) and of 
30 July 2014 (I R 74/ 12) on section 40a of the Act on Asset 
Management Companies (Gesetz über Kapitalanlagege -
sellschaften) and STEKO (section 8b (3) of the Corporation 
Tax Act (Körperschaftsteuergesetz)) (see also Bundestags-  
Drucksache 18/ 5560) as well as the Federal Fiscal Court 
ruling of 17 December 2014 (I R 39/ 14). In the government 
finance statistics, these tax refunds reduce revenue at the 
time of payment. By contrast, they are recorded in the na -
tional accounts as government spending (capital transfers) 
at the time of the final ruling (accrual basis).
17 Most of the projected revenue shortfall in 2017 is attrib -
utable to only one court ruling – the European Court of 
Justice ruling of 20 October 2011 (C-284-09).
18 The Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting issues 
projections on the basis of current tax legislation. The in -
come tax changes that are currently planned have there -
fore not yet been taken into account, but they will place 
only a fairly small strain on tax revenue growth, at least in 
the coming year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
64

cantly to 22.9% by the end of the forecast 
period in 2021 (2015: 22.2%).
The May 2016 forecast has thus been revised 
upwards for the current year (+€4½ billion). 
The most significant factor in this is that tax 
revenue, particularly from profit-  related taxes, 
has so far performed more favourably than ex -
pected in terms of cash receipts. The higher 
baseline is set to remain in place, to some ex -
tent, in the years to come. However, the im -
pact of the macroeconomic setting’s down -
ward revision is of dominating relevance here. 
While the May forecast was largely confirmed 
for the coming year (+€½ billion), annual rev -
enue shortfalls are anticipated as of 2018, 
which are expected to reach €1½ billion in 
2020.
Central government budget
Central government posted a €3½ billion def -
icit in the third quarter of 2016 compared with 
a deficit of just over €3 billion one year previ -
ously. Revenue fell by 1% (€½ billion). This was 
mainly due to the decline in tax revenue, which, 
even after factoring out the €3 billion increase 
in transfers to the EU budget,19 failed to inch 
upwards. By contrast, relief was provided in the 
form of the scheduled one- off payment of €1½ 
billion from the flood relief fund, in particular, 
but also in the form of higher guarantee repay -
ments. Decreasing by ½%, expenditure fell at a 
somewhat weaker pace than revenue. While 
significant growth was recorded, particularly 
for current transfers (+€3 billion),20 this was 
once again counteracted by a marked decline 
in interest expenditure (just over -€1 billion, 
with higher premiums on new issues account -
ing for two- thirds thereof).21 In addition, €3½ 
billion was transferred to the fund to promote 
municipal investment last year, which was not 
repeated in the third quarter of 2016. Excluding 
this factor as well as the funds received from 
the flood relief fund and the one- off burdens 
arising in connection with EU transfers, the bal -ance – at €2 billion – deteriorated to a some -
what greater degree.
After three quarters, the central government 
budget is now running a surplus of almost €8 
billion, marking a year- on- year improvement of 
no less than €4 billion. By contrast, a deficit of 
€6½ billion, and therefore a considerable de -
terioration of €18 billion compared with the ac -
tual result in 2015, was envisaged in the budget 
plan for 2016 as a whole. Taking the latest tax 
estimate as a basis and incorporating the trans -
fer of turnover tax revenue to state govern -
ment in the form of the flat immigrant integra -
tion payment (€2 billion) and the final settle -
ment of the lump- sum refugee payments that 
is to be brought forward (€2½ billion), both of 
which have already been approved by the Fed -
eral Government, a €3 billion year- on- year 
 reduction in tax revenue is on the cards in the 
final quarter. Higher transfers to the social se -
curity funds and state governments, in particu -
lar, are also likely to continue putting pressure 
on the budget. Furthermore, a supplementary 
budget is expected, enabling another round of 
pre- financing of the fund to promote municipal 
investment. Consequently, as things stand 
today, a negative result for the final quarter is 
possible (compared with a surplus of €8 billion 
one year previously, with a one- off transfer of 
€1½ billion to the energy and climate fund). Revenue expect -
ations raised for 
2016, confirmed for 2017 and revised down-wards slightly for subsequent years
Slightly higher 
deficit in Q3 
despite easing 
one- off effectsMarked surplus rather than planned deficit likely for year as a whole
19 Transfers to the EU reduce central government’s tax rev -
enue. In the first half of 2016, it had decreased by €5 bil -
lion on the year. Compared with the expectations outlined 
in the latest tax estimate (year as a whole: reduction of €2 
billion compared with 2015), the developments in the third 
quarter are to be deemed a one- off equalising movement.
20 Including, most notably, higher transfers to the health 
insurance fund and the statutory pension insurance 
scheme, state governments and – in connection with tack -
ling the root causes of refugee migration, it would ap -
pear  – foreign countries. By contrast, payments of un -
employment benefit II (means- tested benefit) also con -
tained here largely stagnated despite the higher number of 
recognised refugees, the majority of whom are presumably 
in need. 
21 In the government finance statistics – unlike in the na -
tional accounts – premiums and discounts on the nominal 
value of government bond issues are recorded immediately 
in their full amount rather than on an accrual basis. This 
can result in substantial relief (€5½ billion so far in 2016) 
but also in corresponding burdens. It would appear advis -
able to harmonise the way in which such items are re -
corded with the method used in the national accounts.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
65

That being said, it seems feasible that central 
government will run another marked surplus 
for the year as a whole. Pursuant to the Budget 
Act (Haushaltsgesetz),  this is to be transferred 
to the refugee reserve, which is likely to grow 
to well over €15 billion as a result. According to 
the accounting practice selected by the Federal 
Ministry of Finance, the pending amount to be 
credited to the control account under the debt 
brake rules will be lowered accordingly.22
At the beginning of July, the Federal Govern -
ment adopted a draft 2017 budget with no net 
borrowing.23 According to the draft, a deficit of 
€7 billion is to be financed by taking recourse 
to the arithmetical remainder of the refugee re -
serve. Later in July, a flat immigrant integration 
payment of €2 billion – which had not yet been 
factored into the draft budget – was earmarked 
for the state governments in 2017 as well. A 
tax reduction package was subsequently also 
put together and is set to place a €1 billion 
strain on the central government budget next year. In addition, besides a dividend cut of €½ 
billion, Deutsche Bahn is to be granted a capital 
injection of €1 billion. Furthermore, additional 
financial assistance was pledged to other coun -
tries such as Afghanistan to tackle the root 
causes of refugee migration.
It was against this backdrop that the final delib -
erations of the German Bundestag’s Budget 
Committee took place in mid- November. The 
decision to forgo any net borrowing was re -
affirmed. Pursuant to the latest tax estimate, 
projected revenue was upped by €4 billion. 
However, the additional burdens –  most of 
which have already been described  – arising 
from legislative changes that have not yet been 
finalised (€4½ billion) and the lower dividend 
paid out by Deutsche Bahn were accompanied 
by the reversal of a global revenue shortfall 
item of €1½ billion,24 meaning that estimated 
revenue was increased by €½ billion in net 
terms. Besides the additional outlays previously 
mentioned, one item to take a prominent pos -
ition on the expenditure side is additional 
spending on internal security. Total additional 
expenditure is largely offset (but for €½ billion) 
by decreases in projected spending in connec -
tion with long- term unemployment and esti -
mated global savings of €2 billion, in particular. 
The planned withdrawal from the refugee re -
serve was therefore not adjusted, resulting in 
an unchanged deficit of €7 billion.
With regard to the debt brake, the Federal Min -
istry of Finance estimates a cyclical burden of 
Draft budget 
for 2017 with reserve- financed deficit expanded at early stage to include further burdensBudget bal-anced in final deliberations, not least by 
means of global 
savingsCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–15–10–50+5+10+15
2016
20152014Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201420162015€ billion
22 Positive differences between the structural budget out -
turn and the constitutional borrowing limit (-€10 billion in 
2016, including the relevant off- budget entities) are to be 
credited to the control account. In the event of unfavour -
able developments at the budget implementation stage, 
the limit can, under certain conditions, be exceeded to a 
limited extent and the control account debited accordingly. 
By contrast, it is not possible to cover structural financing 
gaps in regular budgetary planning by making withdrawals 
from the control account. This fundamental principle was 
bypassed by the reserve.
23 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
 Report, August 2016, pp 63-65.
24 The primary aim of this was evidently to make provision 
for expenditure in connection with the lump- sum refugee 
payment (now €1 billion), which had not yet been specified 
in draft legislation in July.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
66

€2 billion25 and a deficit of €½ billion arising 
from financial transactions in the 2017 central 
government budget. The limit of -0.35% of 
GDP (-€10½ billion) also includes three off-  
budget entities – the flood relief fund, the fund 
to promote municipal investment, and the en -
ergy and climate fund – whose planned overall 
deficit appears to have been revised only 
slightly vis- à- vis the figure projected in the sum -
mer (€3½ billion). If the 2017 central govern -
ment budget’s structural result were, in the 
same way as the previous budget, calculated 
by including no net borrowing, but the planned 
recourse to the refugee reserve eased budget -
ary burdens, the updated draft central govern -
ment budget would contain a structural minus 
of only €½ billion overall. By contrast, an ap -
proach based on EU fiscal rules would, in the 
case of the core budget as well, be linked to 
the fiscal balance (instead of net borrowing), 
which is unaffected in profit and loss terms by 
the withdrawal from the reserve.26 The struc -
tural fiscal balance is therefore markedly less 
favourable than the indicator used by the Fed -
eral Ministry of Finance to assess compliance 
with the debt brake. Its target figure is -€7½ 
billion, which would leave only a moderate 
safety margin below the limit. Overall, how -
ever, developments could once again be signifi -
cantly more favourable than estimated.27
Central government now appears able to suffi -
ciently gauge additional burdens in connection 
with the temporarily very high influx of refu -
gees. Since it would also appear, all other 
things being equal, to be well absorbed within 
the budget, it would be worth considering dis -
solving the reserve in the near future. This pre -
cautionary item, which was established at the 
end of 2015 as a buffer for unforeseeable ex -
penditure in connection with refugee migra -
tion, could then be used in the budget to repay 
a portion of central government’s high debt.28
In line with standard practice, central govern -
ment’s financial plan for the 2018 to 2020 
period was not updated in the Budget Commit -
tee’s final deliberations on the 2017 budget. The €7 billion global revenue shortfalls 
budgeted as risk provisions for 2018 minus the 
revenue shortfalls of €2½ billion from the latest 
tax estimate may no longer be sufficient to 
cover the planned financial relief for local gov -
ernment, which, combined with the flat immi -
grant integration payment guaranteed until 
2018 and the envisaged tax cut, will cost the 
central government budget €10 billion. Conse -
quently, without recourse to the reserve men -
tioned above, a certain amount of borrowing 
would be necessary. In addition, relatively large 
global cost savings of €3 billion are still pro -
jected. For the final year of the financial plan 
(2020) too, factoring in the somewhat lower 
new tax estimate, the envisaged global rev -
enue shortfalls are no longer sufficient to add -
itionally cover the further funds (€9½ billion29) 
pledged by central government for the new 
state government financial equalisation sys -
tem.30 However, in addition to the fact that 
leaving a safety margin as a buffer for unex -Planned struc-
tural deficit with only moderate safety margin
Worth consider-
ing dissolving refugee reserve for formal debt repayment
Risk provisions in 
financial plan no longer suffi-cient to cover planned costs25 The determination that Germany will find itself in an 
unfavourable economic situation is consistent with the 
European Commission’s assessment. However, the Bundes -
bank – much like the institutions involved in the Joint Eco -
nomic Forecast, the German Council of Economic Experts, 
the IMF and the OECD – assumes that economic conditions 
will be favourable in the coming year, which would accord -
ingly suggest cyclical relief for the central government 
budget.
26 The national debt brake is designed to also ensure com -
pliance with European fiscal rules. They relate to the fiscal 
balance in the national accounts – which is likewise un -
affected by the withdrawal from the reserve.
27 For instance, in the case of interest expenditure, a not -
able rebound compared with the projected result for 2016 
is expected.
28 For a critical evaluation of the reserve in the context of 
the debt brake, see also previous quarterly reports, eg 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, 
November 2015, pp 64-66. According to the documents 
published as this report went to press, a provision was at 
least included in the final deliberations to allocate the por -
tion of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution that exceeds 
the budgeted amount to the investment and repayment 
fund (instead of to the reserve), which could then pay off 
debt.
29 The financial plan already took account of the fact that 
the divestiture grants (€2½ billion, paid to the state gov -
ernments as compensation for the 2006 agreement to end 
co- financing of several tasks) and the special- need supple -
mentary central government grants for infrastructure re -
construction in eastern Germany (€2 billion) will both be 
discontinued in 2019.
30 If central government continues to post better budget 
outturns, however, it is conceivable that these costs may 
still be absorbed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
67

pected burdens would be advisable, demo -
graphic developments and the extremely low 
interest rates both mean that it would in fact 
be sensible to better prepare for forthcoming 
burdens and aim to achieve a moderate struc -
tural surplus again.
The aggregate result for central government’s 
off- budget entities31 in the Federal Ministry of 
Finance’s quarterly overviews was a deficit of 
€1½ billion in the third quarter of 2016, follow -
ing a surplus of €4½ billion a year earlier. The 
surplus recorded a year previously was largely 
the result of a €3½ billion central government 
transfer to the fund to promote municipal in -
vestment. Outflows from this fund were still 
very limited at last report. Deutsche Pfandbrief -
bank’s  €1 billion repayment of a capital injec -
tion to the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund 
(SoFFin) in 2015 also had a negative impact on 
the year- on- year figure. In arithmetical terms, 
the deficit recorded for the third quarter of 
2016 was due on balance to a scheduled one- 
off repayment of €1½ billion from the flood re -
lief fund to the central government budget. 
The off- budget entities could achieve a roughly 
balanced budget for the year as a whole. Al -
though there were already notable net out -
flows in the first half of the year, especially 
from the restructuring fund (because of rev -
enue from 2015 being forwarded to the new 
single resolution fund (SRF) for banks) and from 
the fund created to cover additional repayment 
costs due to inflation- linked Federal securities. 
However, these deficits could be offset, along -
side the surpluses likely to be posted by the off- 
budget entities set up to cover the costs of civil 
servant pensions, if prefinancing of the fund to 
promote municipal investment continues – as is 
apparently planned.
Next year, the off- budget entities could record a 
similar result. Perceptible outflows are likely, not 
least from the fund to promote municipal in -
vestment. Nonetheless, the off- budget entities 
set up to cover the costs of civil servant pen -
sions are set to continue posting surpluses, and 
–  given that inflation is expected to rise and transfers from the central government budget 
are thus likely to increase – the precautionary 
fund created to cover additional repayment 
costs due to inflation- linked Federal securities 
will probably also record a marked surplus.32
State government budgets33
State government’s finances deteriorated in the 
third quarter. According to the monthly cash 
statistics, state government’s core budgets 
were slightly in deficit (-€½ billion, compared 
with +€2 billion in the same period last year). 
Revenue rose by 2½% (€2 billion). Tax revenue 
growth (+3%) was significantly weaker than in 
the previous quarters, while the revenue re -
ceived from public administrations (especially 
transfers from central government) saw a large 
increase (+6%). Expenditure expanded by just 
under 6% (or €4½ billion) and thus much more 
strongly than revenue. This was mainly due to 
the sharp increase in current transfers to local 
government (just under 12%, or just over €2 
billion), which was apparently related, in par -
ticular, to support for refugees. The transfers 
from state government to the municipalities 
also included financial support forwarded from 
central government, which had been increased. 
The strong growth in other operating expend -
iture, which was likewise connected with the 
immigration of refugees, continued at a some -
what slower pace (+12%, or just under €1 bil -
lion). The rise in personnel expenditure re -
mained moderate (+3%) in comparison.Significantly 
worse outcome for off- budget entities in Q3 but balanced annual result possible
Another roughly 
balanced budget possible in 2017Deterioration in 2016 Q3 amid 
strong expend-
iture growth
31 This notably does not include bad banks and entities 
keeping commercial accounts.
32 Under the Federal Government’s draft legislation of 
19 October 2016 on reforming responsibility for nuclear 
waste management, operators of nuclear power plants are 
to pay a basic fee of €17½ billion to a federal foundation 
(fund for financing nuclear waste disposal). Operators will 
be able to purchase an exemption from secondary liability 
by paying a surcharge totalling €6 billion. They will also 
have the option of paying in instalments subject to 4½% 
interest. However, the use of commercial double- entry 
bookkeeping makes it unlikely that the foundation will be 
included in this reporting group.
33 The short articles in the Bundesbank’s October 2016 
Monthly Report contain a more detailed analysis of the de -
velopment of local government finances in the second 
quarter of 2016. These are the most recent data available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
68

Thus far, the fiscal situation has generally been 
expected to worsen in the year as a whole. As 
recently as the Stability Council meeting in the 
early summer, state government was still ex -
pecting a core budget deficit of €9½ billion 
and thus a very clear deterioration on the pre -
vious year (surplus of just under €½ billion).34 
However, state government posted an im -
provement of €1 billion for the first three quar -
ters of 2016. Burdens on the revenue side are 
still likely because of considerable tax refunds 
due to court rulings, yet the Federal Cabinet 
has now decided to bring forward the final 
settlement of the lump- sum refugee payments 
agreed from 2016 onwards. This back payment 
of €2½ billion means that state government fi -
nances should at least not deteriorate in 2016 
as a whole. In the subsequent years, given 
marked increases in tax revenue,35 a likely fall in 
payments related to the immigration of refu -
gees and continued relief from low interest 
rates, state government as a whole can be ex -
pected to record ongoing surpluses.
In October, central government and the federal 
states agreed on key points for the reform of 
federal financial relations from 2020. The main 
focus is on abolishing the state government 
revenue- sharing scheme (narrowly defined) 
and thus putting an end to direct payments 
from financially strong to financially weak 
states (€9½ billion in 2015). Under these plans, 
differences in financial capacity will be evened 
out in future via distribution of the state gov -
ernment share in turnover tax revenue36 
– which is to be increased by €4 billion at the 
expense of central government – and via those 
supplementary central government grants 
which vary depending on a federal state’s fi -
nancial capacity and are due to rise from €4½ 
billion in 2019 to just over €7 billion (based on 
the regionalised tax estimate of May 2016). In 
addition, new supplementary central govern -
ment grants totalling €1½ billion are to be 
introduced for federal states containing munici -
palities with particularly weak financial capacity 
(eastern Germany and Saarland). On the other 
hand, special assistance for infrastructure re -construction in eastern Germany (€2 billion in 
2019) and the divestiture funds37 (€2½ billion), 
which are subject to separate rules, will both 
be discontinued. Under the new system, the 
existing transfers to address the higher cost of 
political administration in smaller states (€½ 
billion) and to offset burdens caused by long-  
term unemployment in eastern Germany (€¾ 
billion) will continue, and new central govern -
ment transfers for states receiving below-  
average central government funding to pro -
mote research (€¼ billion) will be introduced. 
Moreover, budgetary restructuring assistance 
totalling €800 million per year is to be paid to 
Bremen and Saarland from 2020 onwards – ap -
parently indefinitely.38 The new financial equal -
isation system will apply indefinitely unless, 
after 2030, central government or at least three 
federal states call for a reform.39Reimbursements 
of refugee- related costs mean no deteri-oration in 2016 as a whole, and surpluses still likely thereafter
Decision on 
the reform of central- state government financial rela-tions from 2020 to the detriment of central  government …
34 Whole- year data are derived from the results of the 
quarterly cash statistics. Unlike the monthly statistics, 
which showed a surplus of almost €3 billion, the year- end 
figures for 2015 apparently still included, most notably, 
transfers to off- budget entities which drove down the core 
budget balance.
35 The latest tax estimate, for example, puts growth in 
state government tax revenue for the 2017 to 2021 period 
at an average annual rate of 3½% and thus somewhat 
stronger than that in nominal GDP .
36 Two- thirds of the additional turnover tax funds will be 
granted as a fixed amount (fixed in nominal terms), the re -
maining third via a higher state government share (dynam -
ically adjusted). In future, the state government share in 
turnover tax will essentially still be distributed among the 
states according to population size, but additional sur -
charges and discounts are to be applied, amounting to 
63% of the deviation in financial capacity from the relevant 
reference value. When calculating this equalisation amount, 
the higher population weighting for the city- states and 
three sparsely populated non- city states will be maintained 
and the share of local government financial capacity to be 
taken into account will be raised from 64% to 75%.
37 Since the 2006 federal structure reform, the divestiture 
funds have been paid as compensation for tasks previously 
co- financed by central government, such as university con -
struction.
38 Under the existing arrangements, the two states are to 
receive temporary consolidation assistance totalling €560 
million up to 2019, half of which is funded by state govern -
ment as a whole. The precondition for this is that Bremen 
and Saarland meet their consolidation requirements. The 
intention was actually to achieve a structurally balanced 
budget from 2020 (the first year in which the debt brake 
will take full effect) and rule out any further need for spe -
cial assistance.
39 In that case, the existing arrangements will continue to 
apply for no more than five years.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
69

The decisions taken on the financial equalisa -
tion system are essentially in line with the pro -
posal made by the state governments in De -
cember 2015 and will entail a considerable fi -
nancial burden for central government (€9½ 
billion in 2020). The agreement should allow all 
states to comply with the debt brake from 
2020 onwards.40 However, a detailed assess -
ment of the plans is not possible at present as 
many details have yet to be negotiated. Al -
though the plans have the merit of simplifying 
the system to some degree, if the new, appar -
ently discretionary central government grants 
are factored in, the proposed new arrange -
ments are not significantly more transparent. 
They do not appear to substantially strengthen 
incentives for state governments to act on their 
own responsibility. The logic for maintaining 
and considerably increasing special assistance 
for Bremen and Saarland is not easy to follow 
unless this support is subject to a time limit and 
strict conditions, eg on debt repayment. All in 
all, the agreement represents a missed oppor -tunity to fundamentally reform Germany’s fis -
cal constitution. The option of extending state 
government tax- setting powers, eg to intro -
duce income tax surcharges and discounts, 
would have been worthy of consideration, also 
with a view to ensuring compliance with the 
debt brake.41
In addition, the agreement envisages a stronger 
role for the Stability Council, which is to moni -
tor central and state government compliance 
with the debt brake rules.42 Here, much will 
hinge on the detail of the Stability Council’s 
powers, eg regarding penalties for infringe -
ments. Another crucial element will be to ob -
tain a transparent and reproducible compara -
tive overview of central government and indi -
vidual state government budgetary develop -
ments and planning which factors in relevant 
burdens affecting off- budget entities and pos -
sibly also local governments. In addition to 
budget balances, this overview should show 
key revenue and expenditure categories (with 
separate recording of financial transactions, 
budgeted global spending cuts and global add -
… and does 
not strengthen states’ individual responsibilityPlans to strengthen role 
of the Stability 
Council …Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016646668707274
–4–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
40 According to the sample calculations (based on the re -
gionalised result of the May 2016 tax estimate) in the 
annex to the decision, all states will achieve a significant 
improvement of at least around €80 per capita once the 
existing temporary special assistance has been discon -
tinued, with the eastern German states – which will be par -
ticularly affected by this phase- out – faring noticeably bet -
ter. Thanks to the budgetary restructuring assistance, Saar -
land and, above all, Bremen ultimately see a much stronger 
increase of €490 and €730 per capita, respectively. See 
Annex to press release No 369 from the Federal Govern -
ment of Germany, 14 October 2016. The impression this 
gives is that the motivation behind the numerous transfers 
is not so much economic as the desire for a specific distri -
bution of funds.
41 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The reform of financial rela -
tions in the German federal system, Monthly Report, Sep -
tember 2014, pp 33-52; and German Council of Economic 
Experts, Annual Report 2016/ 17, November 2016, p 35f.
42 This monitoring is to be carried out using comparable 
data. It must also take account of European rules and pro -
cedures. This is welcome given that the aim of additionally 
safeguarding compliance with European budget rules by 
way of the national debt brake is enshrined in the German 
constitution. Should the European rules differ from the 
debt brake requirements, both limits would have to be 
met.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
70

itional revenue) and deviations of budget esti -
mates from the latest official tax estimate.43
Other important new rules concern the alloca -
tion of responsibilities within the federal system. 
On the one hand, the constitutional limit on 
central government investment grants to muni -
cipalities for education infrastructure is to be 
loosened. Additional investment may be re -
quired for schools, for example. However, pri -
mary responsibility for supporting municipalities 
with weak financial capacity lies with state gov -
ernment.44 In addition, this would again result in 
a starker mismatch between responsibility for 
tasks and their funding, which should funda -
mentally be viewed critically. On the other hand, 
there are plans for central government, which 
provides most of the funding for motorways, to 
manage them too (planning, construction and 
operation) and to set up a private infrastructure 
company for that purpose. This could potentially 
address inefficiencies in planning and construc -
tion associated with the current arrangements, 
in which orders are managed by state govern -
ment on behalf of central government. Even so, 
it should be ensured that central government’s 
debt brake is not circumvented by hiving this 
area off from the government accounts.
Social security funds45
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the third quarter of 2016, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of €3½ 
billion, which constituted a year- on- year deteri -
oration of €1 billion. Revenue was up by 4% on 
the year. This was due to a significant increase in 
contribution receipts (+4½%), which primarily 
reflected ongoing favourable pay and employ -
ment trends. At 5%, growth in expenditure was 
even stronger, however. This was mainly attrib -
utable to the very large mid- year pension in -
crease (4.25% in western Germany and 5.95% 
in eastern Germany),46 which was a key factor in 
the rise of nearly 5½% in outlays on pensions.In the first three quarters combined, the deficit 
was still slightly down on the year. In view of 
the large pension increase, however, expend -
iture is also set to grow strongly in the fourth 
quarter of 2016. The deficit for the year as a 
whole can thus be expected to be around €1 
billion higher than in the previous year (2015: 
€1½ billion), although this would be signifi -
cantly below the budgeted figure (€4½ billion), 
primarily because of better-  than-  expected rev -
enue growth. The reserve is again likely to ex -
ceed the standard upper limit of 1.5 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure at the end of 
the year, albeit only relatively moderately. 
Nonetheless, as the scheme is set to stay in def -
icit, also in the coming years, it is safe to as -
sume that the reserve will increasingly be below 
the upper limit from 2017 onwards. Current 
projections by the statutory pension insurance 
estimators assume that the contribution rate 
will remain unchanged up to and including 
2021, as the reserve is still unlikely to fall below 
the lower reserve limit of 0.2 times the scheme’s 
monthly expenditure throughout that period.
According to the latest calculations, the 
pension- to- earnings ratio in the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme after 45 contribution 
years47 will remain broadly stable up to the end 
of the decade, at around 48%. As the “baby … and end 
state responsibil-ity for motorway management are welcome, but specific arrangements important
Significant 
 deficit in Q3Stronger 
expenditure 
growth leads to 
a somewhat 
higher deficit for 
year as a whole
Pension reform 
being debated 
given demo-
graphic adjust -
ment pressures
43 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The role of the Stability 
Council, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 20-23. The In -
dependent Advisory Board of the Stability Council also 
pointed out the limited transparency regarding state and 
local government finances; see Independent Advisory 
Board of the Stability Council, Second statement, On com -
pliance with the upper limit for the structural general gov -
ernment deficit pursuant to Section 51 (2) of the Budgetary 
Principles Act (HGrG), 8 December 2014.
44 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Local government finances: 
development and selected aspects, Monthly Report, Octo -
ber 2016, pp 13-36.
45 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2016 was discussed in the September Monthly 
Report. These are the most recent data available.
46 The increase was driven up by a one- off factor, after 
being pushed down in mid-2015. See Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2016, p 72.
47 The pension- to- earnings ratio in the statutory pension 
insurance scheme is the ratio of the standard pension 
(given average earnings over 45 contribution years) to aver -
age pay (before tax and less social contributions in both 
cases).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
71

boomers” enter retirement from around the 
mid-2020s and life expectancy continues to 
rise, however, the pension- to- earnings ratio is 
set to fall in the years that follow. The long-  
term financial outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme and the possibility of adjust -
ing the contribution rate, pension- to- earnings 
ratio and statutory retirement age are currently 
being debated. Should the retirement age re -
main unchanged from 2030 onwards despite 
the fact that life expectancy is likely to go on 
rising, the phase in which pensions are drawn 
would grow increasingly longer while the num -
ber of working years would probably stay al -
most unchanged. This would place even greater upward pressure on the contribution 
rate and/or downward pressure on the pension- 
to- earnings ratio.48
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency (excluding the 
civil servants’ pension fund) posted a surplus of 
€1½ billion in the third quarter of 2016. Com -
pared with the same period last year, this con -
stituted a further improvement of just under 
€½ billion. Revenue rose by 3½%. The strong 
growth in contribution receipts (+4½%) was 
countered by a fall in revenue from insolvency 
benefit contributions (the level of which was 
cut at the beginning of the year). The increase 
in total expenditure, at ½%, was significantly 
lower. Given a further decline in unemploy -
ment (also among contribution payers), outlays 
on unemployment benefit I (insurance- related 
benefit) continued to fall (-2%). In addition, 
less was spent on subsidised partial retirement, 
which is being phased out. By contrast, spend -
ing on active labour market policy measures 
grew strongly again (+10½%), probably mainly 
as a result of further marked increases in train -
ing for refugees.
The positive trend is likely to continue in the 
final quarter of 2016. For the year as a whole, 
the surplus is set to increase significantly to €5 
billion (2015: just over €3½ billion). It would 
thus again be substantially above the budget 
estimate (just under €2 billion). On both the 
revenue and expenditure sides, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s finances are currently bene -
fiting from favourable labour market develop -
ments. Its high surpluses, which are likely to 
continue, are probably partly cyclical and, as 
such, should not prompt any action. To limit 
the additional rise in the agency’s reserves, the 
option of lowering the contribution rate should 
be considered.Higher surplus in 
Q3, too
Considerable 
surplus on  horizon for year 
as a wholeFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20167.07.58.08.59.09.5
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 1
48 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pen -
sion developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 68-
77.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2016  
72

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  ...........  58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in  
the national accounts  ..................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 9 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 0 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 1 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 2 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2016
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2015          Jan 8.6 3.8 3.6 3.8 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.1 − 0.05 0.06 1.1
         Feb 8.8 3.9 3.9 4.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.04 0.05 1.0         Mar 9.7 4.4 4.4 4.5 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.05 0.03 0.8
         Apr 10.2 4.7 5.1 4.8 0.9 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.0 4.8 4.8 4.9 1.3 0.5 − 2.9 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.4 5.0 4.7 4.8 1.3 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July 11.8 5.2 5.0 4.8 1.8 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.2 4.9 4.7 4.8 2.2 1.0 − 3.1 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.3 5.0 4.7 4.8 2.1 0.7 − 3.3 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct 11.2 5.1 5.0 4.8 2.2 0.9 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 10.7 5.0 4.8 4.8 2.6 1.1 − 3.3 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.4 5.0 4.5 4.8 2.2 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016          Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 4.8 2.7 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.2 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.1 1.2 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.2 5.5 5.1 4.9 3.0 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.1 4.6 4.9 3.2 1.2 − 2.7 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 3.5 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.7 4.9 5.0 4.9 3.8 1.5 − 2.3 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July 8.4 4.9 4.9 5.0 3.7 1.2 − 2.6 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.9 5.2 5.1 5.0 3.7 1.5 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.5 5.0 5.0 ... 3.8 1.9 − 2.6 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2015          Jan 
+ 6,312 + 15,779 − 35,862 + 62,079 − 100,890 + 3,918 − 2,117 + 1,147 1.1621 95.2 91.1
         Feb + 15,953 + 29,031 − 41,506 + 26,759 − 62,196 + 12,693 − 23,017 + 4,256 1.1350 93.3 89.5
         Mar + 32,952 + 29,793 + 41,165 + 102,685 − 70,593 + 10,641 − 1,859 + 291 1.0838 90.6 86.9
         Apr + 25,504 + 30,326 − 15,307 + 15,902 + 24,491 + 4,522 − 56,427 − 3,795 1.0779 89.7 86.1
         May + 6,356 + 26,749 + 55,395 + 5,738 + 40,733 + 4,805 + 5,793 − 1,674 1.1150 91.6 87.8         June + 36,074 + 34,828 + 44,085 − 5,032 + 33,162 − 5,590 + 18,451 + 3,093 1.1213 92.3 88.5
         July + 39,923 + 39,922 + 31,648 + 6,420 + 75,850 + 10,930 − 54,553 − 7,000 1.0996 91.3 87.5
         Aug + 20,771 + 19,646 + 13,981 + 10,125 + 22,492 − 6,890 − 13,135 + 1,390 1.1139 93.0 88.9         Sep + 35,448 + 30,446 + 49,286 − 326 + 22,583 − 4,878 + 23,625 + 8,282 1.1221 93.8 89.7
         Oct + 30,875 + 33,678 + 113,088 + 38,822 + 38,106 + 12,456 + 29,713 − 6,009 1.1235 93.6 89.6
         Nov + 31,600 + 32,741 − 34,466 − 73,196 + 18,036 + 21,414 − 3,182 + 2,462 1.0736 91.1 87.1         Dec + 41,889 + 31,781 + 78,332 + 55,550 + 67,201 + 21,746 − 74,291 + 8,126 1.0877 92.5 88.3
2016          Jan + 8,817 + 13,775 − 14,829 − 19,034 + 71,947 + 15,130 − 81,717 − 1,155 1.0860 93.6 89.1
         Feb + 14,689 + 27,479 − 17,213 + 42,830 + 22,276 + 13,163 − 96,543 + 1,061 1.1093 94.7 90.0         Mar + 36,813 + 39,212 + 36,743 + 16,858 − 1,393 − 961 + 21,176 + 1,064 1.1100 94.1 89.5
         Apr + 34,502 + 35,204 + 21,069 − 17,661 + 120,189 − 21,423 − 58,417 − 1,618 1.1339 94.8 90.1
         May + 17,207 + 32,803 + 10,921 + 12,367 + 4,817 − 13,991 + 4,619 + 3,109 1.1311 95.1 90.5         June + 36,138 + 39,431 + 60,044 − 20,174 + 49,230 − 12,366 + 42,658 + 695 1.1229 94.7 90.2
         July + 33,846 + 32,871 + 6,927 + 21,830 + 59,107 + 6,002 − 79,134 − 877 1.1069 94.9 p 90.4
         Aug + 23,576 + 24,048 + 26,141 + 45,813 + 34,009 − 2,598 − 52,881 + 1,799 1.1212 95.2 p 90.6         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1212 95.4 p 90.7
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1026 95.5 p 90.8
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2013 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 1.4 − 0.8 0.6 − 3.2 1.1 − 1.7 2.9
2014 1.2 1.6 1.6 2.8 − 0.7 0.6 0.4 8.5 0.1 2.12015 2.0 1.5 1.7 1.4 0.2 1.3 − 0.2 26.3 0.7 2.7
2015          Q2 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.9 0.6 1.2 0.6 24.3 0.9 2.8
         Q3 2.0 1.3 1.8 1.9 − 0.1 1.1 − 2.3 24.4 0.6 3.5         Q4 2.0 1.6 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.4 0.9 28.4 1.0 2.7
2016          Q1 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.5 0.8 1.5 − 0.8 3.9 0.8 2.1
         Q2 1.6 1.3 3.1 0.8 1.1 1.9 − 0.4 4.1 1.0 2.0         Q3 1.6 ... 1.5 ... ... 1.0 1.2 ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2013 − 0.7 1.0 0.2 4.2 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 3.2 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 0.72014 0.9 0.9 1.3 4.3 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.92015 2.0 − 0.1 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 1.6 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.6
2015          Q2 1.9 − 1.7 1.6 − 1.7 − 1.1 1.7 − 2.8 26.8 1.1 5.7
         Q3 2.5 0.1 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.1 1.2 1.5 38.5 2.1 3.8         Q4 1.8 1.3 − 0.3 − 5.5 0.0 2.1 2.6 36.6 1.3 3.0
2016          Q1 1.3 4.7 1.3 − 2.4 − 0.6 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.2 1.7 3.7
         Q2 1.0 3.5 0.6 − 1.8 2.4 0.4 5.0 0.7 0.0 4.4         Q3
e 0.9 ... p 0.6 3.3 2.1 − 0.4 1.7 p − 1.0 1.6 1.4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.22015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.52016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2015          Q3 81.2 80.0 84.0 72.7 79.0 82.9 63.5 − 75.5 71.4
         Q4 81.6 79.2 84.6 71.0 80.1 83.4 64.2 − 75.9 71.0
2016          Q1 81.9 80.0 85.0 72.5 79.5 82.6 65.5 − 77.1 72.3
         Q2 81.5 79.3 84.6 73.8 78.0 82.8 67.8 − 76.5 73.0         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.8 67.8 − 76.0 71.8         Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.4 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2013 12.0 8.4 5.2 8.6 8.2 10.3 27.5 13.1 12.1 11.92014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.82015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.9
2016          May 10.1 8.2 4.3 6.6 8.9 9.9 23.6 8.3 11.5 9.5
         June 10.1 8.3 4.2 7.0 8.9 10.0 23.4 8.4 11.6 9.6
         July 10.0 8.2 4.2 7.0 8.8 10.3 23.3 8.3 11.5 9.5
         Aug 10.0 8.2 4.2 7.6 8.7 10.5 23.4 8.2 11.5 9.3         Sep 10.0 8.0 4.0 ... 8.6 10.2 ... 7.9 11.7 9.2
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7.7 ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2013 1.4 1.2 1.6 3.2 2.2 1.0 − 0.9 0.5 1.2 0.0
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016          May − 0.1 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.8         June 0.1 1.8 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.6
         July 0.2 2.0 0.4 0.8 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.1 − 0.2 0.1
         Aug 0.2 2.0 0.3 1.1 0.5 0.4 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1         Sep 0.4 1.8 0.5 1.7 0.5 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.1 0.5
         Oct 0.5 1.9 0.7 1.0 0.6 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 1.1
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2013 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 13.2 − 5.7 − 2.7 − 0.9
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.2 − 4.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 1.6
2015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.7 0.1 − 2.8 − 3.5 − 7.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.3
 
General government debt 8
 
2013 91.3 105.4 77.5 10.2 56.5 92.3 177.4 119.5 129.0 39.0
2014 92.0 106.5 74.9 10.7 60.2 95.3 179.7 105.2 131.9 40.7
2015 90.4 105.8 71.2 10.1 63.6 96.2 177.4 78.6 132.3 36.3
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. tions. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January,
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual April, July and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
justed data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day varia- calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2016
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.5 4.3 4.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 1.5 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 5.9 2013
3.5 4.1 3.5 1.4 0.6 0.9 2.6 3.1 1.4 − 2.5 20141.8 4.8 6.1 2.0 1.0 1.6 3.8 2.3 3.2 1.6 2015
1.6 4.8 6.3 1.9 0.5 1.5 3.6 2.0 3.2 1.4 2015          Q2
1.8 1.7 6.0 2.0 1.4 1.7 3.9 2.0 3.5 2.3          Q3
2.1 3.2 6.3 1.4 1.1 1.6 4.6 2.8 3.3 2.4          Q4
2.4 3.1 5.3 1.5 1.6 1.0 3.4 2.3 3.5 2.6 2016          Q1
1.9 4.3 3.0 2.3 1.2 1.1 3.8 2.7 3.6 2.9          Q2
1.7 ... ... 2.4 1.3 ... 3.0 ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
3.2 − 3.0 − 5.3 0.5 0.8 0.5 3.8 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 13.5 20130.3 4.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 0.9 1.8 8.6 1.7 1.3 − 0.7 20144.5 1.1 6.3 − 3.4 1.8 1.7 7.0 5.4 3.4 3.4 2015
4.5 1.4 8.3 − 4.8 0.6 1.9 5.0 5.6 3.2 2.6 2015          Q2
4.0 0.6 7.3 − 5.4 2.8 2.4 6.2 5.4 4.2 4.5          Q3
5.3 1.2 5.1 − 4.5 2.3 2.2 5.1 3.7 4.8 6.2          Q4
5.7 1.5 − 5.1 − 2.9 1.4 0.9 2.3 5.7 3.0 9.9 2016          Q1
− 0.9 − 0.6 − 4.5 2.7 2.5 0.8 6.2 5.7 1.4 8.4          Q2
2.5
p − 0.8 p − 2.9 p 3.0 ... 0.9 1.9 p 7.0 0.9 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 201474.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
73.6 69.0 77.2 82.2 84.4 80.1 86.2 83.6 77.6 56.4 2015          Q3
74.3 72.2 77.9 82.2 83.4 80.4 83.4 82.3 78.1 61.1          Q4
75.9 72.4 77.8 81.4 85.0 80.0 85.4 83.2 79.0 56.9 2016          Q1
76.1 76.1 78.9 81.7 84.0 80.8 83.0 83.1 77.8 63.9          Q2
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7          Q3
76.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
11.8 5.9 6.4 7.3 5.4 16.4 14.2 10.1 26.1 15.9 201310.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.4 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 2015
8.2 6.2 4.8 6.3 6.1 11.2 9.9 8.0 20.1 12.4 2016          May
8.4 6.2 4.9 6.1 6.1 11.0 9.7 8.0 19.9 12.2          June
8.8 6.2 4.8 6.0 6.1 10.9 9.6 7.8 19.6 12.1          July
8.6 6.2 4.8 5.8 6.2 10.9 9.5 7.8 19.4 12.1          Aug 
8.4 6.3 4.7 5.7 6.3 10.8 9.4 7.7 19.3 12.0          Sep 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Oct 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
1.2 1.7 1.0 2.6 2.1 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.5 0.4 20130.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.2 − 0.6 1.0 − 0.2 0.6 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 2016          May0.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.2 0.6 0.7 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.9 − 2.0          June
0.0 − 0.4 0.9 − 0.6 0.6 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4          July
0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.1 0.6 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.6          Aug 
0.6 0.3 0.9 − 0.1 1.1 0.7 − 0.5 0.2 0.0 − 0.4          Sep 
0.7 0.7 0.5 0.3 1.4 1.1 − 0.3 0.7 0.5 − 1.0          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 2.6 1.0 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 15.0 − 7.0 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 1.5 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.0 − 6.0 − 8.8 2014− 0.2 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 5.1 − 1.1 2015
 
General government debt 8
 
38.7 23.5 68.4 67.7 81.3 129.0 54.7 71.0 95.4 102.2 201340.5 22.7 67.0 67.9 84.4 130.6 53.6 80.9 100.4 107.1 201442.7 22.1 64.0 65.1 85.5 129.0 52.5 83.1 99.8 107.5 2015
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. latest data publication under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat).
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro-area aggregate: Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank
European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          Feb 11.3 21.5 2.1 − 10.2 − 0.3 − 23.3 − 18.1 5.2 − 14.6 − 8.8 − 1.4 − 9.8 5.3
         Mar 75.3 43.0 1.0 32.3 29.1 10.6 − 30.2 − 40.9 − 20.5 − 12.4 − 1.3 − 26.2 19.4
         Apr 54.4 17.6 16.8 36.8 32.5 − 57.6 38.4 95.9 − 47.5 − 18.8 − 2.1 − 15.5 − 11.0
         May 27.4 11.0 − 0.8 16.4 31.2 25.2 − 55.0 − 80.2 − 21.3 − 8.3 − 1.7 − 23.5 12.2         June 6.7 − 16.6 − 28.1 23.2 24.5 56.0 − 87.7 − 143.7 − 21.5 − 13.8 − 1.2 − 12.9 6.5
         July 61.8 58.0 50.8 3.7 4.0 − 65.0 − 0.3 64.7 − 5.3 10.4 − 0.9 − 21.4 6.6
         Aug 15.3 − 23.6 7.0 38.8 47.7 − 23.3 10.5 33.8 − 10.0 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 8.5 2.4         Sep 26.4 − 13.1 − 8.7 39.4 45.8 − 7.7 − 94.8 − 87.0 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 26.1 9.3
         Oct 24.8 2.6 − 15.4 22.2 18.6 9.5 22.6 13.1 − 39.9 − 25.3 − 1.1 − 17.3 3.8
         Nov 87.2 48.1 2.0 39.1 47.1 3.5 − 15.3 − 18.9 − 6.5 − 13.5 − 1.7 − 4.8 13.5         Dec − 113.8 − 75.0 − 2.2 − 38.8 − 33.8 − 10.5 − 196.1 − 185.6 − 8.4 4.1 − 0.6 − 26.5 14.6
2016          Jan 157.8 47.6 5.3 110.2 95.1 − 39.8 127.3 167.1 − 28.2 − 8.8 − 0.4 − 19.1 0.1
         Feb 87.9 46.6 − 0.0 41.2 50.1 − 81.5 32.0 113.6 − 15.4 12.1 − 1.2 − 24.7 − 1.5         Mar 60.4 21.6 − 3.1 38.7 39.5 21.4 − 85.9 − 107.3 − 16.6 − 6.3 − 0.9 0.1 − 9.5
         Apr 92.6 44.4 25.2 48.2 43.0 − 61.5 118.7 180.2 − 4.1 − 4.6 − 1.3 − 0.7 2.5
         May 70.2 22.9 13.1 47.2 53.5 − 0.1 62.6 62.7 0.2 − 5.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 6.2         June 51.2 5.4 − 5.5 45.7 57.3 23.5 − 31.4 − 54.9 − 12.1 − 21.0 − 0.8 − 11.6 21.2
         July 51.9 28.6 14.0 23.3 22.4 − 87.0 60.0 147.1 − 27.7 − 7.5 − 0.6 − 23.9 4.3
         Aug 14.4 16.0 27.6 − 1.5 7.1 − 36.5 8.1 44.6 0.7 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 5.5         Sep 39.4 27.5 − 7.3 12.0 16.1 − 24.8 − 71.1 − 46.3 − 27.3 − 12.6 − 0.7 − 19.2 5.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          Feb 9.4 4.6 − 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.9 − 11.1 − 13.9 1.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.3 2.3
         Mar 15.2 9.7 8.4 5.6 7.2 − 12.1 − 19.0 − 6.9 − 15.3 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 9.1 − 0.1
         Apr 17.3 3.3 0.7 14.0 4.9 7.7 33.9 26.2 − 13.2 − 10.0 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4
         May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4         June − 0.9 − 2.7 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.2 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 1.8 3.7
         July 31.5 22.9 21.3 8.6 6.4 − 27.6 − 8.7 19.0 12.5 16.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 20.7 − 0.9 19.9 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0         Sep 11.5 4.1 − 2.6 7.3 8.7 15.9 − 2.0 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.4 − 0.4
         Oct 3.4 − 3.8 − 9.4 7.1 3.5 − 8.5 − 13.1 − 4.6 − 10.7 − 9.0 − 1.3 0.7 − 1.1
         Nov 27.3 21.3 7.8 6.0 10.6 − 13.0 − 35.7 − 22.7 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 4.1         Dec − 19.9 − 11.6 − 5.8 − 8.2 − 2.8 5.2 − 52.1 − 57.3 − 24.0 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.1 2.9
2016          Jan 19.7 5.7 − 3.0 14.0 10.4 − 21.1 24.7 45.8 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.8 − 1.2
         Feb 15.6 10.9 − 4.2 4.7 4.8 − 29.2 7.3 36.5 − 11.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 7.7 − 1.0         Mar 12.3 4.4 0.6 7.8 8.2 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 0.4
         Apr 22.8 12.3 0.7 10.6 5.9 − 40.1 13.5 53.7 − 2.3 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.7 0.4
         May 22.0 16.2 4.9 5.8 9.1 1.7 1.2 − 0.5 4.8 0.8 − 1.0 5.0 − 0.0         June 2.5 1.7 0.5 0.8 6.5 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 5.7 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.3 3.8
         July 25.7 13.2 1.4 12.5 9.5 − 18.5 7.0 25.5 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.1 − 3.7
         Aug 9.0 8.8 1.4 0.2 2.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.8 4.0 − 1.6         Sep 20.8 12.9 3.2 7.9 9.1 − 38.3 − 11.1 27.2 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.1 − 2.9
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 28.6 − 15.4 − 46.5 21.8 28.7 4.1 24.6 − 8.5 1.6 38.1 8.7 2.6 2015          Feb 
22.6 53.2 − 30.8 53.7 51.2 7.7 43.4 − 5.4 7.9 1.7 − 10.0 − 6.0          Mar 
− 43.3 − 25.4 − 113.0 77.8 91.5 8.8 82.7 − 15.5 1.8 − 17.5 21.9 6.3          Apr 
44.1 − 0.4 − 30.2 64.2 94.7 6.7 88.0 − 35.2 4.8 − 5.9 − 9.1 − 6.8          May
14.0 64.9 − 5.2 38.3 63.8 10.7 53.1 − 25.5 0.0 − 20.1 − 17.1 8.2          June
− 42.3 − 29.4 − 73.8 42.7 41.8 14.2 27.6 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 24.4 − 12.1          July− 14.8 1.4 − 15.4 11.5 13.3 − 1.9 15.2 − 5.4 3.6 0.7 11.0 − 4.5          Aug 
28.7 31.6 − − 20.9 6.3 23.1 − 2.8 25.9 − 8.4 − 8.5 − 7.7 − 15.7 − 0.8          Sep 
33.0 − 62.9 − 104.0 67.9 82.8 2.2 80.6 − 10.1 − 4.8 − 6.1 21.8 1.1          Oct 
− 17.2 61.1 − 53.4 54.6 58.7 5.7 53.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 4.0 15.1 1.0          Nov 
− 72.3 − 43.4 − − 0.2 53.9 45.2 14.4 30.8 7.8 0.9 − 31.1 − 23.9 − 10.8          Dec 
87.7 − 17.8 − 76.4 37.3 36.2 − 11.4 47.6 − 9.3 10.4 22.5 17.6 8.0 2016          Jan 
− 14.1 4.0 − 31.7 14.5 21.2 1.3 19.9 − 11.9 5.2 43.2 − 1.2 6.8          Feb 
31.8 28.8 − 37.7 55.1 43.0 3.5 39.5 9.8 2.3 − 5.6 − 12.2 1.1          Mar 
− 35.9 − 30.2 − 101.4 75.1 92.5 4.7 87.8 − 17.1 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 3.5          Apr 
20.1 16.4 − 33.4 35.0 47.5 2.3 45.2 − 20.4 7.9 − 9.5 0.7 − 3.0          May60.5 7.9 − 18.4 30.6 34.6 8.5 26.0 − 2.6 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.8 6.3          June
− 29.0 − 75.1 − 96.7 73.2 66.8 9.8 57.0 5.8 0.5 − 22.6 15.5 5.5          July− 54.7 41.6 − − 9.8 − 10.2 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 5.6 0.7 2.4 3.1 − 2.6          Aug 
2.8 41.6 − − 2.4 20.1 24.9 2.2 22.7 1.8 − 6.5 − 4.8 − 6.2 − 8.3          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 6.7 − 11.4 2.1 0.8 28.6 23.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.0 2.3 2015          Feb 
2.9 10.3 2.3 2.2 5.2 5.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 0.8          Mar 
− 2.7 5.0 2.2 1.8 35.9 29.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 3.8 − 0.1 4.1          Apr 
1.4 − 4.8 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1          May
2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
− 3.2 − 18.6 4.7 3.3 13.1 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 1.2 0.0 − 0.6          July− 0.3 − 13.1 2.4 − 0.5 12.1 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2          Aug 
1.8 16.8 2.8 − 0.8 20.5 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.8          Sep 
− 0.6 − 25.3 3.0 − 0.3 31.4 30.7 − 3.8 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 3.7          Oct − 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1          Nov 
10.3 15.2 2.6 2.3 − 16.2 − 21.3 6.3 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.8 − 24.2 − 0.7 − 1.9 24.7 27.8 − 5.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.9 2016          Jan 
7.1 − 24.1 0.6 0.4 15.3 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.6 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.6 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4          June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6          July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4          Aug 8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 5.9 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.7          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          Aug 25,538.7 16,141.2 12,650.4 10,537.6 1,310.1 802.7 3,490.8 1,099.5 2,391.3 4,877.2 4,520.3
         Sep 25,682.8 16,184.8 12,682.5 10,580.6 1,297.7 804.2 3,502.3 1,099.2 2,403.2 4,988.6 4,509.4
         Oct 25,677.5 16,174.0 12,646.8 10,556.0 1,290.2 800.5 3,527.2 1,106.5 2,420.7 4,969.1 4,534.4
         Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1         Dec 25,873.2 16,227.8 12,671.7 10,633.1 1,271.8 766.8 3,556.1 1,132.4 2,423.6 4,972.7 4,672.7
2015          Jan 26,939.0 16,401.5 12,757.6 10,707.2 1,274.4 775.9 3,644.0 1,158.9 2,485.0 5,407.2 5,130.2
         Feb 26,880.5 16,426.6 12,787.1 10,726.6 1,276.5 784.0 3,639.5 1,144.2 2,495.2 5,402.2 5,051.7
         Mar 27,260.2 16,520.0 12,840.1 10,772.7 1,275.9 791.4 3,679.9 1,148.8 2,531.1 5,476.5 5,263.8
         Apr 26,929.5 16,545.2 12,839.5 10,757.4 1,274.8 807.3 3,705.7 1,152.9 2,552.8 5,415.1 4,969.2
         May 26,769.2 16,559.4 12,850.2 10,769.1 1,276.3 804.8 3,709.1 1,138.4 2,570.8 5,410.3 4,799.6
         June 26,207.9 16,518.2 12,811.4 10,766.9 1,254.0 790.5 3,706.8 1,136.8 2,570.0 5,269.8 4,420.0
         July 26,434.1 16,604.6 12,875.6 10,773.7 1,300.2 801.7 3,729.0 1,135.4 2,593.7 5,290.5 4,539.0
         Aug 26,280.8 16,580.6 12,822.2 10,732.6 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,241.9 4,458.3
         Sep 26,222.5 16,606.0 12,794.3 10,719.9 1,303.1 771.4 3,811.7 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,158.7 4,457.7
         Oct 26,416.5 16,658.0 12,814.5 10,743.8 1,288.2 782.6 3,843.5 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,245.1 4,513.3
         Nov 26,732.3 16,772.7 12,884.5 10,797.6 1,295.5 791.3 3,888.2 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,308.0 4,651.6
         Dec 25,927.7 16,619.0 12,780.6 10,705.3 1,296.1 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.3 2,728.2 5,023.5 4,285.1
2016          Jan 26,491.5 16,768.8 12,810.6 10,737.0 1,306.1 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,137.0 4,585.7
         Feb 26,827.0 16,855.5 12,852.4 10,781.9 1,312.6 757.8 4,003.1 1,118.6 2,884.5 5,215.6 4,755.9
         Mar 26,482.8 16,903.8 12,856.7 10,788.1 1,314.3 754.4 4,047.1 1,117.9 2,929.3 5,018.8 4,560.2
         Apr 26,627.5 16,981.4 12,888.2 10,794.1 1,325.5 768.6 4,093.3 1,128.0 2,965.3 5,161.8 4,484.3
         May 26,878.8 17,068.2 12,917.0 10,808.2 1,341.1 767.7 4,151.2 1,121.7 3,029.5 5,258.1 4,552.5
         June 27,143.8 17,114.8 12,904.3 10,805.9 1,345.8 752.6 4,210.5 1,110.6 3,099.9 5,261.0 4,768.0
         July 27,211.2 17,167.5 12,926.3 10,810.5 1,360.7 755.2 4,241.1 1,111.5 3,129.6 5,313.8 4,730.0
         Aug 27,112.5 17,178.3 12,939.0 10,794.6 1,366.2 778.2 4,239.3 1,102.8 3,136.4 5,309.1 4,625.0
         Sep 26,967.1 17,150.0 12,894.7 10,757.5 1,360.7 776.5 4,255.3 1,098.8 3,156.5 5,245.5 4,571.6
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          Aug 5,843.8 3,675.7 2,915.6 2,520.4 142.6 252.7 760.1 360.4 399.7 1,179.0 989.0
         Sep 5,843.6 3,688.5 2,924.1 2,526.7 144.0 253.5 764.4 359.8 404.6 1,182.8 972.4
         Oct 5,864.9 3,695.6 2,922.0 2,528.3 141.7 251.9 773.6 366.9 406.8 1,192.8 976.5
         Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.4 3,696.4 2,931.4 2,527.7 143.6 260.1 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.3 3,728.3 2,948.0 2,536.5 142.2 269.2 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.3 3,739.4 2,953.8 2,542.4 142.3 269.1 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.2 3,758.2 2,967.1 2,546.4 144.1 276.5 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,202.9 3,772.6 2,966.9 2,546.0 135.6 285.3 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.5 3,770.8 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.7 3,767.1 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.3 3,803.0 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.6 3,813.0 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 816.9 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,041.7 3,824.0 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 827.9 364.5 463.4 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.6 3,832.0 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.4 368.4 469.0 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.5 3,864.8 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.3 363.9 481.3 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,924.8 3,839.8 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.3 358.3 477.9 1,166.4 918.6
2016          Jan 6,057.5 3,858.0 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.1 362.0 491.2 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.1 3,874.6 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.6 362.0 498.6 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.3 3,885.2 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.6 361.6 508.0 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,049.9 3,908.1 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 881.8 366.1 515.7 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,090.9 3,934.4 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.4 362.8 528.6 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,220.9 3,939.5 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.0 357.3 539.7 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.3 3,968.2 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 913.9 360.3 553.6 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.7 3,977.6 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 914.8 358.5 556.4 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep 6,201.2 4,001.4 3,074.9 2,655.3 157.6 262.0 926.5 357.2 569.3 1,214.9 984.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
946.8 11,015.1 10,414.4 10,454.5 4,478.1 1,124.0 427.2 2,241.3 2,097.5 86.3 2014          Aug 
947.0 11,017.4 10,417.6 10,466.0 4,522.5 1,115.0 422.6 2,227.3 2,091.9 86.7          Sep 
950.6 11,004.8 10,402.5 10,465.5 4,557.8 1,109.4 415.2 2,212.0 2,084.5 86.5          Oct 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1          Nov 
980.6 11,155.3 10,549.3 10,627.7 4,728.8 1,089.3 399.5 2,217.4 2,105.6 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,312.2 10,597.4 10,701.8 4,827.2 1,073.8 389.0 2,213.3 2,109.9 88.4 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,295.5 10,605.0 10,704.1 4,847.7 1,039.2 389.0 2,230.9 2,110.1 87.2          Feb 
990.9 11,362.5 10,639.0 10,750.7 4,900.1 1,040.0 384.7 2,221.9 2,118.1 85.9          Mar 
999.8 11,356.7 10,684.2 10,784.8 4,972.1 1,030.6 378.6 2,200.2 2,119.3 83.9          Apr 
1,006.4 11,453.0 10,726.9 10,824.8 5,049.8 1,001.7 374.0 2,192.9 2,123.9 82.3          May
1,017.1 11,472.1 10,727.2 10,828.4 5,096.7 977.6 370.2 2,178.6 2,124.1 81.2          June
1,031.3 11,470.9 10,759.7 10,875.8 5,134.9 983.3 367.9 2,187.5 2,121.8 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,455.3 10,756.8 10,867.7 5,137.0 981.6 362.4 2,183.4 2,124.2 79.1          Aug 
1,026.5 11,489.3 10,772.2 10,875.0 5,162.4 977.2 358.8 2,179.5 2,118.7 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,577.7 10,817.5 10,927.6 5,244.4 973.5 356.8 2,161.0 2,114.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,602.0 10,851.3 10,947.8 5,288.4 971.2 350.3 2,150.5 2,111.6 75.7          Nov 
1,048.9 11,562.3 10,889.6 10,998.3 5,324.9 981.8 349.1 2,152.3 2,115.0 75.2          Dec 
1,037.4 11,686.0 10,926.9 11,027.4 5,364.3 973.3 348.8 2,142.8 2,123.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.7 11,695.4 10,946.4 11,050.3 5,383.7 968.1 344.9 2,154.4 2,126.1 73.1          Feb 
1,042.2 11,760.3 10,990.8 11,081.1 5,418.0 973.4 343.0 2,145.6 2,128.8 72.3          Mar 
1,046.9 11,788.3 11,051.0 11,145.6 5,503.2 964.0 339.9 2,139.5 2,128.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.2 11,839.2 11,078.5 11,164.9 5,544.0 946.3 333.9 2,134.6 2,136.0 70.0          May
1,057.7 11,900.5 11,073.0 11,160.7 5,563.8 946.0 331.7 2,114.7 2,135.1 69.3          June
1,067.5 11,922.5 11,126.7 11,206.6 5,615.0 953.8 327.0 2,107.1 2,134.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,855.9 11,110.3 11,193.3 5,611.0 954.2 321.2 2,102.8 2,136.1 68.1          Aug 
1,066.5 11,791.3 11,034.9 11,132.9 5,636.8 960.4 315.2 2,021.9 2,131.4 67.3          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
222.5 3,183.4 3,120.4 2,992.8 1,467.7 199.8 31.3 688.2 528.0 77.7 2014          Aug 
222.8 3,187.6 3,124.3 2,997.3 1,479.1 191.5 32.7 687.6 528.2 78.2          Sep 
223.6 3,199.5 3,133.6 3,020.0 1,507.0 189.9 32.5 684.8 527.9 78.1          Oct 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 
244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 
245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of 
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          Aug 246.4 314.2 138.0 100.3 9.3 45.0 16.4 5.2 305.3 296.2 412.7 2,521.4 1,888.8
         Sep 240.6 310.8 132.1 102.9 9.1 45.2 16.4 5.1 287.6 272.5 414.4 2,526.9 1,878.0
         Oct 236.2 303.1 133.1 95.0 9.3 45.1 15.5 5.1 313.2 302.7 428.9 2,489.0 1,839.8
         Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9         Dec 216.7 310.9 138.0 100.5 11.5 39.5 16.4 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.2 2,479.0 1,820.8
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 134.9 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.8 5.4 321.6 311.4 434.3 2,505.0 1,797.9
         Feb 272.1 319.3 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.3 5.3 359.7 349.6 443.1 2,502.5 1,783.8         Mar 294.7 317.1 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 20.1 5.3 361.8 355.6 433.1 2,493.0 1,762.7
         Apr 251.4 320.6 144.8 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.4 5.1 344.0 336.3 455.0 2,462.0 1,743.3
         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 338.3 331.7 445.9 2,443.7 1,719.2         June 309.5 334.1 157.1 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 318.0 314.5 428.8 2,431.8 1,704.8
         July 267.3 327.8 148.2 100.3 13.4 38.8 22.3 4.9 316.3 313.1 453.2 2,404.1 1,681.3
         Aug 252.6 335.1 154.3 100.4 13.4 38.8 23.4 4.8 316.7 311.6 451.7 2,373.3 1,671.8         Sep 281.7 332.7 152.4 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 309.0 301.4 445.9 2,342.9 1,659.8
         Oct 316.6 333.5 156.3 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 303.1 293.6 467.6 2,336.2 1,639.5
         Nov 299.4 354.9 167.1 108.5 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 307.5 302.3 482.7 2,365.7 1,645.2         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 276.1 274.2 458.9 2,317.9 1,633.0
2016          Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 298.5 296.9 475.9 2,299.3 1,613.5
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 341.8 337.9 474.6 2,284.9 1,595.4         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 335.7 332.5 462.8 2,263.8 1,588.8
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 480.2 2,268.7 1,585.0
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 480.9 2,275.3 1,572.7         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 471.5 2,271.9 1,566.0
         July 349.2 366.6 174.0 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 487.0 2,248.0 1,540.7
         Aug 294.6 368.0 175.6 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 490.2 2,242.5 1,531.1         Sep 297.4 360.9 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 296.2 295.5 484.0 2,214.4 1,513.2
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          Aug 12.4 178.2 47.8 82.1 6.0 38.8 2.8 0.6 10.1 9.0 3.4 541.2 289.6
         Sep 13.9 176.4 43.8 84.6 5.8 38.8 2.7 0.6 7.4 5.8 3.4 546.0 285.7
         Oct 12.6 166.8 41.6 77.1 5.8 38.9 2.8 0.6 9.1 8.4 3.4 549.3 287.7
         Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016          Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.3 515.6 240.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2016
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
41.0 34.2 2,446.2 3,451.1 2,493.6 − 59.1 4,451.8 − 5,648.2 9,445.8 10,067.0 7,317.6 108.3 2014          Aug 
38.7 33.1 2,455.2 3,577.8 2,508.5 − 67.6 4,470.9 − 5,688.1 9,468.9 10,079.0 7,327.9 109.4          Sep 
30.8 36.9 2,421.3 3,563.2 2,491.2 − 83.4 4,520.1 − 5,726.9 9,478.2 10,104.8 7,261.3 107.8          Oct 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3          Nov 
61.6 42.8 2,374.7 3,561.6 2,459.6 − 45.1 4,570.9 − 5,938.9 9,682.5 10,313.4 7,183.3 112.3          Dec 
58.6 42.3 2,404.1 3,918.8 2,555.0 − 99.2 5,012.3 − 6,030.9 9,754.1 10,405.4 7,306.2 110.6 2015          Jan 
59.2 43.3 2,400.1 3,946.4 2,547.9 − 115.4 4,917.5 − 6,061.3 9,752.3 10,427.4 7,311.4 109.1          Feb 
53.4 44.2 2,395.3 3,978.1 2,577.1 − 65.3 5,129.0 − 6,119.8 9,816.0 10,469.8 7,324.7 109.5          Mar 
57.0 45.8 2,359.2 4,005.8 2,544.2 − 72.9 4,835.0 − 6,203.6 9,883.9 10,571.4 7,232.3 107.6          Apr 
54.0 42.2 2,347.5 3,963.5 2,552.5 − 67.3 4,633.2 − 6,302.5 9,953.7 10,607.6 7,220.2 110.0          May
58.6 44.7 2,328.5 3,794.9 2,534.5 − 61.0 4,271.9 − 6,361.5 9,986.3 10,605.9 7,168.7 112.4          June
46.0 45.1 2,313.0 3,892.3 2,533.6 − 68.1 4,400.5 − 6,407.3 10,038.0 10,688.7 7,158.2 114.8          July
35.6 47.3 2,290.3 3,887.3 2,532.2 − 67.5 4,302.4 − 6,415.1 10,042.3 10,680.6 7,128.5 116.3          Aug 
32.7 46.4 2,263.8 3,812.6 2,536.2 − 53.3 4,313.2 − 6,437.1 10,049.4 10,667.3 7,102.1 117.3          Sep 
32.4 47.0 2,256.8 3,865.9 2,562.3 − 75.9 4,350.7 − 6,524.1 10,122.9 10,776.3 7,101.8 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,285.4 3,920.2 2,567.1 − 77.3 4,529.8 − 6,591.2 10,188.4 10,840.9 7,123.1 121.9          Nov 
22.8 47.8 2,247.2 3,669.0 2,551.6 − 48.0 4,091.0 − 6,630.6 10,234.9 10,834.3 7,070.7 123.0          Dec 
29.2 50.8 2,219.3 3,809.3 2,575.8 − 73.1 4,382.5 − 6,664.9 10,269.9 10,908.8 7,057.1 123.6 2016          Jan 
33.5 54.3 2,197.1 3,921.2 2,612.7 − 92.1 4,549.9 − 6,686.8 10,283.4 10,940.6 7,082.3 122.8          Feb 
37.1 51.6 2,175.1 3,739.0 2,595.1 − 90.6 4,374.6 − 6,720.4 10,326.9 10,966.8 7,033.8 121.3          Mar 
42.2 49.9 2,176.6 3,926.4 2,606.9 − 96.5 4,278.7 − 6,814.0 10,403.1 11,066.2 7,040.7 122.7          Apr 
39.6 49.0 2,186.7 4,032.5 2,603.4 − 78.2 4,357.7 − 6,866.2 10,444.7 11,105.8 7,042.7 126.6          May
49.7 47.1 2,175.1 3,954.5 2,667.5 − 57.4 4,556.3 − 6,900.0 10,475.1 11,126.3 7,075.1 127.7          June
54.8 48.0 2,145.3 4,090.2 2,680.7 − 101.8 4,518.4 − 6,967.4 10,547.8 11,223.0 7,050.5 131.5          July
54.1 46.3 2,142.2 4,129.4 2,678.2 − 82.1 4,433.1 − 6,961.5 10,537.0 11,212.9 7,040.3 131.4          Aug 
47.4 45.1 2,121.8 4,090.3 2,698.5 − 61.8 4,387.8 − 6,985.3 10,554.1 11,208.0 6,958.9 132.3          Sep 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
10.3 7.4 523.5 628.4 531.3 − 607.0 1,553.1 254.8 1,515.6 2,365.6 2,396.8 1,860.1 − 2014          Aug 
11.3 7.4 527.4 641.5 532.3 − 621.5 1,546.9 258.7 1,522.9 2,368.4 2,397.9 1,865.0 −          Sep 
11.3 7.8 530.2 636.4 529.7 − 620.1 1,557.6 261.8 1,548.6 2,384.5 2,416.2 1,862.2 −          Oct 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 −          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May
23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 
26.1 12.1 477.4 852.4 593.6 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,762.9 1,796.7 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors
Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2014          Apr 518.9 105.4 534.6 0.7 227.5 29.2 175.5 938.4 73.8 − 25.0 195.2 1 162.8
         May 536.4 128.1 519.6 0.2 222.6 29.7 152.4 947.9 87.7 − 2.1 191.2 1 168.8
         June 536.8 148.1 507.8 0.1 215.9 28.3 126.0 951.0 111.6 − 0.5 192.3 1 171.6
         July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.1 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016          Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Apr 130.9 5.5 11.6 0.1 53.2 8.2 49.0 222.6 1.4 − 138.4 58.6 289.4
         May 136.2 19.3 13.8 0.1 52.0 7.9 46.8 225.0 1.4 − 115.6 55.8 288.7
         June 136.2 28.4 18.1 0.0 50.7 7.7 41.9 226.0 1.4 − 99.0 55.5 289.2
         July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016          Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations.the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue ofsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2016
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 8.5 + 13.6 − 35.8 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.3 − 8.0 − 7.4 − 5.9 + 0.0 2014          Apr 
+
17.5 + 22.7 − 15.0 − 0.5 − 4.9 + 0.5 − 23.1 + 9.5 + 13.9 + 22.9 − 4.0 + 6.0          May
+ 0.4 + 20.0 − 11.8 − 0.1 − 6.7 − 1.4 − 26.4 + 3.1 + 23.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.8          June
+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
−
0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+
19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+
25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+
2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 8.7 − 2.4 − 1.7 2014          Apr + 5.3 + 13.7 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 22.8 − 2.8 − 0.7          May+ 0.0 + 9.1 + 4.3 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 5.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 16.6 − 0.3 + 0.5          June
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9          July
+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
−
1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+
8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+
6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+
0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
allocated
on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency
residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2016 Mar                  4 2,859.8 338.7 306.9 79.7 227.2 32.6 21.8 21.8 −
                              11 2,872.3 338.7 306.9 79.7 227.3 32.2 22.1 22.1 −
                              18 2,886.2 338.7 307.9 79.7 228.2 29.5 21.4 21.4 −
                              25 2,897.7 338.7 309.2 79.7 229.5 27.9 21.8 21.8 −
         Apr                  1 2,941.8 377.3 297.5 77.4 220.1 29.2 20.9 20.9 −
                                8 2,953.1 377.3 296.1 77.4 218.6 30.5 19.4 19.4 −
                              15 2,966.1 377.3 295.5 77.4 218.0 31.7 18.5 18.5 −
                              22 2,983.2 377.3 294.8 77.4 217.4 31.9 18.2 18.2 −
                              29 3,000.8 377.3 296.5 77.2 219.4 32.3 18.0 18.0 −
         May                  6 3,017.8 377.3 298.2 77.0 221.1 29.0 17.5 17.5 −
                              13 3,032.8 377.3 298.7 77.0 221.8 29.7 17.6 17.6 −
                              20 3,054.1 377.3 297.6 76.8 220.8 30.9 18.0 18.0 −
                              27 3,067.5 377.3 299.0 76.8 222.2 30.4 18.4 18.4 −
         June                  3 3,078.6 377.3 300.6 76.8 223.7 30.1 18.6 18.6 −
                              10 3,093.9 377.3 300.0 76.6 223.4 30.3 18.8 18.8 −
                              17 3,109.6 377.3 298.0 76.6 221.4 31.1 17.8 17.8 −
                              24 3,131.1 377.3 299.6 76.6 223.1 30.1 18.3 18.3 −
         July                  1 3,232.6 413.1 309.0 77.6 231.3 33.2 18.3 18.3 −
                                8 3,237.9 413.1 307.8 77.6 230.1 34.7 18.4 18.4 −
                              15 3,249.2 413.1 305.9 77.6 228.3 33.9 17.9 17.9 −
                              22 3,265.8 413.1 308.6 77.6 231.0 30.6 17.3 17.3 −
                              29 3,284.3 413.1 307.6 77.4 230.1 33.2 17.5 17.5 −
2016 Aug                  5 3,286.1 413.1 308.4 77.2 231.2 32.9 16.6 16.6 −
                              12 3,296.6 413.1 307.3 77.2 230.1 33.6 17.1 17.1 −
                              19 3,313.3 413.1 308.9 77.2 231.6 32.2 17.2 17.2 −
                              26 3,330.5 413.1 310.1 77.2 232.8 32.6 17.2 17.2 −
         Sep                  2 3,341.8 413.1 311.3 77.3 234.0 30.5 17.3 17.3 −
                                9 3,358.7 413.1 311.6 77.3 234.3 30.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 3,372.4 413.1 312.3 77.3 235.0 29.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              23 3,391.4 413.1 314.5 77.3 237.3 29.6 17.8 17.8 −
                              30 3,438.1 412.6 315.2 77.8 237.4 33.9 19.6 19.6 −
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 412.6 313.7 77.8 235.8 32.5 19.0 19.0 −
                              14 3,469.3 412.6 313.0 77.8 235.2 33.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              21 3,494.9 412.6 313.1 77.8 235.3 35.3 18.5 18.5 −
                              28 3,507.4 412.6 311.5 78.3 233.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
         Nov                  4 3,518.5 412.6 312.9 78.2 234.7 36.1 17.6 17.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Dec 771.0 107.5 51.3 20.6 30.6 −−−−
2015          Jan 805.7 107.5 51.6 20.4 31.2 −−−−
         Feb 800.2 107.5 51.9 20.3 31.6 −−−−
         Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0.0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016          Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0.0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0.0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0.0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0.0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0.7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0.2−−−
         Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0.3−−−
         Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
         Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
518.0 61.3 456.7 − − 0.0 − 114.4 1 288.2 936.8 351.4 27.1 212.2 2016 Mar                  4
517.6 60.8 456.7 − − 0.0 − 113.5 1 301.5 951.0 350.5 27.1 212.8                               11
516.4 59.7 456.7 − − 0.0 − 114.2 1 315.4 965.2 350.2 27.1 215.6                               18
517.4 60.6 456.7 − − 0.1 − 112.1 1 327.8 977.7 350.1 27.1 215.7                               25
525.1 62.3 462.7 − − 0.0 − 111.2 1 336.9 986.2 350.7 27.0 216.7          Apr                  1
519.1 56.0 462.7 − − 0.3 − 111.3 1 356.3 1 006.1 350.2 27.0 216.2                                 8
519.0 55.7 462.7 − − 0.6 − 110.0 1 371.3 1 022.3 349.0 27.0 216.0                               15
516.8 54.0 462.7 − − 0.0 − 109.8 1 390.8 1 041.5 349.3 27.0 216.7                               22
514.9 56.3 458.5 − − 0.1 − 114.5 1 406.3 1 060.0 346.3 27.0 213.9                               29
512.4 53.5 458.5 − − 0.3 − 117.6 1 425.4 1 077.7 347.7 27.0 213.5          May                  6
510.1 51.4 458.5 − − 0.1 − 114.4 1 443.0 1 096.0 347.0 27.0 215.2                               13
508.6 49.9 458.5 − − 0.1 − 117.3 1 460.7 1 113.8 346.9 27.0 216.8                               20
511.7 60.2 451.2 − − 0.3 − 108.1 1 480.9 1 133.7 347.1 27.0 214.8                               27
503.2 51.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 108.3 1 499.4 1 152.4 347.0 27.0 214.2          June                  3
502.1 50.8 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.4 1 517.3 1 171.3 346.1 27.0 213.7                               10
500.4 49.1 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.7 1 537.0 1 191.4 345.6 27.0 213.4                               17
501.2 49.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 103.5 1 559.0 1 212.9 346.1 27.0 215.1                               24
540.0 53.1 486.8 − − 0.2 − 96.5 1 573.4 1 225.6 347.8 26.5 222.5          July                  1
531.2 44.1 486.8 − − 0.3 − 95.3 1 589.0 1 243.7 345.3 26.5 221.9                                 8
529.3 42.5 486.8 − − 0.0 − 95.8 1 605.9 1 263.6 342.3 26.5 220.8                               15
530.6 43.6 486.8 − − 0.2 − 94.4 1 623.7 1 281.4 342.3 26.5 221.1                               22
533.6 49.6 484.0 − − 0.0 − 94.0 1 639.4 1 298.8 340.6 26.5 219.5                               29
527.1 43.0 484.0 − − 0.1 − 93.1 1 650.0 1 312.3 337.6 26.5 218.4 2016 Aug                  5
525.6 41.6 484.0 − − − − 92.2 1 663.2 1 325.6 337.6 26.5 217.9                               12
525.7 41.7 484.0 − − 0.0 − 93.8 1 676.5 1 339.3 337.2 26.5 219.5                               19
526.8 42.8 484.0 − − 0.0 − 95.7 1 689.0 1 351.8 337.2 26.5 219.5                               26
526.5 43.8 482.7 − − 0.0 − 96.3 1 702.2 1 365.6 336.6 26.5 218.0          Sep                  2
524.5 41.8 482.7 − − − − 94.8 1 721.4 1 385.2 336.2 26.5 219.2                                 9
524.4 41.6 482.7 − − 0.0 − 93.9 1 734.8 1 402.2 332.7 26.5 220.5                               16
526.0 43.2 482.7 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 751.6 1 420.3 331.3 26.5 222.4                               23
552.6 38.7 513.8 − − 0.0 − 83.4 1 764.1 1 434.8 329.3 26.4 230.4                               30
548.2 34.4 513.8 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 784.5 1 454.9 329.6 26.4 224.6          Oct                  7
546.8 32.9 513.8 − − 0.1 − 88.9 1 805.1 1 475.7 329.4 26.4 225.0                               14
547.3 33.4 513.8 − − 0.0 − 91.7 1 822.0 1 492.7 329.3 26.4 228.0                               21
548.3 36.0 512.2 − − 0.1 − 93.9 1 840.4 1 513.0 327.5 26.4 220.1                               28
545.1 32.7 512.2 − − 0.2 − 91.8 1 856.6 1 531.4 325.1 26.4 219.3          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
65.6 32.5 32.9 − − 0.1 − 2.0 50.2 50.2 − 4.4 490.0 2014          Dec 
43.1 11.2 31.9 − − 0.0 − 3.2 52.1 52.1 − 4.4 543.7 2015          Jan 
37.3 8.6 28.7 − − 0.0 − 4.6 52.9 52.9 − 4.4 541.5          Feb 
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 
49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May
47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0          Aug 
55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1          Sep 
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2016 Mar                  4 2,859.8 1,065.5 811.3 564.3 246.8 − − 0.1 4.9 − 199.4 102.8 96.7
                              11 2,872.3 1,066.1 818.5 556.2 262.2 − − 0.1 4.8 − 202.0 108.4 93.6
                              18 2,886.2 1,066.8 786.0 539.2 246.7 − − 0.1 4.8 − 243.7 151.7 92.0
                              25 2,897.7 1,073.3 768.4 543.2 225.1 − − 0.1 4.4 − 269.9 179.7 90.1
         Apr                  1 2,941.8 1,071.0 844.2 575.6 268.4 − − 0.3 4.2 − 220.5 129.7 90.9
                                8 2,953.1 1,069.7 883.6 593.4 290.0 − − 0.3 4.2 − 201.7 111.1 90.6
                              15 2,966.1 1,068.8 865.8 584.3 281.2 − − 0.2 4.1 − 231.1 138.4 92.6
                              22 2,983.2 1,068.6 854.8 579.0 274.9 − − 0.9 4.1 − 255.9 162.2 93.7
                              29 3,000.8 1,073.6 899.3 594.5 304.6 − − 0.2 3.8 − 210.9 115.8 95.1
         May                  6 3,017.8 1,077.7 949.2 633.4 315.6 − − 0.2 3.8 − 182.0 85.1 96.9
                              13 3,032.8 1,078.0 944.8 635.4 309.2 − − 0.2 4.0 − 200.0 102.7 97.3
                              20 3,054.1 1,075.5 911.9 604.1 307.6 − − 0.2 4.2 − 247.5 150.8 96.7
                              27 3,067.5 1,076.4 920.8 611.8 308.8 − − 0.2 4.2 − 262.7 167.6 95.1
         June                  3 3,078.6 1,081.3 968.5 620.8 347.5 − − 0.3 3.9 − 223.3 122.6 100.7
                              10 3,093.9 1,081.8 984.3 643.8 340.3 − − 0.2 3.9 − 220.9 117.9 103.1
                              17 3,109.6 1,081.7 932.6 611.2 321.2 − − 0.2 4.0 − 287.4 183.7 103.7
                              24 3,131.1 1,082.2 911.0 613.1 297.6 − − 0.3 3.8 − 332.3 233.0 99.3
         July                  1 3,232.6 1,088.5 1,023.4 693.0 330.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 251.2 154.2 97.0
                                8 3,237.9 1,092.1 1,030.7 688.5 342.1 − − 0.1 3.6 − 237.1 140.9 96.3
                              15 3,249.2 1,093.8 1,008.0 674.6 333.3 − − 0.0 3.6 − 275.2 177.8 97.4
                              22 3,265.8 1,093.5 985.5 664.9 320.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 309.5 213.3 96.2
                              29 3,284.3 1,097.0 1,029.7 698.4 331.2 − − 0.0 3.6 − 277.0 179.4 97.7
2016 Aug                  5 3,286.1 1,099.2 1,094.4 753.7 340.8 − − 0.0 3.6 − 208.9 111.2 97.7
                              12 3,296.6 1,100.4 1,097.3 742.5 354.8 − − 0.0 3.9 − 225.0 126.4 98.6
                              19 3,313.3 1,096.8 1,099.6 740.9 358.7 − − 0.0 3.9 − 240.9 142.7 98.2
                              26 3,330.5 1,093.1 1,086.5 740.0 346.4 − − 0.0 4.2 − 270.2 171.6 98.6
         Sep                  2 3,341.8 1,095.5 1,143.0 764.0 378.9 − − 0.1 4.1 − 217.0 118.2 98.8
                                9 3,358.7 1,095.6 1,163.4 777.5 385.9 − − 0.0 3.9 − 227.8 128.6 99.2
                              16 3,372.4 1,094.3 1,133.6 767.9 365.7 − − 0.0 3.9 − 258.9 157.3 101.6
                              23 3,391.4 1,092.2 1,127.2 764.4 362.8 − − 0.0 3.9 − 273.6 171.0 102.5
                              30 3,438.1 1,096.3 1,157.9 759.8 398.0 − − 0.1 3.8 − 261.0 155.4 105.6
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 1,097.2 1,186.9 777.4 409.4 − − 0.1 3.8 − 264.2 158.0 106.2
                              14 3,469.3 1,096.2 1,195.0 793.5 401.5 − − 0.0 3.5 − 276.9 171.4 105.5
                              21 3,494.9 1,095.1 1,178.3 781.2 397.0 − − 0.0 3.6 − 304.0 192.8 111.3
                              28 3,507.4 1,100.3 1,197.2 812.8 384.4 − − 0.0 3.4 − 290.5 186.2 104.3
         Nov                  4 3,518.5 1,102.5 1,256.7 801.1 455.6 − − 0.0 3.5 − 241.6 136.3 105.3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Dec 771.0 240.5 90.2 81.2 9.0 − − − − − 9.9 1.9 7.9
2015          Jan 805.7 236.1 76.0 69.0 7.1 − − − − − 19.1 0.8 18.2
         Feb 800.2 236.8 77.3 71.0 6.2 − − − − − 28.8 1.1 27.7
         Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016          Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5
         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
         Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9
         Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
         Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2016
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
54.5 7.2 4.1 4.1 − 59.2 209.4 − 346.2 98.2 2016 Mar                  4
55.7 6.8 4.6 4.6 − 59.2 210.4 − 346.2 98.2                               11
58.7 5.7 4.9 4.9 − 59.2 212.1 − 346.2 98.2                               18
56.7 4.6 4.7 4.7 − 59.2 211.9 − 346.2 98.5                               25
53.2 4.5 3.6 3.6 − 57.5 208.4 − 376.0 98.7          Apr                  1
47.6 4.3 4.0 4.0 − 57.5 205.9 − 376.0 98.7                                 8
51.9 3.8 4.0 4.0 − 57.5 204.4 − 376.0 98.7                               15
55.0 3.2 4.2 4.2 − 57.5 205.2 − 376.0 98.7                               22
67.4 4.0 4.3 4.3 − 57.5 205.2 − 376.0 98.7                               29
57.0 2.8 4.2 4.2 − 57.5 208.5 − 376.0 99.0          May                  6
59.0 2.8 4.9 4.9 − 57.5 206.7 − 376.0 99.1                               13
62.2 3.3 5.1 5.1 − 57.5 211.9 − 376.0 99.0                               20
58.5 2.9 5.7 5.7 − 57.5 203.9 − 376.0 99.0                               27
56.1 3.2 6.3 6.3 − 57.5 203.5 − 376.0 99.0          June                  3
58.2 3.3 6.0 6.0 − 57.5 202.9 − 376.0 99.0                               10
59.7 2.9 5.0 5.0 − 57.5 203.8 − 376.0 99.0                               17
56.6 3.1 4.5 4.5 − 57.5 203.3 − 376.0 100.8                               24
70.9 3.0 5.2 5.2 − 58.5 206.3 − 420.9 100.8          July                  1
79.2 3.4 5.5 5.5 − 58.5 206.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 8
72.8 3.5 6.2 6.2 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               15
79.0 3.0 6.4 6.4 − 58.5 205.0 − 420.9 100.8                               22
83.0 3.1 7.4 7.4 − 58.5 203.3 − 420.9 100.8                               29
83.8 3.2 7.9 7.9 − 58.5 204.8 − 420.9 100.8 2016 Aug                  5
76.1 3.1 7.8 7.8 − 58.5 202.7 − 420.9 100.8                               12
77.4 3.1 8.1 8.1 − 58.5 203.4 − 420.9 100.8                               19
81.2 3.1 8.6 8.6 − 58.5 203.4 − 420.9 100.8                               26
85.6 3.2 8.6 8.6 − 58.5 204.5 − 420.9 100.8          Sep                  2
72.6 3.1 8.2 8.2 − 58.5 204.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 9
84.0 3.0 8.7 8.7 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               16
93.4 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 58.5 209.2 − 420.9 100.8                               23
122.8 2.8 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.3 − 418.5 100.8                               30
101.7 4.2 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.1 − 418.5 100.8          Oct                  7
97.7 5.6 9.3 9.3 − 58.1 207.6 − 418.5 100.8                               14
106.1 4.6 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 216.2 − 418.5 100.8                               21
108.2 5.5 9.7 9.7 − 58.1 215.1 − 418.5 100.8                               28
103.8 4.0 12.5 12.5 − 58.1 216.3 − 418.5 100.8          Nov                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
12.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.4 25.5 267.9 104.5 5.0 2014          Dec 
54.0 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.4 25.0 270.3 104.5 5.0 2015          Jan 
33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 − 14.4 25.2 272.4 104.5 5.0          Feb 
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 
30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May
47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0          Aug 
70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0          Sep 
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 17.8 2,523.4 1,847.9 1,290.4 557.5 675.4 421.6 253.8 3,487.3 3,061.8 2,556.0 2,288.8
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2014          Dec 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015          Jan 8,125.6 15.4 2,107.0 1,582.4 1,198.1 384.3 524.6 363.3 161.3 3,686.5 3,263.3 2,674.4 2,389.2
         Feb 8,061.5 15.4 2,096.3 1,578.2 1,195.7 382.4 518.2 362.5 155.7 3,698.4 3,275.9 2,680.8 2,397.4         Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.5 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.1 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,693.9 2,407.4         June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,691.9 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.2 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,716.9 2,421.1         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016          Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3         Sep 7,863.3 21.0 2,074.7 1,636.5 1,343.9 292.6 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,765.8 3,342.9 2,785.4 2,497.2
 Changes 3
2008 313.3 − 0.1 183.6 164.3 127.5 36.9 19.3 33.7 − 14.4 140.4 102.6 130.9 65.5
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 179.5 0.3 − 16.0 − 11.0 66.8 − 77.8 − 5.0 7.7 − 12.7 66.4 64.9 68.8 57.3
2015          Jan 278.4 − 3.8 75.6 46.7 46.9 − 0.2 28.9 26.3 2.6 28.5 21.9 12.1 3.6
         Feb − 70.0 − 0.0 − 11.8 − 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 1.2 − 5.8 10.6 12.1 5.8 8.3         Mar 86.5 0.1 23.5 28.4 27.5 0.9 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 1.3 6.1 4.4 6.9 1.0
         Apr − 63.9 0.6 − 14.1 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 11.3 11.9 3.2 − 0.2
         May − 92.5 0.3 − 9.5 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.4 2.7 9.0         June − 191.7 − 1.1 − 55.0 − 20.9 − 11.2 − 9.8 − 34.0 − 31.0 − 3.0 − 7.8 − 5.9 − 0.8 6.7
         July 57.5 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 24.8 26.9 22.3 0.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 13.0 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 7.3 0.3 − 17.3 − 26.7 − 20.8 − 5.9 9.3 8.8 0.6 4.0 1.1 2.3 6.7
         Oct 25.1 0.7 39.8 36.4 40.4 − 4.0 3.4 3.3 0.1 − 2.1 0.4 − 0.9 6.1
         Nov 59.7 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 252.6 3.6 − 88.8 − 87.4 − 56.1 − 31.3 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 26.5 − 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.52016          Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.6 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4
         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.1 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7
         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.3 1.5 8.5 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.5 9.9
         June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.4 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8
         Sep − 44.5 1.3 − 11.5 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.4 − 35.3 − 1.1 8.0 8.1 11.5 11.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
267.3 505.8 360.7 145.0 425.5 294.6 124.9 130.9 26.0 104.9 1,339.5 1,026.9 224.4 2007
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014          Dec 
285.2 588.8 336.7 252.1 423.2 273.3 147.1 149.9 31.2 118.7 1,136.5 885.6 1,180.2 2015          Jan 
283.4 595.1 339.8 255.3 422.5 272.8 144.8 149.7 31.3 118.4 1,128.8 880.6 1,122.6          Feb 290.5 593.0 339.0 253.9 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.2 872.6 1,196.3          Mar 
293.3 601.3 347.6 253.7 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.6 585.3 336.3 249.0 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May278.9 579.9 332.5 247.4 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
300.7 583.5 333.2 250.3 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
295.8 584.7 330.3 254.4 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.2 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.3          Sep 
Changes 3
65.4 − 28.4 − 16.9 − 11.5 37.8 42.3 40.4 − 4.5 1.6 − 6.1 − 40.3 − 7.6 29.7 200810.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 1.4 5.1 2.4 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 2.7 − 80.1 − 93.5 − 150.1 2015
8.5 9.9 8.2 1.6 6.5 1.0 2.5 5.5 0.6 4.9 53.7 49.4 124.4 2015          Jan 
− 2.5 6.3 3.0 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.3 − 11.2 − 7.8 − 57.6          Feb 
5.8 − 2.4 − 0.9 − 1.5 1.6 2.8 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 17.0 − 24.3 73.7          Mar 3.4 8.7 8.7 0.0 − 0.6 0.0 2.8 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.1 32.6 34.1 − 94.4          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.7 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 25.1 − 28.1 − 102.8          June
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 2.1 0.6 0.8 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 3.9 32.0          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.6 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 2.9 1.8 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 7.2          Sep 
− 7.1 1.4 2.9 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 7.9 − 8.4          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.5 − 35.3 50.6          Nov 
0.9 − 10.1 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 12.8 − 8.0 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 4.2 − 55.6 − 55.3 − 85.4          Dec 
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.8 90.5 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.0 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 1.0 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5          June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.6 11.8 − 11.1          July1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.4 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.8 0.7 0.6 0.1 − 11.9 − 11.6 − 30.3          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2007 7,592.4 1,778.6 1,479.0 299.6 2,633.6 2,518.3 769.6 1,193.3 477.9 555.4 446.0 75.1 19.6
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2014          Dec 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015          Jan 8,125.6 1,383.4 1,138.5 244.9 3,214.5 3,114.1 1,530.7 976.8 292.7 606.6 529.1 82.4 37.2
         Feb 8,061.5 1,368.7 1,134.4 234.3 3,220.8 3,126.5 1,543.4 977.0 294.6 606.1 530.0 83.3 38.9         Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016          Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4         Sep 7,863.3 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
 Changes 4
2008 313.3 65.8 121.7 − 55.8 162.3 173.1 38.7 154.6 123.5 − 20.2 − 21.2 − 7.5 − 0.1
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 179.5 − 61.1 − 49.6 − 11.5 104.9 105.5 153.7 − 36.9 − 10.0 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
2015          Jan 278.4 54.3 23.1 31.3 13.8 5.2 14.5 − 8.2 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 1.1 2.2 2.5
         Feb − 70.0 − 14.9 − 4.3 − 10.7 5.9 12.1 12.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.5 0.8 0.8 1.7         Mar 86.5 10.9 − 1.2 12.0 − 4.6 − 8.0 − 1.9 − 4.0 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.9 1.2 1.8
         Apr − 63.9 − 11.7 − 15.3 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.5 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.8 18.8 25.9 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.7         June − 191.7 − 39.1 − 12.4 − 26.7 − 5.2 − 7.8 2.9 − 9.0 − 5.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.9 1.2
         July 57.5 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3
         Sep − 7.3 0.8 3.6 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.7 − 0.4 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
         Oct 25.1 13.7 20.6 − 7.0 9.5 13.5 25.6 − 12.2 − 4.3 0.1 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.5
         Nov 59.7 14.4 10.3 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 252.6 − 42.5 − 41.5 − 1.0 1.0 0.9 − 1.4 0.1 4.5 2.2 3.0 − 1.8 − 4.1
2016          Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.8 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.5 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0
         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3
         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
         June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.4 − 15.0 − 7.0 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3
         Sep − 44.5 − 16.7 12.6 − 29.3 2.6 0.9 − 0.7 2.8 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
53.2 22.0 2.3 1.8 40.1 38.3 26.6 28.6 1,637.6 182.3 661.0 428.2 398.2 2007
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014          Dec 
41.8 15.5 3.4 2.7 18.0 12.7 6.8 3.5 1,103.7 44.2 614.3 543.2 1,256.2 2015          Jan 
41.0 14.5 3.4 2.7 11.0 8.9 8.0 3.5 1,104.3 44.7 610.1 557.4 1,188.7          Feb 40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.4 1,263.6          Mar 
41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,009.9 50.7 655.7 597.5 1,027.9          Sep 
Changes 4
− 7.5 0.6 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 3.2 36.1 − 12.2 − 33.9 50.2 − 0.1 39.3 56.1 2008− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 80.5 9.3 − 26.6 28.0 − 143.3 2015
− 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.4 1.2 3.4 0.0 8.1 4.0 63.5 3.9 131.3 2015          Jan 
− 0.9 − 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 7.0 − 3.8 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.5 − 5.7 13.6 − 68.4          Feb − 0.5 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 6.5 1.2 6.4 5.4 75.3          Mar 
0.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.8 0.6 − 98.3          Apr 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.7 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 36.0 − 1.8 − 100.8          June
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 17.4 − 0.7 26.6          July− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.0 9.7 − 23.6          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.2 7.3 − 27.9 4.0 19.9          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 0.0 10.8 5.9 2.3 0.0 − 10.7          Oct − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 2.3 − 16.8 − 6.7 51.2          Nov 
2.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 50.1 − 2.1 − 67.8 − 2.8 − 86.4          Dec 
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.1 1.6 11.6 13.2 65.7          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.2 7.2 − 48.8          Apr − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.7 0.9 4.3 12.4          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7          June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 10.4 − 2.2 − 7.8 13.2 − 25.0          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
 
 Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2016          Apr 1,769 7,849.5 207.7 2,456.6 1,934.4 516.7 4,023.1 371.9 2,866.1 0.7 773.7 119.0 1,043.1
         May 1,769 7,860.5 226.7 2,431.2 1,912.1 513.8 4,031.1 368.5 2,876.2 0.6 775.5 119.1 1,052.4         June 1,764 7,963.8 243.4 2,447.8 1,929.9 512.6 4,010.8 355.9 2,876.6 0.6 769.7 119.4 1,142.4
         July 1,754 7,985.3 264.9 2,438.2 1,928.9 505.3 4,030.4 366.6 2,887.9 0.5 769.5 119.7 1,132.0
         Aug 1,749 7,951.8 273.2 2,429.6 1,923.8 502.0 4,031.3 360.2 2,900.7 0.5 763.4 120.0 1,097.7         Sep 1,734 7,906.5 279.9 2,414.6 1,903.3 507.6 4,025.5 360.3 2,903.4 0.5 755.0 119.4 1,067.2
Commercial banks 6
2016          Aug 266 3,248.9 189.3 997.3 912.0 85.2 1,189.4 185.6 757.3 0.3 242.2 57.0 815.9
         Sep 267 3,186.9 178.4 978.5 891.1 87.2 1,185.0 182.3 757.7 0.3 240.9 57.0 788.0
   Big banks 7
2016          Aug 4 1,963.7 66.0 561.4 524.3 37.0 505.8 106.1 278.7 0.1 117.5 50.3 780.3
         Sep 4 1,885.5 58.7 528.4 490.8 37.6 497.2 99.2 277.3 0.1 117.5 50.3 750.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2016          Aug 159 933.3 59.5 227.8 184.0 43.7 611.0 58.6 437.7 0.2 114.1 5.8 29.3
         Sep 160 931.3 50.4 231.9 186.7 45.1 613.1 61.8 438.6 0.2 112.1 5.8 30.2
   Branches of foreign banks
2016          Aug 103 351.9 63.8 208.2 203.8 4.5 72.7 20.8 40.9 − 10.7 0.9 6.3
         Sep 103 370.1 69.4 218.2 213.7 4.5 74.7 21.4 41.8 0.0 11.3 0.9 6.9
Landesbanken
2016          Aug 9 938.6 13.4 281.1 211.1 69.6 504.9 55.8 360.3 0.1 87.9 10.9 128.4
         Sep 9 935.9 14.9 281.2 212.0 68.9 503.3 56.8 359.2 0.1 86.2 10.9 125.7
Savings banks
2016          Aug 408 1,157.0 21.5 187.4 68.0 119.2 918.2 48.6 713.9 0.1 155.4 14.5 15.4
         Sep 408 1,158.2 23.6 186.0 65.5 120.3 918.6 49.5 715.6 0.0 153.2 14.5 15.5
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2016          Aug 1,010 837.0 13.1 167.2 59.1 107.5 622.6 31.8 488.5 0.0 102.1 15.7 18.5         Sep 995 838.8 14.3 166.3 57.1 108.6 624.0 32.5 490.2 0.0 101.1 15.7 18.6
Mortgage banks
2016          Aug 15 286.3 2.0 52.7 37.6 14.8 222.0 4.7 176.8 − 40.5 0.2 9.4
         Sep 15 285.2 1.4 52.4 37.2 14.9 221.8 5.0 176.9 − 40.0 0.2 9.4
Building and loan associations
2016          Aug 20 214.7 1.2 57.2 40.0 17.2 151.7 1.3 127.5 . 22.9 0.3 4.4
         Sep 20 215.1 1.4 56.7 39.7 16.9 152.2 1.3 128.0 . 22.9 0.3 4.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
  From July 2016 including DZ BANK AG Deutsche Zentral- Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt am Main (DZ Bank)
2016          Aug 21 1,269.1 32.7 686.7 596.1 88.5 422.6 32.4 276.4 0.0 112.4 21.4 105.7         Sep 20 1,286.4 46.0 693.4 600.6 90.8 420.7 32.9 275.7 0.0 110.8 20.8 105.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2016          Aug 138 1,053.6 98.0 390.0 347.7 42.3 458.0 62.6 280.5 0.2 112.1 4.4 103.1
         Sep 138 1,072.0 97.6 407.7 364.5 43.2 461.3 65.5 282.6 0.2 109.8 4.4 100.9
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2016          Aug 35 701.6 34.2 181.8 144.0 37.8 385.3 41.8 239.6 0.2 101.4 3.5 96.8
         Sep 35 701.8 28.2 189.6 150.8 38.7 386.6 44.2 240.8 0.2 98.6 3.5 94.0
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,718.2 493.9 1,224.2 3,483.4 1,836.5 290.4 692.7 60.3 601.4 542.9 62.4 1,119.0 483.5 1,045.4 2016          Apr 
1,691.4 531.5 1,159.8 3,502.4 1,852.5 294.6 693.4 58.2 599.8 542.3 62.2 1,132.7 480.6 1,053.4          May1,717.7 550.2 1,167.4 3,495.4 1,855.4 285.8 694.0 48.7 598.6 541.8 61.7 1,125.6 485.3 1,139.9          June
1,729.0 548.3 1,180.6 3,519.6 1,866.2 299.0 695.6 60.7 597.6 541.7 61.3 1,113.0 486.6 1,137.1          July
1,717.1 535.9 1,181.1 3,530.4 1,875.8 302.4 694.7 65.0 596.8 541.7 60.7 1,116.8 484.9 1,102.6          Aug 1,708.3 498.1 1,210.1 3,517.0 1,872.6 294.3 694.2 52.7 595.4 541.1 60.4 1,119.9 487.2 1,074.1          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
795.8 372.9 422.9 1,357.6 818.6 170.6 240.1 48.2 103.6 95.9 24.7 156.7 164.5 774.2 2016          Aug 782.4 325.4 456.9 1,337.8 810.5 159.2 240.8 31.5 102.7 95.1 24.7 155.5 164.5 746.7          Sep 
Big banks 7
436.0 203.3 232.6 586.6 330.2 100.0 86.5 48.2 64.2 62.8 5.8 122.7 97.1 721.3 2016          Aug 406.6 143.0 263.5 566.7 323.3 87.7 86.2 31.5 63.7 62.4 5.7 122.3 97.1 692.8          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
170.7 59.1 111.5 623.9 392.3 48.1 126.9 − 39.0 32.8 17.7 33.6 59.3 45.8 2016          Aug 170.9 56.2 114.7 621.8 389.6 48.7 127.3 − 38.6 32.5 17.7 32.8 59.3 46.5          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
189.2 110.4 78.8 147.1 96.1 22.5 26.8 − 0.5 0.2 1.2 0.4 8.1 7.1 2016          Aug 204.9 126.2 78.7 149.4 97.6 22.9 27.2 − 0.5 0.2 1.2 0.4 8.1 7.4          Sep 
Landesbanken
262.4 55.2 207.2 294.5 120.0 65.1 95.7 12.8 13.5 10.6 0.2 202.7 55.3 123.7 2016          Aug 261.2 56.8 204.4 296.0 119.6 67.3 95.4 16.2 13.5 10.5 0.3 203.2 55.3 120.2          Sep 
Savings banks
131.4 8.8 122.6 870.5 519.1 16.1 15.5 − 293.3 262.9 26.5 13.8 101.1 40.2 2016          Aug 133.1 10.8 122.3 868.9 518.4 15.7 15.5 − 293.0 263.0 26.2 13.8 101.2 41.2          Sep 
 
Credit cooperatives
 
104.9 2.6 102.3 624.1 381.5 32.6 16.4 − 185.9 172.0 7.6 8.2 68.8 31.1 2016          Aug 105.6 2.7 102.9 624.3 382.0 32.9 16.3 − 185.8 172.0 7.5 7.9 68.8 32.1          Sep 
Mortgage banks
52.2 6.7 45.5 118.7 8.2 9.7 100.7 − 0.1 0.1 . 95.6 9.7 10.1 2016          Aug 50.7 7.1 43.6 118.5 8.4 9.9 100.1 − 0.1 0.1 . 95.9 9.8 10.4          Sep 
Building and loan associations
21.7 4.3 17.5 166.1 1.1 0.9 163.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.2 2.5 10.2 14.2 2016          Aug 21.2 3.9 17.3 166.5 1.1 1.0 164.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.2 2.6 10.2 14.5          Sep 
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
From July 2016 including DZ Bank
348.6 85.4 263.3 98.8 27.4 7.3 62.6 4.1 − − . 637.3 75.3 109.1 2016          Aug 354.2 91.5 262.7 104.9 32.8 8.3 62.2 4.9 − − . 641.1 77.4 108.9          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
356.3 178.4 178.0 521.0 358.2 53.7 79.2 10.0 21.4 20.9 8.5 20.9 50.8 104.5 2016          Aug 373.1 190.3 182.9 524.5 358.8 56.1 79.8 10.0 21.3 20.8 8.5 21.1 50.8 102.5          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
167.2 68.0 99.2 373.9 262.1 31.2 52.4 10.0 20.9 20.7 7.3 20.5 42.7 97.4 2016          Aug 168.2 64.1 104.2 375.1 261.3 33.2 52.6 10.0 20.8 20.5 7.3 20.7 42.7 95.0          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)
Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2006 16.0 49.4 1,637.8 1,086.3 − 9.3 542.2 1.9 3,000.7 2,630.3 1.9 2.0 366.5
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2015          Apr 15.9 91.7 1,473.6 1,117.3 0.0 3.4 352.8 1.6 3,221.1 2,745.0 0.4 1.5 474.2
         May 16.1 95.0 1,466.4 1,114.3 0.0 3.5 348.6 1.6 3,207.9 2,743.3 0.3 1.7 462.5         June 15.1 115.4 1,424.2 1,082.1 0.0 3.3 338.8 1.6 3,200.4 2,745.2 0.3 2.4 452.5
         July 15.4 116.6 1,429.7 1,091.8 0.0 2.7 335.2 1.6 3,228.7 2,748.4 0.3 2.4 477.6
         Aug 15.2 133.6 1,418.0 1,086.8 0.0 2.1 329.1 1.6 3,230.9 2,751.1 0.3 1.9 477.5         Sep 15.6 139.8 1,384.6 1,059.7 0.0 2.3 322.7 1.6 3,230.8 2,756.1 0.3 1.7 472.8
         Oct 16.2 140.0 1,421.3 1,100.0 0.0 2.1 319.1 1.6 3,232.0 2,764.6 0.3 1.5 465.6
         Nov 15.7 152.2 1,438.4 1,122.6 0.0 2.6 313.2 1.6 3,249.0 2,775.2 0.3 1.0 472.5         Dec 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016          Jan 16.2 170.9 1,368.7 1,086.0 0.0 2.0 280.8 1.6 3,238.7 2,771.0 0.4 0.7 466.5
         Feb 15.9 164.3 1,379.8 1,098.3 0.0 1.8 279.7 1.6 3,248.0 2,781.4 0.4 1.5 464.7         Mar 17.2 166.6 1,358.5 1,076.3 0.0 2.0 280.2 1.6 3,247.2 2,785.9 0.3 1.2 459.7
         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
         July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
         Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5         Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
Changes *
2007 + 1.5 + 15.2 + 114.8 + 137.6 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 39.8 + 0.4 − 15.9 + 12.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 27.2
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009
− 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011
− 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2015          Apr + 0.6 − 5.7 − 15.3 − 9.7 − + 0.2 − 5.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 6.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.8
         May + 0.3 + 3.3 − 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 13.1 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 11.7         June − 1.1 + 20.4 − 42.1 − 32.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 10.1
         July + 0.3 + 1.2 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 28.3 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.1
         Aug − 0.1 + 17.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         Sep + 0.3 + 6.3 − 33.3 − 27.1 − + 0.2 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.1 + 36.6 + 40.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.2         Nov − 0.6 + 12.3 + 17.3 + 22.7 − + 0.5 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.9
         Dec + 3.6 + 2.8 − 91.8 − 59.9 − − 0.9 − 31.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5
2016          Jan − 3.1 + 15.9 + 22.2 + 23.4 − + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 6.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.4
         Feb − 0.3 − 6.5 + 11.9 + 13.1 − − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.7
         Mar + 1.3 + 2.3 − 21.3 − 22.1 − + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.0
         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
         July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6
         Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 53.0 106.3 1,348.2 125.4 1,222.7 0.0 22.3 2,394.6 747.7 962.8 586.5 97.5 37.8 2006
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 25.8 92.5 1,117.5 163.4 954.0 0.0 11.2 3,140.9 1,572.3 905.2 601.5 61.9 30.2 2015          Apr 
− 25.7 92.8 1,103.0 164.4 938.6 0.0 11.1 3,158.8 1,597.3 900.5 600.0 61.0 30.2          May− 25.3 92.5 1,090.2 161.7 928.4 0.0 11.1 3,151.7 1,600.1 892.9 598.3 60.4 29.6          June
− 25.0 92.4 1,079.0 152.5 926.5 0.0 10.8 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 596.4 59.5 29.5          July
− 25.0 92.1 1,072.5 149.0 923.4 0.0 10.8 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 595.2 58.8 29.5          Aug − 24.9 92.0 1,076.0 153.1 922.9 0.0 10.8 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 594.6 58.1 29.5          Sep 
− 24.7 91.9 1,096.4 150.5 945.8 0.0 10.6 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 594.6 57.5 29.5          Oct 
− 24.5 92.0 1,108.0 158.2 949.7 0.0 10.5 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 594.3 56.8 29.5          Nov − 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3          Dec 
− 20.3 90.0 1,066.1 145.0 921.1 0.0 6.0 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 596.1 54.8 29.3 2016          Jan 
− 20.2 89.8 1,061.7 151.8 909.9 0.0 5.9 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 596.4 54.6 29.3          Feb − 19.9 90.3 1,058.6 147.9 910.7 0.0 5.9 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 594.5 54.4 29.1          Mar 
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6          July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7          Aug − 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6          Sep 
Changes *
− − 2.3 + 3.1 + 132.0 − 3.3 + 135.3 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 181.1 + 31.6 + 160.5 − 31.1 + 20.1 − 2.0 2007− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 17.0 − 14.6 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 9.2 + 23.5 − 10.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.5 2015          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.3 − 14.4 + 1.0 − 15.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 17.9 + 25.0 − 4.7 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.1          May− − 0.3 − 0.3 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5          June
− − 0.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 9.2 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1          July
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 − 2.6 + 22.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 11.6 + 7.7 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 − 2.0 − 42.4 − 27.1 − 15.2 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 13.9 − 13.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 2016          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.1 + 7.0 − 10.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.2 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)
Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2006 0.4 1,266.9 1,003.2 744.5 258.7 13.3 250.4 0.8 777.0 421.0 156.0 264.9 7.2 348.9
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2015          Apr 0.2 1,199.9 958.7 675.5 283.1 10.0 231.3 1.1 780.2 455.7 124.6 331.1 6.1 318.4
         May 0.3 1,189.7 948.9 665.0 284.0 9.1 231.7 1.1 787.3 459.0 127.1 331.8 6.3 322.0         June 0.3 1,142.5 903.1 617.1 286.0 8.1 231.3 1.1 765.7 435.1 104.4 330.7 7.5 323.1
         July 0.3 1,149.0 911.5 625.0 286.5 6.6 230.9 1.1 760.0 433.4 103.3 330.1 5.0 321.6
         Aug 0.3 1,140.9 904.7 619.3 285.3 6.1 230.2 1.1 761.5 435.8 106.9 328.8 5.8 319.9         Sep 0.3 1,152.8 914.7 627.4 287.4 4.4 233.7 1.1 760.7 434.9 106.6 328.3 6.0 319.8
         Oct 0.3 1,138.7 900.4 617.1 283.4 2.9 235.3 1.1 772.2 446.5 116.4 330.1 6.1 319.6
         Nov 0.3 1,112.9 873.2 598.4 274.8 2.8 237.0 1.1 784.8 450.0 103.7 346.4 6.9 327.9         Dec 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016          Jan 0.3 1,080.5 844.9 570.2 274.8 1.9 233.6 1.0 766.7 440.2 101.3 338.8 8.9 317.6
         Feb 0.3 1,095.3 854.5 580.2 274.3 3.1 237.8 1.0 765.9 445.3 102.6 342.7 10.2 310.3         Mar 0.3 1,057.4 816.6 551.7 264.9 3.0 237.8 1.0 754.4 427.1 87.9 339.2 9.1 318.2
         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
         July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
         Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0         Sep 0.3 1,046.5 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.0 1.0 751.4 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.7
Changes *
2007 − 0.0 + 190.3 + 123.7 + 72.9 + 50.8 + 7.5 + 59.1 − 0.4 + 167.7 + 94.3 + 50.1 + 44.2 + 20.1 + 53.3
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2015          Apr − 0.0 + 25.3 + 26.1 + 27.4 − 1.3 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 10.4 + 14.3 + 12.7 + 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.9         May + 0.0 − 17.8 − 17.3 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.9         June + 0.0 − 41.3 − 40.1 − 44.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 18.3 − 21.2 − 20.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 + 1.7
         July + 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − − 9.1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 2.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.7
         Sep + 0.0 + 14.0 + 12.2 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct + 0.0 − 20.2 − 20.2 − 13.9 − 6.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 7.7 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9
         Nov + 0.0 − 38.2 − 39.4 − 25.9 − 13.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 2.7 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Dec − 0.0 − 36.7 − 33.4 − 37.5 + 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 20.7 − 18.9 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 7.2
2016          Jan − 0.0 + 16.1 + 16.8 + 15.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 18.2 + 18.2 + 18.6 − 0.4 + 1.3 − 1.3
         Feb + 0.0 + 14.9 + 9.6 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 1.1 − 7.1
         Mar − 0.0 − 26.3 − 26.5 − 22.8 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 13.6 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 9.3
         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
         July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3
         Sep − 0.0 − 43.8 − 42.1 − 42.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 5.4 − 6.1 + 0.7 − 0.4 + 2.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.8 50.4 689.7 168.1 521.6 397.3 124.3 0.4 310.1 82.1 228.0 111.5 116.5 1.5 2006
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.8 36.0 729.9 348.1 381.8 297.3 84.5 0.1 265.1 146.9 118.2 62.3 55.9 0.9 2015          Apr 
13.8 36.8 714.0 357.6 356.4 270.8 85.7 0.1 265.4 142.7 122.7 70.8 51.9 0.9          May13.6 36.4 671.4 331.2 340.2 256.3 83.9 0.1 240.5 127.7 112.8 61.6 51.2 0.9          June
13.6 35.3 690.6 342.8 347.7 266.7 81.0 0.1 244.4 131.9 112.5 62.0 50.5 0.9          July
13.7 35.2 681.5 334.5 347.0 264.5 82.5 0.1 253.6 135.3 118.3 65.9 52.4 0.9          Aug 13.7 35.2 672.0 346.4 325.5 244.3 81.2 0.1 234.5 128.3 106.3 53.2 53.1 0.9          Sep 
13.5 35.2 656.9 362.9 294.0 212.7 81.3 0.1 243.4 134.6 108.8 56.6 52.3 0.8          Oct 
13.6 34.8 649.0 373.8 275.2 190.5 84.6 0.1 243.2 136.3 106.9 55.7 51.2 0.8          Nov 13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7          Dec 
13.2 29.6 637.8 352.2 285.7 201.3 84.3 0.1 237.7 129.1 108.6 60.5 48.2 0.8 2016          Jan 
13.2 29.0 644.4 357.8 286.6 201.8 84.8 0.1 246.4 137.2 109.2 61.8 47.5 0.8          Feb 13.3 28.9 623.4 349.6 273.8 192.0 81.8 0.0 218.8 119.8 99.0 52.9 46.1 0.8          Mar 
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7          July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7          Aug 13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7          Sep 
Changes *
− 0.1 − 0.8 + 67.3 + 1.5 + 65.8 + 74.0 − 8.3 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 5.5 + 10.2 + 16.6 − 6.4 + 1.6 2007+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.4 − 0.0 + 25.2 − 17.7 + 42.9 + 44.3 − 1.3 − + 12.9 + 16.0 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.0 2015          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − 20.1 + 8.0 − 28.1 − 28.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 4.8 + 3.9 + 8.2 − 4.3 − 0.0          May− 0.2 − 0.3 − 39.2 − 25.0 − 14.1 − 12.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 23.9 − 14.5 − 9.3 − 8.9 − 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 − 1.2 + 16.0 + 10.6 + 5.4 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 4.3 + 2.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.5 + 12.0 − 21.5 − 20.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 18.9 − 7.0 − 11.9 − 12.6 + 0.7 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 18.2 + 15.2 − 33.4 − 33.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.0 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.2          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 − 14.3 + 8.4 − 22.7 − 25.2 + 2.5 − − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 4.3 − 32.0 − 48.3 + 16.4 + 15.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.6 − 7.9 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.9 + 27.6 + 29.5 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.2 − + 36.9 + 26.4 + 10.6 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 2016          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.0 − 5.4 − 8.6 − 6.7 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 25.6 − 16.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 1.2 + 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2006 3,000.7 2,632.2 303.1 269.8 269.3 0.6 33.3 31.9 1.4 2,697.6 2,181.8
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2015          Apr 3,221.1 2,745.4 284.0 216.6 215.7 1.0 67.3 66.8 0.5 2,937.1 2,403.4
         May 3,207.9 2,743.6 272.4 215.8 214.7 1.1 56.6 55.9 0.7 2,935.5 2,407.1
         June 3,200.4 2,745.5 279.2 223.8 222.5 1.3 55.4 54.3 1.1 2,921.2 2,397.0
         July 3,228.7 2,748.7 273.0 215.4 214.0 1.3 57.6 56.5 1.1 2,955.7 2,430.2
         Aug 3,230.9 2,751.4 269.4 214.0 212.9 1.1 55.5 54.6 0.9 2,961.4 2,432.5
         Sep 3,230.8 2,756.4 271.8 218.5 217.6 0.9 53.3 52.5 0.8 2,959.0 2,428.4
         Oct 3,232.0 2,764.9 268.0 212.4 211.7 0.7 55.6 54.8 0.8 2,964.0 2,433.8
         Nov 3,249.0 2,775.5 264.2 212.9 212.3 0.6 51.3 50.9 0.4 2,984.8 2,451.1
         Dec 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016          Jan 3,238.7 2,771.4 259.0 208.1 207.7 0.4 50.9 50.5 0.3 2,979.7 2,452.5
         Feb 3,248.0 2,781.8 266.3 214.3 213.6 0.7 52.0 51.2 0.8 2,981.7 2,456.1
         Mar 3,247.2 2,786.3 271.4 218.7 217.9 0.8 52.6 52.2 0.4 2,975.9 2,454.1
         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7
         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.8 217.8 216.8 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.3 2,472.8
         July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
         Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1
         Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
Changes *
2007 − 15.9 + 11.8 + 27.6 + 31.5 + 31.7 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 43.5 − 7.1
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2015          Apr + 9.1 + 6.4 + 5.9 − 3.7 − 3.8 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 4.3
         May − 13.1 − 1.6 − 11.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 3.8
         June − 7.5 + 1.9 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 14.3 − 10.1
         July + 28.3 + 3.1 − 6.2 − 8.4 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 34.4 + 31.9
         Aug + 2.3 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 2.6
         Sep − 0.1 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4
         Oct + 1.2 + 8.6 − 3.8 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 5.7
         Nov + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.9 − 0.4 + 17.6 + 14.1
         Dec − 15.1 − 11.0 − 8.6 − 5.1 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 6.5 + 0.3
2016          Jan + 4.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1
         Feb + 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.6 + 6.4 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6
         Mar − 0.8 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 6.0 − 2.2
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7
         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.2
         July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2         Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,972.7 194.5 1,778.1 209.1 48.2 515.8 358.4 31.7 326.6 157.4 − 4.8 2006
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,182.1 250.5 1,931.7 221.3 23.7 533.7 280.8 29.5 251.3 252.9 − 2.1 2015          Apr 
2,192.6 253.2 1,939.4 214.5 23.6 528.4 280.4 29.5 250.9 248.0 − 2.1          May
2,190.5 251.5 1,939.0 206.5 23.3 524.2 278.3 28.7 249.5 246.0 − 2.0          June
2,201.5 250.8 1,950.6 228.7 23.0 525.5 276.6 28.5 248.2 248.9 − 2.0          July
2,208.2 251.0 1,957.2 224.4 22.9 528.9 275.7 28.2 247.6 253.1 − 2.0          Aug 
2,208.7 251.2 1,957.4 219.7 22.9 530.6 277.5 29.3 248.2 253.1 − 2.0          Sep 
2,220.0 253.2 1,966.8 213.8 22.7 530.2 278.5 29.3 249.2 251.8 − 2.0          Oct 
2,233.7 256.1 1,977.6 217.4 22.5 533.8 278.6 28.1 250.5 255.1 − 2.0          Nov 
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1          Dec 
2,235.3 257.1 1,978.3 217.2 18.2 527.2 277.8 27.7 250.1 249.4 − 2.1 2016          Jan 
2,240.2 257.4 1,982.8 215.9 18.0 525.6 276.8 27.7 249.1 248.8 − 2.1          Feb 
2,240.5 257.3 1,983.2 213.5 17.9 521.8 275.6 27.5 248.1 246.2 − 2.0          Mar 
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May
2,256.9 258.7 1,998.2 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8          July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8          Aug 2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8          Sep 
Changes *
+ 9.6 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 16.7 − 2.2 − 36.3 − 25.8 + 0.1 − 26.0 − 10.5 − − 0.1 2007
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 1.6 − 1.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − − 0.0 2015          Apr 
+ 10.6 + 2.8 + 7.8 − 6.8 − 0.1 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.9 − − 0.0          May
− 2.1 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.0 − − 0.1          June
+ 9.7 − 0.7 + 10.4 + 22.2 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 6.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 11.6 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 10.5 + 2.0 + 8.6 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − −          Nov 
− 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 6.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 3.0 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2016          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 1.0 + 3.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6 − − 0.1          Mar 
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May
+ 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2014 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Sep 2,426.3 1,244.5 1,218.5 1,001.2 217.3 1,309.0 336.5 127.5 100.6 61.7 125.3 50.0 65.6 129.5
         Dec 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016          Mar 2,458.5 1,227.2 1,235.2 987.0 248.2 1,328.6 342.5 133.3 101.9 62.2 126.6 50.1 62.6 131.6
         June 2,473.6 1,235.1 1,248.0 996.2 251.8 1,332.0 345.8 131.5 101.7 62.7 125.4 50.9 59.0 133.7         Sep 2,497.2 1,248.2 1,264.5 1,007.6 256.9 1,341.0 350.5 130.3 103.0 63.2 126.9 51.2 57.4 136.4
 Short-term lending
2014 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Sep 217.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 183.3 4.3 34.6 5.3 12.8 43.5 4.4 5.2 26.6
         Dec 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2016          Mar 218.0 − 7.7 − 7.7 185.1 4.1 39.4 4.9 13.0 43.6 4.0 5.3 24.6
         June 216.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 184.7 4.3 37.0 4.7 13.1 42.1 4.2 5.1 27.2
         Sep 213.8 − 7.6 − 7.6 181.6 4.1 34.3 4.5 13.0 42.6 4.1 4.7 28.5
 Medium-term lending
2014 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Sep 251.2 − 35.5 − 35.5 176.8 13.4 24.0 5.1 10.3 15.8 4.4 11.3 39.3
         Dec 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2016          Mar 257.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 181.8 13.2 23.9 5.1 10.4 16.2 4.5 11.5 41.2
         June 258.7 − 34.7 − 34.7 182.1 13.2 23.7 5.1 10.5 16.6 4.5 11.1 40.4
         Sep 261.0 − 34.8 − 34.8 183.4 13.4 24.3 5.7 10.5 16.5 4.6 11.0 41.1
 Long-term lending
2014 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Sep 1,957.4 1,244.5 1,174.5 1,001.2 173.3 948.9 318.8 68.8 90.2 38.5 66.0 41.2 49.0 63.6         Dec 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2016          Mar 1,983.2 1,227.2 1,192.7 987.0 205.7 961.7 325.3 70.1 91.9 38.8 66.8 41.7 45.8 65.8
         June 1,998.2 1,235.1 1,205.5 996.2 209.3 965.3 328.3 70.7 91.9 39.1 66.8 42.1 42.8 66.0         Sep 2,022.5 1,248.2 1,222.1 1,007.6 214.5 976.0 332.9 71.7 92.7 39.7 67.8 42.4 41.6 66.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2015          Q3 + 13.2 + 9.8 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6         Q4 + 13.7 + 9.0 + 11.4 + 9.0 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
2016          Q1 + 18.5 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 14.1 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0
         Q2 + 17.4 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 3.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 3.3         Q3 + 24.4 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 10.9 + 5.1 + 10.2 + 4.2 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 1.6 + 2.7
 Short-term lending
2015          Q3 − 4.7 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 4.8 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.2         Q4 − 7.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.2
2016          Q1 + 10.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 11.4 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Q2 − 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.6         Q3 − 2.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
 Medium-term lending
2015          Q3 − 0.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Q4 + 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6
2016          Q1 + 1.4 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 3.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
 Long-term lending
2015          Q3 + 17.9 + 9.8 + 13.7 + 9.3 + 4.4 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.6         Q4 + 17.0 + 9.0 + 11.7 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.8
2016          Q1 + 6.5 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.6
         Q2 + 15.1 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 0.4         Q3 + 24.2 + 12.4 + 16.2 + 10.9 + 5.3 + 10.7 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.8
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8 2014
649.0 191.5 32.0 175.9 394.7 47.7 1,103.0 878.4 224.6 153.6 11.0 14.2 3.6 2015          Sep 
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5          Dec 
660.2 194.8 34.4 177.4 397.2 47.1 1,115.9 889.2 226.6 156.8 10.3 14.1 3.4 2016          Mar 
667.2 198.4 34.6 178.1 399.4 46.9 1,127.6 898.7 228.9 159.6 9.8 14.0 3.5          June672.7 201.4 34.8 180.8 401.1 46.8 1,142.0 910.5 231.5 162.3 9.8 14.2 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0 2014
51.0 8.6 6.2 10.4 26.1 6.3 33.8 4.2 29.6 1.7 11.0 0.6 0.0 2015          Sep 
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0          Dec 
50.3 8.1 6.5 10.5 25.6 6.2 32.4 3.7 28.7 1.8 10.3 0.5 0.0 2016          Mar 
51.2 8.6 6.1 10.7 25.5 5.9 31.6 3.6 28.1 1.8 9.8 0.5 0.0          June49.9 8.5 5.9 11.1 24.7 5.7 31.6 3.4 28.2 1.7 9.8 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0 2014
66.5 9.9 7.0 19.5 32.3 3.5 73.9 22.1 51.9 46.9 − 0.5 0.0 2015          Sep 
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
69.1 10.1 7.2 19.4 32.7 3.5 74.9 21.5 53.3 48.1 − 0.6 0.0 2016          Mar 
70.1 10.6 7.3 19.0 33.0 3.6 76.0 21.4 54.6 49.3 − 0.6 0.0          June
69.7 10.7 7.3 18.9 33.0 3.7 77.1 21.4 55.7 50.3 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7 2014
531.5 173.0 18.8 146.0 336.3 37.9 995.3 852.1 143.2 105.0 − 13.2 3.6 2015          Sep 
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5          Dec 
540.8 176.7 20.7 147.6 338.9 37.4 1,008.6 864.0 144.6 106.9 − 13.0 3.4 2016          Mar 
545.8 179.2 21.2 148.5 340.9 37.4 1,019.9 873.7 146.2 108.6 − 13.0 3.4          June
553.1 182.1 21.6 150.8 343.4 37.4 1,033.3 885.7 147.6 110.2 − 13.1 3.5          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.3 + 13.5 + 11.5 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 2015          Q3+ 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1          Q4
+ 6.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 7.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 11.8 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 6.4 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 14.1 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
Short-term lending
− 3.7 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q3− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.1 − 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 −          Q2− 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q3+ 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 − − − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 2.9 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 1.7 + 2.8 − 0.0 + 12.7 + 11.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1 2015          Q3
+ 5.0 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 8.6 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1          Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 5.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 11.4 + 9.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 7.4 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2013 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 254.8 697.2 29.7 667.5 610.1 76.6 32.9 29.0 5.4
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.72015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2015          Oct 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 231.6 658.6 34.7 623.9 594.6 57.5 29.5 22.7 1.9
         Nov 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 239.6 657.1 35.1 622.0 594.3 56.8 29.5 22.5 2.0         Dec 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016          Jan 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 236.2 657.1 39.0 618.1 596.1 54.8 29.3 20.1 0.5
         Feb 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 232.0 655.9 39.5 616.4 596.4 54.6 29.3 19.9 0.8         Mar 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 236.4 658.5 41.4 617.1 594.5 54.4 29.1 19.8 1.6
         Apr 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 235.9 657.7 42.2 615.5 592.7 54.0 29.0 19.7 1.7
         May 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 237.7 658.3 41.9 616.5 591.2 53.7 29.0 19.6 1.5         June 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 235.9 658.2 42.8 615.4 590.0 53.1 28.7 19.5 1.5
         July 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 238.0 658.8 44.5 614.3 589.1 52.7 28.6 19.3 1.0
         Aug 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 234.7 658.3 45.0 613.3 588.4 52.2 28.7 19.0 0.7         Sep 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 239.5 657.2 45.5 611.7 587.2 51.8 28.6 18.8 1.3
Changes*
2014 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 + 2.5 − 27.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 − 2.8 − 3.7
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2015          Oct + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 − 7.2 − 6.0 + 1.5 − 7.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7
         Nov + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 + 8.0 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1         Dec − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 3.4 − 1.7 + 2.2 − 3.8 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.5
2016          Jan + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 7.2 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Mar − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.8
         Apr + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         July + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Aug + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3         Sep + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7
Domestic government End of year or month*
2013 183.0 48.2 129.6 81.1 48.5 5.7 42.8 3.6 1.6 30.7 4.8 4.7
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2015          Oct 191.6 58.7 125.6 81.3 44.3 9.8 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.9 1.6
         Nov 200.5 58.4 134.7 90.7 44.0 9.5 34.5 3.7 3.5 28.1 2.8 1.6
         Dec 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016          Jan 193.0 56.6 129.2 83.9 45.3 10.6 34.7 3.7 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.1
         Feb 194.5 61.4 125.9 80.4 45.6 10.6 34.9 3.6 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.5
         Mar 198.3 60.5 130.5 84.1 46.4 10.9 35.5 3.6 3.7 27.7 2.7 1.2
         Apr 196.0 60.8 127.7 79.9 47.8 11.0 36.9 3.7 3.7 27.6 2.6 1.3
         May 204.3 63.5 133.0 84.4 48.6 11.2 37.4 3.8 4.0 27.6 2.6 1.1
         June 204.0 62.1 134.0 84.6 49.4 11.6 37.8 3.9 4.0 27.3 2.6 0.2
         July 203.8 60.1 135.8 84.5 51.3 13.3 38.0 3.9 4.1 27.2 2.6 0.2
         Aug 206.1 62.4 135.6 83.6 52.1 13.7 38.4 4.0 4.1 27.3 2.6 0.0
         Sep 202.6 59.6 134.8 82.4 52.4 14.1 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 0.2
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 + 1.9 − 3.9 + 2.5 − 6.4 + 1.0 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 4.2
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2015          Oct − 6.2 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 5.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5
         Nov + 8.8 − 0.3 + 9.1 + 9.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         Dec − 3.0 − 0.9 − 2.1 − 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.0
2016          Jan − 4.5 − 1.0 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.0 + 4.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4         Mar + 3.8 − 0.9 + 4.6 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Apr − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 4.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2         June − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.9
         July − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2013 2,865.7 1,361.7 822.4 173.7 648.7 24.0 624.7 606.5 75.0 2.2 24.2 0.7
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.22015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2015          Oct 3,006.2 1,596.7 764.6 150.3 614.3 24.9 589.4 590.9 53.9 1.3 19.8 0.3
         Nov 3,024.3 1,618.5 762.0 149.0 613.0 25.6 587.5 590.5 53.3 1.4 19.7 0.4         Dec 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2016          Jan 3,040.8 1,633.0 764.1 152.3 611.8 28.4 583.5 592.4 51.3 1.4 17.4 0.4
         Feb 3,041.7 1,636.1 761.9 151.6 610.3 28.8 581.5 592.7 51.0 1.4 17.2 0.3         Mar 3,032.9 1,626.9 764.4 152.2 612.2 30.5 581.6 590.9 50.7 1.4 17.2 0.3
         Apr 3,053.8 1,648.8 765.8 156.0 609.8 31.2 578.6 589.0 50.3 1.4 17.1 0.3
         May 3,058.5 1,658.3 763.1 153.3 609.7 30.7 579.0 587.4 49.7 1.4 17.0 0.4         June 3,055.9 1,660.5 760.1 151.3 608.8 31.2 577.6 586.2 49.1 1.4 16.9 1.2
         July 3,071.8 1,677.0 761.1 153.6 607.5 31.2 576.3 585.2 48.6 1.4 16.7 0.8
         Aug 3,076.0 1,686.1 757.4 151.1 606.3 31.4 574.9 584.4 48.1 1.4 16.4 0.6         Sep 3,081.1 1,688.4 761.8 157.0 604.8 31.4 573.3 583.2 47.6 1.4 16.1 1.2
Changes*
2014 + 70.8 + 106.0 − 21.4 − 0.0 − 21.4 − 1.5 − 19.9 − 2.5 − 11.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 0.5
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.2
2015          Oct + 17.2 + 25.9 − 8.1 − 1.8 − 6.3 + 1.4 − 7.7 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 18.2 + 21.8 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec + 3.0 − 2.3 + 3.9 + 6.4 − 2.5 + 1.5 − 4.0 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.4
2016          Jan + 13.6 + 16.8 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4
         Feb + 1.8 + 3.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 8.8 − 9.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Apr + 20.9 + 21.8 + 1.4 + 3.8 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         May + 4.8 + 9.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         June − 2.2 + 2.3 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         July + 15.9 + 16.4 + 1.0 + 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.3 + 9.1 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2         Sep + 5.4 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 5.9 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2013 1,011.3 429.1 559.7 105.6 454.0 10.1 444.0 7.2 15.3 2.2 17.2 0.7
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2015          Oct 1,031.8 504.5 506.3 93.2 413.1 12.9 400.2 7.1 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.3
         Nov 1,033.9 508.8 504.3 92.7 411.6 13.4 398.2 7.0 13.9 1.3 15.8 0.4
         Dec 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016          Jan 1,037.6 512.8 504.2 97.4 406.9 15.3 391.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         Feb 1,033.9 510.7 502.8 97.4 405.3 15.7 389.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Mar 1,029.9 504.8 504.6 98.0 406.7 17.2 389.5 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Apr 1,032.3 506.7 505.1 101.3 403.8 17.5 386.4 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         May 1,035.5 513.4 501.5 98.2 403.3 17.0 386.3 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         June 1,027.4 508.9 498.0 95.7 402.2 17.6 384.7 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 1.2
         July 1,027.0 506.7 499.6 98.2 401.4 17.5 384.0 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.6 0.8
         Aug 1,030.7 512.7 497.2 96.9 400.2 17.7 382.5 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.3 0.6
         Sep 1,035.0 512.9 501.4 103.0 398.4 17.8 380.7 7.3 13.4 1.3 13.1 1.2
Changes*
2014 − 1.4 + 28.8 − 29.5 − 1.0 − 28.5 + 0.4 − 28.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.5
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.2
2015          Oct + 8.0 + 15.3 − 7.3 − 1.0 − 6.4 + 1.1 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 2.1 + 4.3 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1         Dec − 4.1 − 5.9 + 2.2 + 7.2 − 4.9 + 1.0 − 5.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.4
2016          Jan + 7.9 + 10.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Feb − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 4.1 − 5.9 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 3.3 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0         June − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Aug + 3.8 + 6.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         Sep + 4.7 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 6.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits
Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,854.4 932.5 906.3 161.3 613.0 132.0 26.2 262.8 247.2 16.5 215.1 15.6
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016          Apr 2,021.5 1,142.1 1,108.3 193.2 769.7 145.5 33.8 260.7 247.7 25.1 180.7 41.9
         May 2,023.0 1,144.9 1,110.3 193.7 771.7 144.9 34.7 261.5 248.5 25.3 181.2 42.0
         June 2,028.5 1,151.7 1,116.7 191.3 779.9 145.5 34.9 262.1 248.8 25.5 181.3 42.0
         July 2,044.8 1,170.3 1,135.8 198.4 791.4 146.0 34.5 261.5 247.9 25.7 180.7 41.5
         Aug 2,045.3 1,173.3 1,138.1 201.5 790.3 146.4 35.2 260.2 246.7 24.7 180.7 41.4
         Sep 2,046.0 1,175.5 1,140.3 198.3 795.2 146.8 35.2 260.4 246.8 24.8 180.8 41.1
Changes*
2014 + 72.3 + 77.2 + 74.0 + 11.7 + 57.1 + 5.3 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 7.6 + 1.9 + 6.4 − 0.6
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2016          Apr + 18.5 + 20.0 + 19.7 + 4.6 + 13.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
         May + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2
         June + 5.6 + 6.7 + 6.5 − 2.4 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0
         July + 16.1 + 18.4 + 18.8 + 7.1 + 10.4 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.5 + 3.1 + 2.3 + 3.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Sep + 0.7 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 3.2 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2013 183.0 16.0 2.9 7.7 5.3 0.1 15.7 43.6 10.2 10.1 23.0 0.2 14.6
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016          Apr 196.0 7.9 3.2 2.0 2.6 0.1 14.0 49.3 14.5 16.9 17.0 0.9 13.2
         May 204.3 8.1 3.3 2.1 2.7 0.1 14.0 49.4 13.7 17.7 17.1 0.9 13.2
         June 204.0 8.8 3.9 2.2 2.6 0.1 13.8 51.7 14.7 19.0 17.1 0.9 13.1
         July 203.8 8.1 3.6 1.8 2.6 0.1 13.8 53.9 15.1 20.4 17.5 0.8 13.1
         Aug 206.1 7.9 3.6 1.6 2.6 0.1 13.8 51.9 14.4 19.2 17.4 0.9 13.1
         Sep 202.6 8.1 3.7 1.8 2.5 0.1 13.8 53.0 14.8 19.8 17.5 0.9 13.0
Changes*
2014 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 0.4 − 0.5
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2016          Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         June − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0         Sep − 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
15.6 68.1 194.7 14.0 180.7 599.3 589.6 9.7 59.8 0.0 7.0 − 2013
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 201413.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 2015
13.0 54.7 206.0 13.8 192.2 581.8 572.7 9.0 37.1 0.1 3.4 − 2016          Apr 
13.0 55.1 206.4 13.7 192.7 580.1 571.1 9.0 36.4 0.1 3.3 −          May13.3 55.6 206.5 13.6 192.9 578.9 569.9 9.0 35.9 0.1 3.2 −          June
13.6 55.4 206.1 13.7 192.3 577.8 568.9 9.0 35.2 0.1 3.1 −          July
13.5 54.2 206.0 13.7 192.4 577.0 568.0 9.0 34.7 0.1 3.1 −          Aug 13.6 54.0 206.3 13.7 192.6 575.9 567.0 8.9 34.2 0.1 3.0 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 0.5 + 1.0 + 7.1 − 2.0 + 9.0 − 2.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 2014
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015
+ 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2016          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          May
+ 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          June
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
44.9 23.5 10.7 6.6 4.1 0.4 78.7 11.6 52.7 13.5 0.9 0.0 2013
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 201452.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 2015
49.0 26.1 9.0 8.7 5.3 0.4 89.8 17.1 52.0 19.6 1.1 − 2016          Apr 
53.6 30.1 9.3 8.8 5.5 0.4 93.2 16.5 55.3 20.0 1.3 −          May50.7 27.7 8.6 9.0 5.5 0.4 92.7 15.8 54.8 20.8 1.4 −          June
48.3 25.4 8.0 9.4 5.5 0.4 93.5 16.0 54.2 21.9 1.5 −          July
54.2 30.3 8.7 9.6 5.6 0.4 92.0 14.1 54.0 22.4 1.5 −          Aug 51.3 27.5 8.5 9.8 5.6 0.4 90.2 13.6 52.4 22.6 1.6 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 2.9 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 − 2.4 + 4.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2014+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015
+ 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 2016          Apr 
+ 4.6 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − + 3.3 − 0.6 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.2 −          May− 2.9 − 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 −          June
− 2.5 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 −          July
+ 5.9 + 4.9 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          Aug − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2013 620.0 610.1 532.4 413.5 77.8 65.2 9.9 7.9 7.5 92.2 76.6 59.3 15.6
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.82015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016          May 599.8 591.2 535.0 369.7 56.2 42.3 8.6 7.3 0.1 62.2 53.7 38.4 8.5
         June 598.6 590.0 534.6 369.2 55.5 41.6 8.5 7.2 0.1 61.7 53.1 38.0 8.5
         July 597.6 589.1 534.5 367.6 54.6 40.8 8.4 7.2 0.2 61.3 52.7 37.7 8.6
         Aug 596.8 588.4 534.6 365.4 53.8 40.0 8.4 7.2 0.1 60.7 52.2 37.3 8.6         Sep 595.4 587.2 534.1 364.4 53.1 39.2 8.3 7.1 0.1 60.4 51.8 37.0 8.5
Changes*
2014 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 13.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 . − 12.3 − 10.6 − 7.8 − 1.8
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2016          May − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1
         June − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.0
         July − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Sep − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up toand including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non-
maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2013 1,142.7 315.9 26.3 321.2 54.8 69.0 2.5 34.7 4.4 1,039.0 0.6 0.2 37.0 1.1
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.22015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016          May 1,098.6 177.9 32.6 403.2 98.4 120.3 2.7 32.4 6.0 946.0 0.2 0.2 34.0 0.5
         June 1,091.5 175.7 32.3 396.8 97.9 119.7 2.5 32.1 5.9 939.7 0.2 0.2 34.1 0.5
         July 1,079.0 174.5 30.6 387.9 92.6 114.1 4.0 33.8 6.2 931.1 0.4 0.2 34.0 0.5
         Aug 1,083.2 173.3 29.7 393.3 94.4 115.7 4.1 33.7 6.3 933.7 0.4 0.2 33.6 0.5         Sep 1,086.5 169.5 32.5 398.2 100.1 125.2 5.0 35.5 5.9 925.7 0.3 0.2 33.4 0.5
Changes*
2014 − 28.7 − 29.5 + 0.0 + 32.7 + 14.4 + 14.6 − 0.7 − 8.4 + 0.6 − 35.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2016          May + 13.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 16.8 + 2.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 −         June − 7.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 6.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 6.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
         July − 12.5 − 1.2 − 1.7 − 8.9 − 5.4 − 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 8.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug + 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 −         Sep + 3.3 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 9.5 + 0.8 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2014 21 211.6 45.6 0.0 16.6 18.7 87.2 17.3 20.6 1.9 21.3 156.8 5.2 2.8 9.2 94.6
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016          July 21 214.5 41.3 0.0 17.4 14.7 95.8 17.8 22.8 2.1 19.5 160.4 5.5 2.5 10.2 7.0
         Aug 20 214.7 41.1 0.0 17.2 14.5 96.3 17.9 22.9 2.2 19.5 160.6 5.5 2.5 10.2 7.0
         Sep 20 215.1 41.1 0.0 17.0 14.3 97.1 17.9 22.9 2.2 19.0 160.9 5.6 2.6 10.2 7.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          July 12 148.4 25.4 − 9.2 10.9 74.5 15.2 9.5 1.4 16.7 105.3 5.1 2.5 6.6 4.4         Aug 12 148.6 25.3 − 9.0 10.8 74.8 15.4 9.6 1.4 16.8 105.4 5.1 2.5 6.6 4.4         Sep 12 148.9 25.4 − 8.6 10.6 75.5 15.3 9.8 1.5 16.4 105.7 5.2 2.6 6.6 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          July 9 66.1 15.9 0.0 8.2 3.8 21.4 2.6 13.2 0.7 2.8 55.1 0.4 − 3.7 2.6         Aug 8 66.1 15.9 0.0 8.2 3.7 21.5 2.6 13.2 0.8 2.7 55.2 0.3 − 3.6 2.6         Sep 8 66.2 15.7 0.0 8.4 3.7 21.7 2.6 13.1 0.8 2.6 55.3 0.4 − 3.6 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2014 29.5 2.5 6.5 45.7 27.9 39.9 16.7 4.2 6.1 3.6 17.1 14.5 8.0 10.1 8.4 0.4
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016          July 2.1 0.0 0.8 4.4 2.7 3.8 1.8 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.6 16.2 8.4 0.6 0.0
         Aug 2.2 0.0 0.7 3.5 1.9 3.3 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.7 16.0 8.3 0.6 0.0
         Sep 2.3 0.0 0.6 3.4 1.9 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.7 15.7 8.1 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          July 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.0 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.3 11.6 5.1 0.5 0.0
         Aug 1.4 0.0 0.4 2.5 1.3 2.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.4 11.4 5.0 0.5 0.0         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.3 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.3 11.3 5.0 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          July 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.0         Aug 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.3 4.6 3.2 0.2 0.0         Sep 0.8 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.1 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.92015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2015          Nov 51 199 1,980.5 533.8 515.8 150.0 365.8 18.0 658.8 528.5 14.6 513.9 130.4 787.9 557.2
         Dec 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016          Jan 50 196 1,960.5 540.7 523.3 169.1 354.2 17.4 652.2 529.7 14.2 515.5 122.6 767.5 568.7
         Feb 49 192 2,022.6 555.3 538.2 173.5 364.7 17.2 658.4 538.2 14.3 523.9 120.2 808.8 607.9         Mar 49 192 1,943.8 558.9 543.2 172.4 370.8 15.7 642.2 529.2 14.6 514.6 113.1 742.6 557.5
         Apr 49 192 1,933.2 545.0 529.1 177.2 351.8 15.9 659.8 545.1 14.7 530.4 114.7 728.4 539.0
         May 48 187 1,930.1 563.9 548.9 176.4 372.5 15.0 642.5 529.8 13.6 516.3 112.7 723.7 519.2         June 49 188 2,036.5 569.2 553.5 182.3 371.2 15.6 674.8 556.9 14.1 542.8 117.9 792.5 593.8
         July 50 187 2,060.2 587.5 572.6 183.1 389.6 14.9 668.3 551.7 13.6 538.1 116.5 804.5 590.3
         Aug 50 187 1,959.7 569.3 553.9 187.9 366.0 15.4 643.3 528.5 13.9 514.6 114.7 747.1 544.6
Changes *
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2015          Dec − − 1 − 135.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 11.2 − 10.6 − 0.4 − 11.7 − 6.8 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 4.9 − 106.1 − 51.3
2016          Jan − 1 − 2 + 118.2 + 16.1 + 15.9 + 7.9 + 8.1 + 0.2 + 20.9 + 21.3 + 0.2 + 21.1 − 0.4 + 85.8 + 71.1
         Feb − 1 − 4 + 61.6 + 13.6 + 13.8 + 4.4 + 9.5 − 0.3 + 5.1 + 7.4 + 0.1 + 7.3 − 2.3 + 40.7 + 38.8
         Mar − − − 75.2 + 14.9 + 16.0 − 1.0 + 17.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 62.5 − 39.6
         Apr − − − 10.9 − 14.2 − 14.4 + 4.8 − 19.2 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.4 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 1.4 − 14.5 − 18.8
         May − 1 − 5 − 4.7 + 13.3 + 14.4 − 0.9 + 15.3 − 1.1 − 25.5 − 22.3 − 1.2 − 21.1 − 3.2 − 6.4 − 24.9         June + 1 + 1 + 105.9 + 4.4 + 3.8 + 5.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 + 33.6 + 27.7 + 0.5 + 27.2 + 5.9 + 68.4 + 75.4
         July + 1 − 1 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 19.4 + 0.7 + 18.7 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 + 12.2 − 2.6
         Aug − − − 100.4 − 17.6 − 18.2 + 4.9 − 23.0 + 0.5 − 24.1 − 22.5 + 0.3 − 22.7 − 1.7 − 57.2 − 45.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2015          Nov 25 59 379.5 121.1 107.4 44.5 62.8 13.7 191.7 158.3 22.5 135.8 33.3 66.8 −
         Dec 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016          Jan 24 58 375.6 129.1 116.5 53.7 62.7 12.7 185.1 152.9 21.7 131.1 32.3 61.3 −
         Feb 24 58 359.4 120.7 108.5 50.7 57.9 12.2 174.1 141.8 22.3 119.6 32.3 64.6 −         Mar 24 58 352.2 113.6 102.1 47.9 54.2 11.5 173.4 140.6 22.6 118.1 32.8 65.2 −
         Apr 24 58 349.7 116.3 104.9 48.9 56.0 11.4 169.8 137.4 23.0 114.4 32.4 63.7 −
         May 24 57 350.4 115.3 103.9 49.0 54.9 11.4 170.6 138.2 22.9 115.3 32.4 64.5 −         June 24 57 356.9 117.7 107.5 52.9 54.6 10.2 170.5 138.0 22.9 115.1 32.5 68.7 −
         July 19 56 355.3 116.3 106.2 51.8 54.5 10.1 170.3 137.4 23.7 113.7 32.9 68.7 −
         Aug 19 55 352.7 112.4 102.3 48.0 54.3 10.0 167.7 135.4 23.0 112.3 32.3 72.6 −
Changes *
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2015          Dec − 1 − 1 − 0.7 + 6.8 + 7.2 + 5.6 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 −
2016          Jan − − + 0.6 + 3.0 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.5 − 3.8 −
         Feb − − − 16.4 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 3.1 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 11.2 − 11.2 + 0.5 − 11.7 + 0.0 + 3.3 −
         Mar − − − 3.7 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 −
         Apr − − − 2.5 + 2.7 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.3 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.4 − 1.5 −
         May − − 1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 −
         June − − + 6.7 + 2.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 −
         July − 5 − 1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Aug − − 1 − 2.3 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 3.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 4.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2016
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 2015
1,124.3 742.0 377.3 364.7 382.3 22.0 17.0 5.0 360.3 138.6 48.4 669.2 554.0 2015          Nov 
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4          Dec 
1,101.8 733.9 357.8 376.1 367.9 21.3 16.6 4.8 346.5 129.4 50.0 679.3 566.3 2016          Jan 
1,105.0 734.8 368.7 366.1 370.3 22.1 17.4 4.7 348.2 127.7 49.7 740.1 605.7          Feb 1,083.8 714.8 344.5 370.3 369.0 23.6 19.5 4.1 345.4 121.3 49.4 689.3 559.2          Mar 
1,108.9 719.0 348.0 371.0 389.9 21.5 17.4 4.1 368.5 117.7 49.4 657.2 541.5          Apr 
1,130.1 746.9 358.9 388.0 383.2 20.7 17.2 3.6 362.5 111.0 49.7 639.4 523.0          May1,154.9 762.2 386.5 375.6 392.8 21.3 17.8 3.5 371.5 104.9 49.8 726.9 596.8          June
1,163.1 772.6 388.8 383.8 390.5 21.3 17.5 3.8 369.2 108.5 49.8 738.9 593.8          July
1,128.2 760.8 382.8 378.1 367.4 21.6 17.7 3.8 345.8 114.7 49.8 667.0 548.8          Aug 
Changes *
+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015
− 55.2 − 18.9 − 18.0 − 0.9 − 36.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 35.4 − 7.2 + 1.5 − 66.8 − 49.3 2015          Dec 
+ 42.4 + 20.1 − 1.5 + 21.6 + 22.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 22.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 76.2 + 70.3 2016          Jan 
+ 2.0 − 0.4 + 10.9 − 11.3 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 60.9 + 39.1          Feb − 9.5 − 8.6 − 24.2 + 15.5 − 0.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 50.9 − 34.9          Mar 
+ 24.6 + 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 20.9 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 18.0          Apr 
+ 15.1 + 22.0 + 10.9 + 11.1 − 6.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 8.3 + 0.3 − 17.9 − 23.8          May+ 24.0 + 14.3 + 27.6 − 13.2 + 9.6 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 6.5 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 74.4          June
+ 9.0 + 11.2 + 2.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.0 + 12.0 − 2.1          July
− 34.3 − 11.2 − 6.0 − 5.2 − 23.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 23.4 + 6.4 + 0.1 − 71.9 − 44.4          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015
293.4 159.3 90.2 69.0 134.1 11.8 9.2 2.6 122.3 14.8 26.7 44.7 − 2015          Nov 
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 −          Dec 
294.1 170.0 101.9 68.1 124.1 11.9 9.4 2.6 112.2 14.5 26.4 40.6 − 2016          Jan 
282.1 157.1 99.1 58.0 125.0 13.2 10.5 2.8 111.8 12.9 24.3 40.1 −          Feb 
275.0 160.5 100.5 59.9 114.5 13.4 10.5 2.9 101.1 13.3 24.2 39.6 −          Mar 
274.5 161.1 102.8 58.3 113.4 13.8 10.9 2.9 99.6 13.5 24.2 37.5 −          Apr 
275.9 164.2 103.6 60.6 111.8 12.7 9.9 2.8 99.1 13.3 24.3 36.8 −          May
284.5 163.7 101.1 62.6 120.8 12.1 9.3 2.7 108.7 12.3 24.0 36.1 −          June
282.4 162.9 98.9 64.1 119.4 11.5 8.7 2.7 108.0 12.5 24.4 36.0 −          July
281.4 167.7 99.9 67.8 113.7 11.0 6.3 4.8 102.7 12.4 24.4 34.5 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015
+ 1.3 + 8.7 + 9.3 − 0.6 − 7.4 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 8.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 2015          Dec 
+ 2.3 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 1.3 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 2016          Jan 
− 12.1 − 12.9 − 2.8 − 10.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.7 −          Feb 
− 4.2 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 9.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 −          Mar 
− 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 −          Apr 
− 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 −          May
+ 8.8 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 + 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 9.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 −          June
− 2.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.0 + 3.8 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.0 − 5.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2016
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance
Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.02012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.02013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 
8 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016          July 11,712.7 117.1 116.7 748.8 632.1 0.0         Aug . . . . . .         Sep 11,821.2 118.2 117.8 777.4 659.6 0.0         Oct  
p 11,783.5 117.8 117.4 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance
German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 02011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 12012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 12013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016          July 3,226,967 27.6 32,270 32,101 229,334 197,233 0         Aug . . . . . . .         Sep 3,280,948 27.8 32,809 32,643 243,561 210,918 0         Oct  
p 3,293,872 28.0 32,939 32,773 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance
Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in 1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,1702011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,3242012 
3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016          July 5,978 5,220 2,470 10,751 5,834 232 1,617         Aug . . . . . . .         Sep 6,076 5,556 2,483 10,847 5,897 236 1,548         Oct 6,078 5,447 2,665 10,869 5,924 233 1,558
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and
securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in 1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,7282011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,1532012 
3 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016          July 2,149,432 2,352 378,231 589,495 107,539         Aug . . . . .         Sep 2,168,562 2,072 418,510 587,510 104,297         Oct 2,177,643 3,232 420,700 586,867 105,447
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, lump-sum allowance. 8Required reserves after deduction of the lump-sum
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve allowance, including required reserves of Lithuania ( €0.154 billion). Required
base.
The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was reserves of the euro area up to 31 December 2014 amounted to € 106.2 billion. 
2%
between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2016
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2016 Oct                12 32,886 32,886 0.00−−−7
         Oct                19 33,428 33,428 0.00−−−7
         Oct                26 36,027 36,027 0.00−−−6
         Nov                  1 32,728 32,728 0.00−−−8
         Nov                  9 31,449 31,449 0.00−−−7
         Nov                16 32,639 32,639 0.00−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2016 July                28 7,010 7,010 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep                  1 5,015 5,015 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep                28 45,270 45,270 0,00−−− 1,463
         Sep                29 4,570 4,570 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct                27 5,427 5,427 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2016          Apr − 0.34 − 0.36 − 0.34 − 0.25 − 0.14 − 0.07 − 0.01
         May − 0.34 − 0.36 − 0.35 − 0.26 − 0.14 − 0.08 − 0.01
         June − 0.33 − 0.37 − 0.36 − 0.27 − 0.16 − 0.10 − 0.03
         July − 0.33 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.29 − 0.19 − 0.12 − 0.06
         Aug − 0.34 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.30 − 0.19 − 0.12 − 0.05
         Sep − 0.34 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.30 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.06
         Oct − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.21 − 0.13 − 0.07
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 
1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Sep 
0.50 79,461 1.70 221,031 0.26 75,281 2.17 17,611
         Oct 0.49 78,623 1.69 220,371 0.25 74,750 2.15 17,702
         Nov 0.48 77,788 1.67 219,914 0.24 76,639 2.09 17,194
         Dec 0.46 77,515 1.66 221,625 0.22 79,591 2.04 17,364
2016          Jan 0.45 76,746 1.64 221,432 0.22 79,489 2.00 17,335
         Feb 0.44 75,932 1.62 221,154 0.21 80,142 2.00 17,271
         Mar 0.44 76,809 1.61 221,229 0.20 82,706 1.95 17,573
         Apr 0.44 77,166 1.59 220,954 0.19 83,708 1.92 17,490
         May 0.43 77,295 1.58 220,985 0.19 80,922 1.86 18,025
         June 0.42 77,303 1.56 220,707 0.16 78,910 1.80 18,063
         July 0.41 77,112 1.55 219,660 0.14 80,553 1.76 18,143
         Aug 0.41 75,607 1.53 219,332 0.14 79,332 1.72 18,124
         Sep 0.40 75,235 1.52 219,354 0.12 83,015 1.65 18,371
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Sep 
2.64 5,135 2.44 27,890 3.41 1,036,799 7.55 55,936 4.48 78,671 4.54 306,905
         Oct 2.62 5,160 2.41 27,887 3.38 1,041,492 7.43 54,093 4.44 79,409 4.51 307,750
         Nov 2.61 5,139 2.38 27,838 3.36 1,044,861 7.39 53,821 4.42 79,222 4.49 308,002
         Dec 2.62 5,029 2.36 27,692 3.33 1,047,658 7.38 54,838 4.39 79,345 4.46 306,514
2016          Jan 2.61 5,011 2.34 27,438 3.30 1,047,865 7.44 52,884 4.35 79,779 4.43 307,381
         Feb 2.60 5,022 2.36 27,364 3.27 1,049,663 7.45 53,249 4.31 80,351 4.41 307,866
         Mar 2.63 5,014 2.34 27,371 3.24 1,052,498 7.49 54,287 4.29 80,695 4.38 307,355
         Apr 2.56 4,928 2.31 27,215 3.21 1,057,019 7.33 52,229 4.27 81,376 4.35 308,474
         May 2.57 4,959 2.29 27,187 3.19 1,059,863 7.36 52,678 4.24 81,793 4.33 309,250
         June 2.57 4,863 2.28 27,272 3.16 1,064,491 7.39 53,521 4.22 82,252 4.31 309,025
         July 2.50 4,836 2.25 27,233 3.13 1,069,851 7.26 51,406 4.20 82,844 4.29 310,390
         Aug 2.50 4,772 2.23 27,198 3.10 1,074,183 7.27 51,516 4.17 83,206 4.27 310,914
         Sep 2.49 4,645 2.22 27,195 3.07 1,079,272 7.29 52,985 4.15 83,297 4.24 310,504
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Sep 
2.86 132,444 2.39 126,160 2.82 585,043
         Oct 2.80 130,602 2.36 127,257 2.80 587,398
         Nov 2.82 128,922 2.33 129,015 2.78 594,272
         Dec 2.77 125,750 2.29 129,455 2.74 593,021
2016          Jan 2.68 130,505 2.26 129,655 2.72 595,850
         Feb 2.67 134,107 2.23 130,842 2.70 598,794
         Mar 2.65 137,421 2.20 130,530 2.67 597,332
         Apr 2.66 136,364 2.18 131,883 2.64 601,069
         May 2.60 136,538 2.15 132,698 2.62 605,918
         June 2.62 135,941 2.13 133,455 2.60 604,497
         July 2.59 133,112 2.09 133,334 2.57 608,349
         Aug 2.60 129,449 2.08 134,293 2.55 613,121
         Sep 2.58 132,354 2.06 134,447 2.52 612,811
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics
/ MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Sep 
0.14 1,079,060 0.34 6,158 0.87 668 1.12 971 0.42 528,705 0.51 65,229
         Oct 0.15 1,089,962 0.34 5,760 0.71 793 0.90 1,088 0.41 529,980 0.49 63,966
         Nov 0.14 1,107,307 0.34 5,900 0.69 840 0.89 1,196 0.40 530,810 0.47 62,774
         Dec 0.13 1,111,065 0.28 6,140 0.50 1,161 0.97 1,379 0.39 533,865 0.45 61,900
2016          Jan 0.12 1,117,856 0.35 7,184 0.62 1,024 1.00 1,360 0.37 534,775 0.43 60,627
         Feb 0.12 1,123,332 0.34 6,226 0.71 914 1.03 1,493 0.36 536,409 0.40 59,334
         Mar 0.11 1,120,146 0.34 6,804 0.82 1,137 0.93 1,721 0.34 535,575 0.39 58,239
         Apr 0.10 1,140,220 0.35 5,852 0.69 994 0.94 1,130 0.32 534,792 0.38 57,125
         May 0.10 1,142,947 0.34 5,430 0.69 747 0.89 901 0.31 534,122 0.37 56,154
         June 0.08 1,149,604 0.27 6,027 0.73 759 0.83 935 0.30 533,649 0.36 55,415
         July 0.08 1,168,427 0.27 5,846 0.57 856 0.80 903 0.28 533,501 0.35 54,560
         Aug 0.08 1,171,644 0.33 5,081 0.61 1,148 0.86 961 0.27 533,503 0.34 53,749
         Sep 0.08 1,173,762 0.33 5,253 0.50 671 0.77 885 0.26 532,980 0.33 53,031
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Sep 
0.05 357,208 0.15 8,732 0.22 723 0.54 351
         Oct 0.05 373,013 0.10 10,805 0.28 798 0.43 528
         Nov 0.05 377,900 0.11 10,676 0.39 574 0.56 326
         Dec 0.04 375,456 0.07 14,914 0.36 1,338 0.57 872
2016          Jan 0.03 370,533 0.10 9,780 0.32 1,283 0.42 489
         Feb 0.03 369,125 0.08 10,334 0.48 890 0.50 244
         Mar 0.05 369,344 − 0.03 14,907 0.20 931 1.34 1,057
         Apr 0.05 377,546 − 0.01 10,820 0.13 851 0.40 439
         May 0.01 380,942 − 0.02 9,700 0.18 694 0.52 1,123
         June 0.01 376,365 − 0.02 10,619 0.16 689 0.46 858
         July 0.01 378,718 − 0.02 9,596 0.14 569 0.25 476
         Aug 0.01 388,519 − 0.06 9,727 0.19 451 0.39 286
         Sep 0.01 389,701 − 0.08 15,158 0.14 598 0.30 792
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Sep 
2.19 6,448 1.99 2,333 1.91 3,289 2.96 838 2.30 2,321 1.96 1,949 3.21 618 2.23 1,576
         Oct 2.07 7,280 1.93 2,886 1.76 3,823 2.75 966 2.29 2,491 1.97 2,264 2.88 745 2.21 1,636
         Nov 2.03 6,561 1.97 2,146 1.75 3,295 2.74 872 2.17 2,394 2.07 1,872 2.81 694 2.13 1,556         Dec 2.05 8,344 2.03 2,796 1.81 4,005 2.75 1,136 2.11 3,203 2.06 2,469 2.80 886 2.06 2,163
2016          Jan 1.96 7,252 2.01 2,816 1.68 3,753 2.63 1,054 2.11 2,445 2.04 2,153 2.70 823 2.03 1,617
         Feb 2.05 6,669 2.10 2,300 1.87 3,388 2.64 904 2.08 2,377 2.15 2,032 2.76 690 2.05 1,528         Mar 2.02 7,255 1.87 2,578 1.77 3,549 2.70 996 2.09 2,710 1.96 2,167 2.81 756 2.03 1,796
         Apr 2.03 6,381 1.89 2,492 1.81 3,375 2.68 981 2.09 2,025 2.02 2,079 2.87 757 2.01 1,420
         May 2.00 5,898 1.92 1,926 1.77 2,921 2.71 876 2.03 2,101 2.01 1,859 2.97 647 1.97 1,372         June 2.02 6,820 1.93 2,359 1.84 3,200 2.58 1,134 1.98 2,486 2.09 1,953 2.67 898 1.89 1,769
         July 1.89 6,818 1.73 2,543 1.69 3,394 2.66 936 1.89 2,488 1.88 2,323 2.82 724 1.85 1,614
         Aug 2.02 5,949 1.95 1,989 1.94 2,699 2.80 793 1.85 2,457 1.99 1,789 2.96 589 1.89 1,569         Sep 1.89 6,462 1.76 2,153 1.76 3,266 2.69 807 1.81 2,389 1.88 2,013 2.89 610 1.78 1,638
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Sep 6.28 6.21 7,331 7.63 1,200 5.20 338 4.94 3,052 7.28 3,941
         Oct 6.28 6.20 7,233 7.69 1,135 5.17 309 4.88 3,104 7.36 3,820
         Nov 6.21 6.15 6,657 7.58 1,055 5.24 276 4.90 2,993 7.32 3,388
         Dec 6.03 5.97 6,067 7.30 934 5.67 316 4.78 2,867 7.19 2,884
2016          Jan 6.44 6.37 7,338 7.52 1,426 5.59 309 4.99 2,938 7.41 4,091
         Feb 6.25 6.20 7,862 7.44 1,444 5.55 322 4.94 3,260 7.22 4,280
         Mar 6.06 6.04 8,415 7.33 1,833 5.49 341 4.79 3,577 7.07 4,497
         Apr 6.21 6.19 8,734 7.33 1,814 5.89 310 4.88 3,548 7.16 4,876
         May 6.22 6.20 8,244 7.47 1,715 5.89 306 4.90 3,329 7.16 4,609
         June 6.20 6.18 8,940 7.47 1,864 5.73 314 4.87 3,616 7.15 5,010
         July 6.20 6.18 8,468 7.50 1,764 5.97 298 4.77 3,405 7.20 4,765
         Aug 6.09 6.06 8,301 7.36 1,643 5.89 328 4.70 3,402 7.09 4,571
         Sep 5.94 5.92 7,802 7.11 1,560 6.04 296 4.56 3,257 6.95 4,249
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Sep . 3.28 238 . . 2.52 38 3.90 116 2.78 84
         Oct . 3.33 244 . . 2.33 41 3.87 131 2.89 72
         Nov . 3.58 218 . . 2.84 23 3.90 136 3.14 59
         Dec . 3.39 219 . . 2.72 22 3.89 128 2.66 69
2016          Jan . 3.32 191 . . 2.50 21 3.72 111 2.85 59
         Feb . 3.51 220 . . 2.85 33 3.84 135 3.08 52
         Mar . 3.29 260 . . 2.58 25 3.71 158 2.65 77
         Apr . 3.49 206 . . 2.75 13 3.80 145 2.77 48
         May . 3.56 202 . . 2.69 18 3.95 135 2.79 49
         June . 3.62 213 . . 2.95 17 3.96 141 2.94 55
         July . 3.53 193 . . 2.85 18 3.82 135 2.86 40
         Aug . 3.52 216 . . 3.00 16 3.83 149 2.80 51
         Sep . 3.55 203 . . 2.86 17 3.85 136 2.97 50
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Sep 2.07 2.03 19,161 2.08 4,209 2.17 2,344 1.98 1,851 1.92 7,276 2.12 7,690
         Oct 2.07 2.05 19,874 2.04 5,455 2.11 2,577 1.99 2,125 1.94 7,230 2.14 7,942
         Nov 2.04 2.02 18,426 2.11 4,212 2.27 2,190 1.94 1,874 1.89 7,319 2.09 7,043
         Dec 1.98 1.95 19,521 2.02 4,769 2.16 2,713 1.88 2,045 1.83 7,385 2.01 7,378
2016          Jan 2.00 1.97 18,507 2.05 5,833 2.22 2,413 1.87 2,054 1.84 6,800 2.05 7,240
         Feb 1.97 1.96 18,778 2.16 4,870 2.45 2,584 1.86 1,994 1.79 6,837 1.97 7,363
         Mar 1.85 1.82 22,396 1.94 4,799 2.10 2,618 1.82 2,256 1.70 8,246 1.86 9,276
         Apr 1.93 1.88 17,859 1.94 4,981 2.16 2,206 1.82 1,820 1.67 6,054 1.97 7,779
         May 1.86 1.79 17,968 2.03 3,654 2.19 2,133 1.83 1,698 1.62 6,635 1.83 7,502
         June 1.82 1.76 21,409 1.94 4,079 2.04 2,567 1.85 1,931 1.60 7,424 1.79 9,487
         July 1.78 1.73 20,287 1.83 4,970 2.01 2,464 1.79 1,866 1.59 7,230 1.75 8,727
         Aug 1.74 1.68 19,903 1.86 4,075 2.18 2,185 1.76 1,745 1.49 7,197 1.69 8,776
         Sep 1.70 1.64 18,685 1.78 3,902 1.99 2,111 1.75 1,658 1.48 6,555 1.66 8,361
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Sep . 1.96 8,434 . . 2.13 912 1.74 878 1.87 3,334 2.07 3,310
         Oct . 1.99 9,323 . . 2.10 995 1.71 1,063 1.86 3,583 2.16 3,682
         Nov . 1.94 8,245 . . 2.21 812 1.69 888 1.83 3,378 2.05 3,167
         Dec . 1.86 8,294 . . 2.06 969 1.63 915 1.77 3,272 1.95 3,138
2016          Jan . 1.92 8,349 . . 2.30 916 1.62 1,003 1.80 3,276 2.04 3,154
         Feb . 1.89 7,875 . . 2.47 987 1.62 875 1.73 3,048 1.95 2,965
         Mar . 1.74 9,786 . . 2.01 1,002 1.63 1,075 1.63 3,807 1.81 3,902
         Apr . 1.89 7,980 . . 2.17 848 1.53 843 1.62 2,827 2.14 3,462
         May . 1.71 7,343 . . 2.08 783 1.53 752 1.54 2,804 1.81 3,004
         June . 1.67 9,111 . . 1.96 956 1.55 849 1.53 3,475 1.75 3,831
         July . 1.65 8,675 . . 1.86 927 1.51 833 1.53 3,387 1.75 3,528
         Aug . 1.58 8,476 . . 1.97 770 1.46 770 1.41 3,410 1.67 3,526
         Sep . 1.54 7,977 . . 1.93 775 1.46 708 1.39 3,109 1.61 3,385
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2016
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Sep 
8.95 42,843 9.01 35,907 15.43 3,899 4.08 65,570 4.10 65,322
         Oct 8.89 41,116 8.89 34,203 15.43 3,971 4.00 62,917 4.01 62,664
         Nov 8.82 40,622 8.82 33,577 15.32 4,064 3.92 65,212 3.94 64,959
         Dec 8.69 41,921 8.80 34,544 15.31 3,938 3.94 61,493 3.96 61,270
2016          Jan 8.83 40,469 8.78 33,630 15.36 4,043 3.82 65,219 3.84 65,010
         Feb 8.82 41,049 8.81 34,005 15.36 4,071 3.79 67,167 3.80 66,930
         Mar 8.81 42,187 8.80 35,211 15.42 3,982 3.84 68,638 3.85 68,394
         Apr 8.70 40,129 8.67 33,142 15.24 4,067 3.83 66,708 3.85 66,461
         May 8.72 40,781 8.75 33,466 15.21 4,135 3.70 67,212 3.71 66,974
         June 8.75 41,709 8.77 34,494 15.23 4,093 3.74 67,687 3.75 67,430
         July 8.61 39,874 8.62 32,504 15.22 4,152 3.66 65,412 3.67 65,180
         Aug 8.61 40,210 8.63 32,811 15.22 4,137 3.73 63,560 3.74 63,322
         Sep 8.62 41,559 8.66 33,900 15.13 4,269 3.70 66,029 3.71 65,745
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Sep 1.84 60,340 1.82 19,271 2.78 8,061 2.91 1,323 2.08 1,333 1.56 39,892 1.69 1,704 2.11 8,027
         Oct 1.68 57,781 1.57 20,890 2.64 8,271 2.89 1,452 2.07 1,254 1.37 37,386 1.71 2,319 1.86 7,099
         Nov 1.67 51,840 1.63 16,651 2.71 7,599 2.91 1,381 2.09 1,254 1.30 32,330 1.98 2,249 1.81 7,027         Dec 1.68 71,770 1.68 21,964 2.63 8,367 2.90 1,688 1.98 1,765 1.42 46,829 1.79 3,286 1.82 9,835
2016          Jan 1.60 56,798 1.62 19,979 2.58 7,835 2.87 1,331 2.02 1,328 1.26 38,673 2.16 2,309 1.90 5,322
         Feb 1.54 52,765 1.61 15,300 2.71 7,805 2.78 1,310 1.93 1,160 1.20 34,426 1.42 2,142 1.67 5,922         Mar 1.64 62,713 1.70 19,300 2.67 8,680 2.73 1,524 1.88 1,394 1.35 41,099 1.76 2,294 1.68 7,722
         Apr 1.55 57,589 1.60 19,803 2.60 8,290 2.74 1,645 1.82 1,410 1.23 38,162 1.56 1,933 1.68 6,149
         May 1.47 53,170 1.55 15,321 2.59 7,987 2.73 1,363 1.85 1,338 1.11 34,259 1.55 1,651 1.64 6,572         June 1.52 66,550 1.68 19,903 2.61 8,992 2.79 1,600 1.76 1,526 1.23 43,829 1.57 2,249 1.55 8,354
         July 1.46 62,584 1.55 21,116 2.44 8,339 2.67 1,484 1.72 1,554 1.16 41,120 1.88 2,329 1.53 7,758
         Aug 1.43 54,015 1.58 14,307 2.44 7,384 2.62 1,340 1.68 1,416 1.14 33,033 1.48 2,112 1.40 8,730         Sep 1.51 62,178 1.66 19,939 2.54 8,315 2.63 1,431 1.70 1,311 1.24 41,380 1.67 1,986 1.54 7,755
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Sep 1.93 9,689 . . 2.07 584 2.73 101 1.92 380 1.63 5,151 1.65 395 2.44 3,078
         Oct 1.72 9,269 . . 1.99 722 2.53 160 1.94 448 1.60 5,036 1.83 752 1.78 2,151
         Nov 1.76 7,680 . . 2.04 503 2.62 130 1.92 395 1.48 4,036 2.31 1,162 1.87 1,454         Dec 1.61 13,483 . . 1.98 636 2.57 150 1.76 539 1.47 7,249 1.84 1,438 1.67 3,471
2016          Jan 1.65 9,419 . . 2.01 674 2.55 125 1.89 463 1.33 6,286 3.51 656 1.93 1,215
         Feb 1.60 8,658 . . 2.07 554 2.29 149 1.84 382 1.45 4,958 1.69 627 1.71 1,988         Mar 1.62 10,561 . . 1.94 611 2.60 154 1.73 406 1.50 5,407 1.79 1,089 1.66 2,894
         Apr 1.59 9,251 . . 1.95 660 2.39 153 1.67 438 1.49 5,471 1.92 530 1.57 1,999
         May 1.58 5,951 . . 2.03 479 2.60 134 1.65 406 1.47 2,864 1.57 364 1.55 1,704         June 1.58 10,056 . . 1.91 601 2.51 159 1.64 468 1.56 4,885 1.72 1,003 1.46 2,940
         July 1.53 10,322 . . 1.87 681 2.38 161 1.53 544 1.35 5,526 1.95 929 1.61 2,481
         Aug 1.54 7,519 . . 2.01 523 2.54 119 1.51 410 1.40 3,645 1.71 452 1.57 2,370         Sep 1.59 9,000 . . 1.93 548 2.49 104 1.46 379 1.53 5,125 2.18 614 1.45 2,230
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and
Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.52008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.82009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.42012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.12013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.52014 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.42014          Q3 2,392.9 2,317.6 531.4 365.3 294.9 229.0 763.7 67.5 65.8 75.3
         Q4 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015          Q1 2,539.4 2,461.4 517.4 414.0 305.1 242.1 843.7 70.6 68.4 78.1
         Q2 2,489.5 2,410.8 509.4 396.7 304.8 238.9 819.2 72.6 69.2 78.6         Q3 2,507.3 2,427.5 498.0 412.5 308.0 241.6 823.8 74.7 68.9 79.8         Q4 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016          Q1 2,598.2 2,514.1 486.8 456.3 310.8 248.3 863.1 78.9 70.0 84.1
         Q2 2,637.1 2,552.4 478.6 480.8 312.6 248.5 882.7 78.7 70.6 84.7
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2014          Q3 1,856.7 1,808.2 378.3 313.4 266.6 213.5 523.2 62.7 50.3 48.6
         Q4 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015          Q1 1,967.9 1,918.2 365.3 352.8 275.7 224.9 583.1 65.6 50.8 49.7
         Q2 1,925.8 1,875.9 357.5 337.9 275.3 221.6 564.6 67.5 51.5 49.9
         Q3 1,938.2 1,887.7 347.5 350.0 278.1 224.0 567.7 69.5 51.0 50.5
         Q4 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016          Q1 2,007.2 1,954.1 336.2 386.6 280.0 230.0 596.3 73.4 51.6 53.1
         Q2 2,033.9 1,980.7 328.6 408.0 281.7 229.6 607.7 73.1 51.9 53.2
Pension funds 4
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2014          Q3 536.2 509.4 153.0 52.0 28.3 15.5 240.5 4.7 15.4 26.8
         Q4 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015          Q1 571.5 543.2 152.1 61.2 29.4 17.3 260.6 5.0 17.6 28.3
         Q2 563.7 534.9 151.8 58.8 29.6 17.3 254.7 5.1 17.7 28.8
         Q3 569.2 539.9 150.6 62.5 29.9 17.7 256.0 5.3 17.9 29.3
         Q4 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016          Q1 591.1 560.0 150.6 69.7 30.7 18.3 266.8 5.5 18.4 31.0
         Q2 603.2 571.7 150.0 72.8 30.9 18.8 275.0 5.5 18.6 31.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2014 Q3 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2016
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.5
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.82012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.82013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.52014 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2014          Q3 2,392.9 17.6 86.3 188.0 1,870.6 1,575.6 295.0 73.3 157.1
         Q4 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015          Q1 2,539.4 19.0 90.4 223.1 1,942.6 1,635.6 307.0 73.0 191.4
         Q2 2,489.5 17.9 91.9 206.2 1,958.3 1,649.6 308.7 72.5 142.7         Q3 2,507.3 17.5 94.3 208.4 1,976.5 1,665.6 311.0 72.2 138.4         Q4 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016          Q1 2,598.2 17.7 97.8 231.7 2,027.1 1,707.3 319.9 73.2 150.6
         Q2 2,637.1 17.6 97.9 201.1 2,041.0 1,722.3 318.8 73.3 206.2
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2014          Q3 1,856.7 17.6 81.8 179.3 1,394.2 1,099.7 294.5 70.1 113.7
         Q4 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015          Q1 1,967.9 19.0 85.6 212.5 1,443.0 1,136.4 306.6 71.2 136.6
         Q2 1,925.8 17.9 87.2 196.4 1,453.2 1,145.0 308.3 70.7 100.3
         Q3 1,938.2 17.5 89.5 198.5 1,464.5 1,154.0 310.5 70.5 97.6
         Q4 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016          Q1 2,007.2 17.7 92.8 220.6 1,499.3 1,179.8 319.4 71.4 105.4
         Q2 2,033.9 17.6 92.9 191.3 1,506.6 1,188.3 318.3 71.5 154.0
Pension funds 5
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2014          Q3 536.2 − 4.5 8.7 476.4 475.9 0.5 3.1 43.4
         Q4 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015          Q1 571.5 − 4.7 10.5 499.7 499.2 0.5 1.8 54.8
         Q2 563.7 − 4.8 9.8 505.1 504.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
         Q3 569.2 − 4.8 9.9 512.0 511.6 0.5 1.7 40.7
         Q4 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016          Q1 591.1 − 5.0 11.2 527.9 527.4 0.5 1.7 45.3
         Q2 603.2 − 5.0 9.8 534.4 533.9 0.5 1.8 52.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2015 are partially estimated. Figures from 2014 Q3 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2016
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales
Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2004 233,890 133,711 64,231 10,778 58,703 100,179 108,119 121,841 . − 13,723 125,772
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5252012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5802013 − 12,603 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 89,013 18,583 − 25,778 − 12,708 57,069 − 31,1852014 63,381 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,341 51,779 − 12,124 − 11,951 75,854 11,601
2015 32,891 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,902 123,662 − 66,330 121,164 68,828 − 90,7732015          Nov − 821 − 2,159 − 14,282 − 1,729 13,853 1,338 5,797 3,259 12,847 − 10,309 − 6,618
         Dec − 59,323 − 57,836 − 55,168 996 − 3,664 − 1,487 − 13,826 − 39,384 11,090 14,468 − 45,497
2016          Jan 8,853 − 1,881 7,474 2,924 − 12,279 10,733 6,823 2,236 12,023 − 7,436 2,029
         Feb 31,114 19,483 14,851 1,224 3,407 11,631 20,916 2,002 12,911 6,003 10,198         Mar 26,539 12,729 1,330 4,510 6,889 13,810 26,890 1,261 13,401 12,228 − 351
         Apr 12,556 − 3,469 7,238 1,970 − 12,677 16,025 34,517 − 5,143 15,821 23,839 − 21,961
         May 32,838 29,686 8,729 3,993 16,964 3,152 15,400 − 6,052 18,093 3,359 17,438         June − 5,007 − 7,553 − 2,177 − 4,636 − 740 2,545 15,220 − 8,528 16,907 6,841 − 20,227
         July − 30,730 − 26,603 − 16,263 1,055 − 11,394 − 4,127 − 1,577 − 9,959 18,064 − 9,682 − 29,152
         Aug 19,614 18,041 7,011 − 942 11,972 1,573 12,251 − 10,241 13,001 9,491 7,362         Sep 17,890 12,468 6,106 3,712 2,650 5,423 24,022 − 4,025 17,786 10,261 − 6,131
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales
Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2004 − 3,317 10,157 − 13,474 7,432 5,045 2,387 − 10,748
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 21,553 10,106 11,447 18,344 11,991 6,353 3,2092014 47,506 18,778 28,728 39,661 17,203 22,458 7,845
2015 38,855 7,668 31,187 24,017 − 5,421 29,438 14,838
2015          Nov 4,836 640 4,196 1,526 5,566 − 4,040 3,310
         Dec 5,812 1,100 4,712 6,195 − 4,336 10,531 − 383
2016          Jan − 1,294 120 − 1,414 367 − 5,901 6,268 − 1,661
         Feb − 611 66 − 677 1,539 − 5,401 6,940 − 2,150         Mar 8,290 59 8,231 5,935 1,861 4,074 2,355
         Apr − 949 39 − 988 472 − 639 1,111 − 1,421
         May 5,585 288 5,297 6,964 2,838 4,126 − 1,379         June 1,068 335 733 3,576 − 330 3,906 − 2,508
         July 2,930 464 2,466 2,672 − 2,128 4,800 258
         Aug 4,811 1,063 3,748 3,180 2,256 924 1,631         Sep 3,591 229 3,362 4,274 503 3,771 − 683
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2004 990,399 688,844 33,774 90,815 162,353 401,904 31,517 270,040 12,344
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700 −
2016          Feb 127,058 80,388 6,236 886 55,057 18,208 4,135 42,535 −
         Mar 111,271 61,483 2,722 1,030 38,521 19,209 9,240 40,548 −
         Apr 115,428 69,506 1,282 536 53,522 14,167 5,762 40,160 −
         May 109,656 67,125 3,518 355 48,486 14,766 7,177 35,353 −
         June 98,036 56,397 1,402 1,345 35,416 18,235 3,694 37,944 −
         July 5 106,809 64,060 3,695 231 47,806 12,328 5,516 37,234 −
         Aug 84,466 47,957 3,758 952 35,486 7,762 2,439 34,070 −
         Sep 110,645 60,863 720 143 46,130 13,870 9,464 40,318 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  6 
2004 424,769 275,808 20,060 48,249 54,075 153,423 20,286 128,676 4,320
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 400
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742 −
2016          Feb 36,168 19,792 5,716 540 9,953 3,582 1,579 14,797 −
         Mar 37,922 17,301 2,209 1,030 6,745 7,317 5,178 15,444 −
         Apr 30,946 11,246 1,207 511 4,680 4,848 4,481 15,219 −
         May 36,255 17,367 2,711 55 8,707 5,895 4,908 13,980 −         June 34,458 16,553 1,291 711 6,590 7,962 2,098 15,808 −
         July 
5 34,008 14,977 2,759 231 9,154 2,833 3,897 15,134 −
         Aug 24,960 11,808 2,630 502 4,541 4,134 931 12,221 −
         Sep 35,483 16,330 708 118 7,420 8,084 7,291 11,862 −
Net sales  7 
2004 167,233 81,860 1,039 − 52,615 50,142 83,293 18,768 66,605 − 22,124
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,963
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174 − 1,441
2016          Feb 16,450 12,194 4,786 42 6,832 534 122 4,133 −
         Mar 11,323 4,244 977 − 477 1,174 2,571 4,323 2,756 − 219
         Apr − 8,359 7,324 236 − 1,468 6,691 1,865 1,909 − 17,592 − 159
         May 28,473 9,196 − 1,402 − 660 9,052 2,206 3,294 15,983 − 590         June − 3,182 − 4,261 − 2,543 − 3,575 1,322 534 − 4,057 5,135 −
         July 
5 − 22,944 − 15,024 858 − 1,014 − 14,406 − 463 884 − 8,803 − 59
         Aug 19,464 5,831 3,209 − 34 4,897 − 2,241 − 342 13,975 −
         Sep 13,990 4,456 − 421 − 1,385 4,802 1,461 3,807 5,727 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. e. 6Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 7Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal redemptions. 
Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2016
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2004 2,773,007 1,685,766 159,360 553,927 316,745 655,734 73,844 1,013,397 170,543
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,4222014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,3562016          Mar 3,067,081 1,174,640 133,223 74,800 579,283 387,335 264,380 1,628,060 6,137         Apr 3,058,722 1,181,964 133,459 73,331 585,974 389,200 266,289 1,610,468 5,978
         May 3,087,195 1,191,160 132,057 72,672 595,026 391,406 269,584 1,626,451 5,389         June 3,084,013 1,186,899 129,514 69,097 596,349 391,940 265,527 1,631,587 5,389
         July 
2 3,061,069 1,171,875 130,372 68,083 632,445 340,975 266,411 1,622,783 5,330
         Aug 3,080,533 1,177,707 133,581 68,049 637,342 338,734 266,068 1,636,758 5,330
         Sep 3,094,523 1,182,162 133,160 66,664 642,143 340,195 269,875 1,642,486 5,330
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2016 
1,022,665 466,066 37,991 26,970 274,573 126,533 49,620 506,979 1,876    less than 2
666,491 282,254 39,407 16,794 160,294 65,760 49,045 335,191 204 2 to less than 4
450,279 178,497 24,311 9,750 93,667 50,770 37,560 234,223 341 4 to less than 6
326,289 91,677 16,505 6,366 43,662 25,145 25,043 209,569 1,333 6 to less than 8
222,627 75,067 9,739 4,834 39,307 21,187 14,429 133,132 111 8 to less than 10
127,669 32,867 4,762 1,262 11,667 15,177 14,994 79,808 498 10 to less than 15
49,851 15,907 162 620 11,121 4,004 4,823 29,121 − 15 to less than 20
228,650 39,825 283 70 7,852 31,621 74,362 114,463 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2004 164,802 2,669 3,960 1,566 276 696 220 − 1,760 − 2,286 887,217
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,4422016          Mar 177,113 − 12 57 −0−0 − 2 − 6 7 1,512,940
         Apr 176,705 − 408 31 − 34 − − 281 − 2 − 188 1,528,339
         May 175,609 − 1,097 209 14 5 − − 4 − 378 − 942 1,529,297         June 175,694 85 213 67 228 − − 30 − 305 − 87 1,432,091
         July 176,196 502 425 148 5 − − 83 49 − 40 1,527,172
         Aug 176,572 376 1,061 35 19 − − 495 − 121 − 124 1,566,154         Sep 176,583 11 49 2 0 − − 22 59 − 76 1,574,835
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) are included as well as enter-
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- prises listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2016
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2004 3.7 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 4.0 120.19 99.89 268.32 4,256.08
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.012016          May 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.19 113.75 478.01 10,262.74
         June 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.2 0.7 2.0 143.74 116.88 450.95 9,680.09
         July − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 0.2 0.7 1.7 144.06 116.16 481.02 10,337.50
         Aug − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 1.6 144.30 115.34 491.68 10,592.69         Sep − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 1.6 144.47 115.53 490.14 10,511.02
         Oct 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.7 1.7 142.59 113.12 494.25 10,665.01
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2004 14,435 1,453 − 3,978 − 6,160 − 1,246 3,245 5,431 12,982 10,267 8,446 3,796 1,821 9,186 4,168
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,743 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,407 117,675 771 100 116,904 32,305 6,069
2014 139,011 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 41,302 144,168 819 − 1,745 143,349 43,046 − 5,154
2015 181,632 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,495 176,116 7,362 494 168,754 35,001 5,515
2016          Mar 11,178 7,620 1,620 − 191 657 836 6,000 3,558 12,939 1,053 915 11,886 2,643 − 1,761         Apr 12,939 6,740 1,705 − 76 940 496 5,035 6,199 14,526 671 − 230 13,855 6,429 − 1,587
         May 9,441 8,249 2,461 − 50 1,132 1,111 5,788 1,192 9,280 887 − 65 8,393 1,257 161         June 11,123 10,640 1,664 42 565 755 8,976 483 11,561 557 − 87 11,004 570 − 439
         July 9,383 7,899 1,862 − 195 1,706 280 6,038 1,484 10,904 1,208 186 9,696 1,298 − 1,521
         Aug 8,572 5,151 1,038 − 125 843 109 4,113 3,421 9,140 − 922 − 1,679 10,062 5,100 − 567         Sep 11,925 8,123 900 39 28 631 7,224 3,802 12,169 648 132 11,521 3,670 − 244
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 4.45 − 7.75 37.62 − 10.96 3.60 28.00 16.99 − 1.30 5.16
Debt securities 0.65 − 1.26 − 0.93 − 1.48 0.56 0.51 − 0.52 0.87 − 3.32
short-term debt securities 1.56 1.62 − 0.77 − 1.06 0.93 − 1.42 0.78 0.98 − 0.70
long-term debt securities − 0.91 − 2.88 − 0.15 − 0.42 − 0.37 1.93 − 1.29 − 0.10 − 2.62
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.27 − 1.88 0.73 − 0.07 0.24 0.94 − 0.38 0.51 − 2.54
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12
Financial corporations − 2.14 − 1.26 1.93 0.75 − 0.27 0.87 0.58 0.31 − 1.80
General government 0.07 − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.28 − 0.08 0.39 − 0.44 − 0.46 − 0.62
Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.91 0.62 − 1.66 − 1.41 0.32 − 0.42 − 0.14 0.37 − 0.78
Loans 9.29 14.41 30.52 23.08 5.87 1.37 0.20 6.50 − 5.35
short-term loans 27.76 36.06 25.14 20.41 1.63 1.12 1.97 3.21 − 0.62
long-term loans − 18.47 − 21.66 5.39 2.67 4.23 0.25 − 1.77 3.29 − 4.74
Memo item
to domestic sectors 2.20 10.40 12.08 17.89 − 1.12 0.52 − 5.20 0.78 − 4.40
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.42 − 1.41 0.05 4.33 − 0.56 3.28 − 8.39
Financial corporations − 1.81 10.65 9.68 19.30 − 1.17 − 3.81 − 4.64 − 2.50 3.99
General government 0.10 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.01 − 0.01 − 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 7.09 4.01 18.44 5.19 6.99 0.85 5.41 5.72 − 0.95
Equity and investment fund shares 39.87 9.93 47.49 3.74 8.00 14.77 20.99 10.03 4.14
Equity 32.22 20.31 31.15 − 4.41 5.18 10.89 19.49 9.58 4.89
Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.70 − 1.62 − 10.41 − 16.68 1.41 1.98 2.88 − 6.00 − 0.77
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 − 14.10 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94
Financial corporations − 0.95 3.78 − 2.37 − 2.59 0.34 − 0.14 0.02 0.17 0.17
Listed shares of the rest of the world 3.37 − 4.85 12.38 13.99 − 0.15 − 4.46 3.00 0.66 − 0.60
Other equity 1 20.16 26.77 29.18 − 1.72 3.92 13.37 13.61 14.92 6.26
Investment fund shares 7.65 − 10.38 16.35 8.15 2.82 3.87 1.50 0.45 − 0.75
Money market fund shares − 0.15 0.23 0.21 − 0.25 0.17 − 0.06 0.35 − 0.30 − 0.10
Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.80 − 10.61 16.13 8.40 2.65 3.93 1.15 0.75 − 0.65
Insurance technical reserves 3.02 1.05 2.97 0.59 0.86 0.88 0.64 2.40 2.61
Financial derivatives 6.49 − 1.26 3.02 3.55 − 2.41 2.06 − 0.19 − 0.26 2.60Other accounts receivable 173.71 − 95.11 53.33 − 29.56 48.50 12.20 22.19 10.35 − 9.01
Total 237.47 − 80.01 174.03 − 11.04 64.97 59.79 60.31 28.59 − 3.17
External financing
Debt securities 12.78 1.26 7.78 3.58 4.91 0.46 − 1.17 10.40 4.60
short-term securities − 1.12 − 11.63 1.96 1.26 − 0.04 1.01 − 0.27 2.04 0.18
long-term securities 13.90 12.89 5.82 2.32 4.95 − 0.55 − 0.89 8.36 4.43
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 5.10 4.27 1.76 0.95 2.73 − 0.72 − 1.19 4.97 1.44
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 − 0.53 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12
Financial corporations 2.85 4.12 2.07 1.26 1.85 − 0.44 − 0.60 3.59 2.13
General government − 0.05 0.00 0.02 0.01 − 0.00 0.01 0.01 − 0.00 0.00
Households 1.50 0.20 0.46 0.22 0.29 0.03 − 0.07 0.73 − 0.57
Debt securities of the rest of the world 7.67 − 3.01 6.02 2.63 2.19 1.18 0.03 5.43 3.16
Loans 26.84 − 13.42 42.49 28.46 16.70 − 1.39 − 1.28 33.16 7.42
short-term loans 24.45 1.81 24.56 8.46 14.91 − 2.82 4.01 18.03 − 2.94
long-term loans 2.40 − 15.23 17.92 20.00 1.78 1.43 − 5.29 15.13 10.36
Memo item
from domestic sectors − 4.95 4.59 17.88 21.81 6.28 0.00 − 10.21 21.63 − 8.09
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.42 − 1.41 0.05 4.33 − 0.56 3.28 − 8.39
Financial corporations 12.46 16.45 22.68 15.58 7.26 − 1.53 1.37 12.18 − 0.31
General government − 21.31 − 11.55 − 7.23 7.63 − 1.03 − 2.81 − 11.02 6.18 0.61
from the rest of the world 31.74 − 18.01 24.60 6.65 10.41 − 1.39 8.93 11.53 15.51
Equity 12.04 27.88 15.04 0.05 5.40 5.89 3.69 3.25 2.13
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 4.47 − 0.97 6.66 − 1.81 − 3.65 0.73 11.39 − 2.68 3.28
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 − 14.10 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94
Financial corporations − 5.02 1.59 11.05 17.66 − 5.34 − 6.36 5.09 − 1.14 3.22
General government − 0.88 0.03 0.11 0.06 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.03 0.03
Households − 8.21 2.80 3.55 − 5.43 0.61 4.95 3.43 4.61 0.98
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 7.80 9.72 − 0.64 2.08 5.36 1.97 − 10.04 2.72 − 2.86
Other equity 1 8.70 19.13 9.02 − 0.22 3.70 3.20 2.34 3.21 1.71
Insurance technical reserves 6.34 6.41 5.06 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 3.72 1.93 − 8.22 10.89 − 16.16 − 1.04 − 1.92 8.63 − 2.20
Other accounts payable 19.83 − 10.06 58.33 28.90 18.93 0.49 10.01 8.40 1.27
Total 81.54 13.98 120.48 73.14 31.05 5.69 10.60 65.11 14.49
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 405.8 462.6 386.9 396.3 431.0 462.6 454.1 464.8
Debt securities 45.0 49.6 47.8 48.6 48.4 48.4 47.8 48.8 45.7
short-term debt securities 5.1 6.8 6.0 5.7 6.7 5.2 6.0 7.0 6.3
long-term debt securities 39.9 42.9 41.7 42.9 41.7 43.2 41.7 41.7 39.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 24.6 22.9 23.3 23.0 23.0 23.8 23.3 23.8 21.4
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.1 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2
Financial corporations 13.8 12.7 14.5 13.5 13.2 14.0 14.5 14.8 13.0
General government 6.1 5.7 5.2 5.4 5.3 5.6 5.2 4.8 4.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world 20.5 26.7 24.4 25.6 25.4 24.7 24.4 24.9 24.3
Loans 446.5 465.6 495.9 493.2 498.0 497.3 495.9 500.1 495.0
short-term loans 340.0 375.8 399.8 398.6 399.5 399.7 399.8 401.8 401.5
long-term loans 106.5 89.8 96.2 94.6 98.4 97.7 96.2 98.4 93.5
Memo item
to domestic sectors 304.7 315.1 327.2 333.0 331.8 332.4 327.2 328.0 323.6
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.7 214.8 214.9 219.2 218.7 221.9 213.5
Financial corporations 82.1 92.8 102.4 112.1 110.9 107.1 102.4 100.0 104.0
General government 6.0 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1
to the rest of the world 141.8 150.5 168.8 160.2 166.1 165.0 168.8 172.1 171.5
Equity and investment fund shares 1,658.3 1,726.5 1,905.6 1,954.8 1,888.8 1,781.0 1,905.6 1,839.6 1,808.9
Equity 1,520.2 1,591.0 1,753.6 1,803.8 1,738.8 1,631.2 1,753.6 1,688.5 1,657.2
Listed shares of domestic sectors 275.4 262.2 273.0 290.6 274.6 239.0 273.0 248.1 239.4
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 283.1 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7
Financial corporations 5.7 10.0 6.3 7.4 7.2 5.9 6.3 6.1 5.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 54.2 50.0 62.5 65.7 63.5 58.7 62.5 62.8 62.1
Other equity 1 1,190.6 1,278.8 1,418.2 1,447.5 1,400.7 1,333.5 1,418.2 1,377.6 1,355.7
Investment fund shares 138.1 135.5 151.9 151.0 150.0 149.8 151.9 151.1 151.7
Money market fund shares 1.1 1.2 1.4 0.9 1.1 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.1
Non-MMF investment fund shares 137.0 134.4 150.6 150.1 149.0 148.8 150.6 150.1 150.6
Insurance technical reserves 46.1 47.3 50.0 47.9 48.6 49.3 50.0 52.6 55.2
Financial derivatives 16.8 22.7 24.0 25.9 23.0 24.6 24.0 23.3 25.5Other accounts receivable 891.1 857.8 927.7 899.7 926.7 921.7 927.7 921.2 921.3
Total 3,515.1 3,575.4 3,913.6 3,857.1 3,829.8 3,753.4 3,913.6 3,839.7 3,816.4
Liabilities
Debt securities 138.9 150.9 156.8 159.5 157.2 158.1 156.8 173.1 179.0
short-term securities 13.4 1.8 3.0 2.3 2.3 3.3 3.0 5.1 5.3
long-term securities 125.4 149.1 153.7 157.1 154.9 154.8 153.7 168.0 173.7
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 51.1 60.2 58.7 62.6 62.7 60.7 58.7 65.9 68.2
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.1 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2
Financial corporations 30.8 39.8 40.0 42.0 42.8 41.3 40.0 46.0 49.1
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.6 15.8 15.0 16.4 15.3 15.2 15.0 15.6 14.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world 87.8 90.7 98.1 96.8 94.5 97.4 98.1 107.2 110.8
Loans 1,411.2 1,383.6 1,427.3 1,417.0 1,433.1 1,431.3 1,427.3 1,457.7 1,462.8
short-term loans 494.2 496.0 521.0 508.7 522.3 518.2 521.0 537.2 534.0
long-term loans 917.0 887.6 906.3 908.3 910.8 913.1 906.3 920.5 928.8
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,091.5 1,078.1 1,092.6 1,099.7 1,106.2 1,107.0 1,092.6 1,114.4 1,102.2
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.7 214.8 214.9 219.2 218.7 221.9 213.5
Financial corporations 809.3 805.6 825.4 821.9 829.5 828.1 825.4 834.3 829.6
General government 65.6 56.3 48.6 63.0 61.8 59.8 48.6 58.2 59.0
from the rest of the world 319.8 305.5 334.6 317.3 326.9 324.3 334.6 343.3 360.7
Equity 2,436.6 2,542.2 2,670.9 2,860.2 2,715.7 2,484.8 2,670.9 2,567.4 2,487.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors 571.9 570.0 626.4 681.4 625.1 551.6 626.4 585.2 569.6
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 283.1 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7
Financial corporations 120.3 133.9 150.1 181.9 159.4 130.8 150.1 140.3 139.2
General government 35.2 35.2 43.4 42.9 39.5 41.1 43.4 41.5 40.4
Households 146.6 148.7 166.2 173.4 158.8 146.5 166.2 161.5 156.3
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 670.8 719.9 756.3 839.8 789.6 693.2 756.3 724.7 684.7
Other equity 1 1,194.0 1,252.3 1,288.3 1,339.0 1,301.0 1,240.0 1,288.3 1,257.5 1,233.0
Insurance technical reserves 243.9 250.3 255.4 251.6 252.8 254.1 255.4 256.6 257.9
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 37.3 54.0 42.0 63.9 46.6 44.7 42.0 49.8 46.7
Other accounts payable 961.6 987.6 1,057.6 1,038.4 1,022.5 1,024.7 1,057.6 1,044.1 1,048.4
Total 5,229.5 5,368.6 5,609.9 5,790.5 5,627.9 5,397.8 5,609.9 5,548.6 5,482.2
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 63.87 85.82 96.77 14.97 30.80 11.88 39.13 8.10 25.29
Currency 8.08 15.64 25.61 4.48 6.84 6.40 7.90 2.40 1.03
Deposits 55.79 70.18 71.16 10.49 23.96 5.48 31.24 5.70 24.26
Transferable deposits 89.41 73.84 100.96 19.30 34.43 15.01 32.22 7.24 28.09
Time deposits − 9.78 8.74 − 9.22 − 2.32 − 3.12 − 4.21 0.44 0.83 2.16
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 23.85 − 12.41 − 20.58 − 6.49 − 7.35 − 5.32 − 1.43 − 2.37 − 5.99
Debt securities − 17.81 − 18.00 − 17.40 − 7.38 − 5.09 − 1.87 − 3.07 − 1.76 − 4.10
short-term debt securities − 0.36 − 0.67 0.75 0.29 0.31 0.28 − 0.13 0.10 − 0.62
long-term debt securities − 17.45 − 17.33 − 18.16 − 7.66 − 5.40 − 2.14 − 2.95 − 1.86 − 3.48
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 14.86 − 15.08 − 9.34 − 4.76 − 2.98 − 0.16 − 1.45 1.08 − 1.57
Non-financial corporations 1.24 0.02 0.39 0.21 0.23 0.02 − 0.07 0.67 − 0.59
Financial corporations − 12.46 − 12.52 − 6.80 − 4.05 − 2.40 0.44 − 0.78 0.74 − 0.36
General government − 3.64 − 2.58 − 2.93 − 0.91 − 0.81 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 0.33 − 0.63
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.94 − 2.93 − 8.06 − 2.62 − 2.11 − 1.71 − 1.62 − 2.84 − 2.53
Equity and investment fund shares 9.63 36.87 46.39 4.53 10.53 16.85 14.48 15.67 11.57
Equity − 0.41 12.17 15.03 − 6.26 2.87 11.73 6.69 10.26 5.22
Listed Shares of domestic sectors − 5.63 4.61 4.06 − 6.53 1.13 6.67 2.79 6.59 2.69
Non-financial corporations − 5.29 2.69 3.77 − 5.50 0.49 6.03 2.76 4.52 0.69
Financial corporations − 0.35 1.93 0.28 − 1.03 0.64 0.64 0.03 2.07 2.00
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 2.99 3.70 6.75 0.66 0.80 3.00 2.30 1.65 1.21
Other equity 1 2.24 3.86 4.22 − 0.39 0.95 2.07 1.60 2.02 1.32
Investment fund shares 10.04 24.70 31.36 10.79 7.66 5.12 7.79 5.41 6.35
Money market fund shares − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.16 − 0.02 − 0.10 − 0.30 − 0.30 − 0.15
Non-MMF investment fund shares 10.34 25.04 31.93 10.95 7.68 5.22 8.09 5.71 6.50
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 26.02 24.47 20.08 5.29 4.89 4.78 5.12 5.83 5.86
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 31.69 30.40 31.36 11.15 6.89 6.19 7.14 17.35 6.06
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 19.39 35.34 31.30 11.81 6.71 5.81 6.96 5.28 6.58
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 14.16 − 33.07 − 24.48 12.74 − 9.93 − 1.79 − 25.51 10.30 − 3.72
Total 146.96 161.82 184.01 53.12 44.79 41.86 44.25 60.77 47.54
  External financing
Loans 11.96 20.59 39.11 3.46 11.39 14.88 9.39 6.01 15.84
short-term loans − 3.31 − 1.98 − 3.17 1.00 − 1.26 − 1.51 − 1.40 − 0.42 − 0.91
long-term loans 15.27 22.57 42.28 2.46 12.64 16.39 10.79 6.43 16.76
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.89 24.87 36.54 2.17 9.85 14.08 10.45 4.29 12.16
Consumer loans − 0.30 1.21 5.44 1.57 2.15 1.40 0.32 2.11 3.93
Entrepreneurial loans − 6.64 − 5.49 − 2.88 − 0.29 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 1.38 − 0.38 − 0.24
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 12.60 18.87 39.35 3.27 11.60 15.09 9.38 5.24 13.81
Loans from other financial institutions − 0.60 1.72 − 0.24 0.18 − 0.22 − 0.22 0.01 0.77 2.04
Loans from general government and restof the world − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.01 0.78 − 1.26 − 0.22 − 0.30 − 0.37 − 0.37 0.15 0.03
Total 11.94 21.37 37.85 3.23 11.09 14.51 9.03 6.15 15.88
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2016
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,910.8 1,998.1 2,094.9 2,013.0 2,043.8 2,055.7 2,094.9 2,103.1 2,128.4
Currency 112.0 127.7 153.3 132.2 139.0 145.4 153.3 155.7 156.7
Deposits 1,798.8 1,870.4 1,941.6 1,880.9 1,904.8 1,910.3 1,941.6 1,947.4 1,971.6
Transferable deposits 907.8 981.4 1,082.4 1,000.6 1,035.1 1,050.1 1,082.4 1,089.8 1,117.9
Time deposits 245.9 256.4 246.8 254.0 250.9 246.4 246.8 248.3 250.4
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 645.1 632.7 612.4 626.2 618.9 613.8 612.4 609.3 603.4
Debt securities 179.0 162.2 139.8 156.8 149.2 144.0 139.8 137.1 133.5
short-term debt securities 2.7 2.1 2.9 2.4 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.3
long-term debt securities 176.3 160.1 136.9 154.3 146.5 141.0 136.9 134.2 131.2
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 116.9 102.4 89.4 98.6 94.3 92.2 89.4 89.6 87.8
Non-financial corporations 14.2 14.1 13.4 14.8 13.7 13.5 13.4 13.9 13.1
Financial corporations 90.7 78.7 69.5 75.1 72.9 71.5 69.5 69.4 69.0
General government 12.0 9.6 6.5 8.7 7.8 7.1 6.5 6.3 5.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world 62.0 59.8 50.3 58.2 54.9 51.8 50.3 47.6 45.7
Equity and investment fund shares 885.9 951.4 1,040.7 1,051.1 1,018.4 982.1 1,040.7 1,024.3 1,028.5
Equity 487.6 508.9 555.9 563.4 537.0 518.3 555.9 544.9 540.7
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 167.4 169.7 188.9 197.9 179.6 168.4 188.9 181.8 174.6
Non-financial corporations 140.4 142.1 158.7 165.4 151.1 140.2 158.7 154.1 148.6
Financial corporations 26.9 27.6 30.3 32.5 28.5 28.2 30.3 27.6 26.0
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 55.8 64.0 74.8 74.6 71.7 67.9 74.8 73.1 76.8
Other equity 1 264.4 275.3 292.2 290.9 285.7 282.0 292.2 290.1 289.2
Investment fund shares 398.3 442.5 484.8 487.7 481.3 463.8 484.8 479.3 487.8
Money market fund shares 4.4 4.0 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.1 3.0Non-MMF investment fund shares 393.8 438.5 481.4 483.8 477.5 460.1 481.4 476.3 484.7
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 291.3 307.3 324.4 311.5 315.8 320.0 324.4 330.2 336.1
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 847.3 885.6 919.5 897.7 905.1 911.8 919.5 936.8 942.8
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 708.3 752.1 786.4 759.4 764.0 770.6 786.4 791.7 798.3
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 36.7 35.8 34.1 35.5 35.2 34.8 34.1 33.8 33.5
Total 4,859.4 5,092.6 5,339.8 5,225.1 5,231.6 5,219.0 5,339.8 5,357.0 5,401.0
  Liabilities
Loans 1,549.6 1,570.5 1,607.6 1,572.7 1,583.9 1,598.4 1,607.6 1,614.0 1,629.8
short-term loans 66.4 64.6 60.9 65.6 64.1 62.6 60.9 60.5 59.6
long-term loans 1,483.2 1,505.9 1,546.7 1,507.1 1,519.8 1,535.8 1,546.7 1,553.5 1,570.2
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,092.9 1,118.0 1,154.7 1,120.2 1,130.2 1,144.0 1,154.7 1,159.1 1,171.3
Consumer loans 188.7 188.9 191.9 189.2 191.2 192.2 191.9 194.0 197.8
Entrepreneurial loans 268.0 263.6 260.9 263.3 262.5 262.1 260.9 260.9 260.7
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,479.6 1,491.0 1,505.7 1,514.9 1,520.5 1,534.3
Loans from other financial institutions 91.2 92.9 92.7 93.1 92.9 92.7 92.7 93.5 95.5
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.6 16.4 14.9 17.0 16.4 16.3 14.9 15.6 15.6
Total 1,565.2 1,586.9 1,622.4 1,589.7 1,600.3 1,614.7 1,622.4 1,629.6 1,645.4
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 5.4 − 8.1 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.6 + 8.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 p + 20.9 + 10.0 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2014          H1  p + 11.1 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 3.8 + 6.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.5
         H2  p − 2.6 + 7.2 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 3.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2
2015          H1  p + 14.4 + 2.4 + 3.7 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         H2  p + 6.6 + 7.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
2016          H1  pe + 18.5 + 9.7 + 0.4 + 2.5 + 5.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2010 2,088.7 1,334.0 629.7 143.0 1.3 81.0 51.7 24.4 5.5 0.1
2011 2,128.1 1,344.0 657.0 143.4 1.3 78.7 49.7 24.3 5.3 0.0
2012 p 2,204.5 1,387.7 685.4 148.0 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.8 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,189.2 1,390.3 663.9 151.1 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
2014 p 2,188.7 1,396.3 656.7 152.2 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,157.9 1,372.5 652.6 152.3 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2014          Q1 p 2,178.4 1,386.6 659.6 149.9 1.2 76.2 48.5 23.1 5.2 0.0
         Q2 p 2,184.8 1,394.6 657.4 151.0 1.1 75.9 48.5 22.8 5.2 0.0
         Q3 p 2,186.0 1,390.9 659.8 151.5 1.1 75.4 48.0 22.8 5.2 0.0
         Q4 p 2,188.7 1,396.3 656.7 152.2 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,194.6 1,397.6 665.2 152.6 1.4 74.5 47.4 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2 p 2,160.6 1,380.4 644.8 152.4 1.4 72.6 46.4 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q3 p 2,162.3 1,374.6 652.3 153.2 1.5 72.0 45.8 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q4 p 2,157.9 1,372.5 652.6 152.3 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016          Q1 p 2,167.0 1,382.2 645.5 156.1 1.2 70.9 45.2 21.1 5.1 0.0
         Q2 p 2,168.2 1,390.9 641.6 154.1 1.1 70.1 45.0 20.8 5.0 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and fiscal deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees Interest formation Other surplus burden  1 
€ billion
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 63.9 59.4 258.0 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 67.5 61.4 237.2 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 63.1 61.5 239.3 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 p 1,258.4 650.6 465.0 142.8 1,263.7 666.5 217.9 56.0 60.7 262.5 − 5.4 1,119.9
2014 p 1,306.8 674.0 482.0 150.7 1,298.2 692.5 224.1 52.0 60.9 268.7 + 8.6 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.8 706.3 500.8 147.8 1,333.9 723.4 228.6 47.3 64.3 270.3 + 20.9 1,212.5
as a percentage of GDP
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 2.5 2.3 10.0 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 2.5 2.3 8.8 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 2.3 2.2 8.7 − 0.0 39.3
2013 p 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 2.0 2.1 9.3 − 0.2 39.6
2014 p 44.7 23.1 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.7 7.7 1.8 2.1 9.2 + 0.3 39.7
2015 p 44.7 23.3 16.5 4.9 44.0 23.9 7.5 1.6 2.1 8.9 + 0.7 40.0
Percentage growth rates
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.9 + 14.8 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.7 + 3.3 − 8.1 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 6.5 + 0.2 + 0.9 . + 3.6
2013 p + 3.1 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 2.6 − 11.2 − 1.3 + 9.7 . + 3.3
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 2.8 − 7.2 + 0.4 + 2.3 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.8 + 3.9 − 1.9 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 2.0 − 9.1 + 5.4 + 0.6 . + 4.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and                                                            
social contributions plus customs duties. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2009 623.0 524.0 7.1 713.1 187.1 286.6 63.4 38.6 34.8 − 90.1 492.1 506.0 − 14.0 1,013.4 1,117.5 − 104.0
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.4 551.1 + 3.2 1,245.1 1,236.8 + 8.4
2015 p 832.1 673.3 10.4 802.9 243.5 302.0 49.9 46.3 12.7 + 29.2 574.2 572.5 + 1.7 1,302.8 1,271.9 + 30.9
2014          Q1 p 188.2 153.6 2.0 193.9 56.7 77.9 20.0 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 296.0 305.0 − 9.0
         Q2 p 193.1 157.4 2.2 188.1 56.9 71.8 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 5.0 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.5 299.0 + 5.6
         Q3 p 192.2 157.5 3.4 193.5 57.1 71.2 17.7 11.3 4.0 − 1.4 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 303.1 305.5 − 2.4
         Q4 p 219.0 174.9 3.5 211.8 65.4 73.5 9.5 16.5 3.1 + 7.2 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 341.6 327.6 + 14.0
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2 p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 73.2 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3 p 202.9 159.0 3.8 198.1 62.3 70.9 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.2 315.6 + 2.6
         Q4 p 222.2 178.1 2.6 219.4 63.2 77.3 7.6 17.1 3.7 + 2.8 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 349.1 338.9 + 10.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated. 3The development
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statistical change-
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The overs. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and
quarterly figures do not contain the special purpose associations included in the local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as disposals
annual calculations, but they do not contain numerous other off-budget entities of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this contains thewhich are assigned to the general government sector as defined in the national ac- acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6Including central government
counts. From 2012, also including the bad bank FMSW. 2Furthermore, the annual fig- liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
ures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2009 282.6 317.1 − 34.5 260.1 287.1 − 26.9 170.8 178.3 − 7.5
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.2 326.4 + 11.8 355.1 350.4 + 4.7 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 50.0 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.8 52.0 + 2.8
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.4 − 0.5
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.0 61.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4 p 91.4 83.3 + 8.1 94.1 96.6 − 2.6 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any government sector, up to and including 2013: excluding special purpose associ-
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that ations. Annual figures up to and including 2011: excluding off-budget entities, but in-
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- cluding special accounts and special purpose associations based on the calculationscluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and of the Federal Statistical Office. For the following years, Bundesbank supplementary
Hamburg. 3For state government from 2011, for local government from 2012: quar- estimations. 
terly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are assigned to the general

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2009 524,000 455,615 252,842 182,273 20,501 68,419 − 34 24,846
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2014          Q1 153,971 130,986 64,962 54,529 11,495 15,287 + 7,698 6,638
         Q2 158,118 135,358 72,082 56,178 7,098 23,160 − 400 6,803
         Q3 156,886 135,698 75,711 55,194 4,794 21,380 − 192 7,577
         Q4 174,650 153,966 85,763 60,603 7,599 27,592 − 6,908 6,754
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558
         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016          Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512
         Q3 ... 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 ... ... 7,584
2015          Sep . 55,204 31,038 23,030 1,136 . . 2,253
2016          Sep . 57,860 30,506 24,726 2,628 . . 2,261
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2009 484,880 193,684 135,165 26,430 7,173 24,916 176,991 141,907 35,084 4,908 89,318 16,375 3,604 29,265
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2014          Q1 140,035 62,941 39,035 11,808 5,610 6,487 50,533 38,904 11,629 134 20,893 4,481 1,053 9,049
         Q2 144,418 65,233 40,767 11,963 5,068 7,435 49,166 37,194 11,972 1,785 22,874 4,318 1,042 9,059         Q3 144,482 60,838 40,538 10,022 4,314 5,965 51,148 38,733 12,415 1,911 24,945 4,395 1,244 8,783         Q4 164,104 69,863 47,642 11,820 5,052 5,349 52,264 39,397 12,867 3,312 33,091 4,361 1,214 10,139
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016          Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824
2015          Sep 59,367 30,947 13,244 11,683 5,034 985 17,255 13,119 4,136 5 8,974 1,711 476 4,1632016          Sep 62,333 33,588 14,231 12,680 5,386 1,291 17,691 13,272 4,419 2 8,826 1,777 449 4,474
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2015: 52.3:45.5:2.2. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2015: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui-
Soli- Motor Motor sition of Inherit- Local Real
Period Energy Tobacco darity Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits vehicle land and ance business property
tax tax surcharge tax tax 2 city tax tax Other tax 2 buildings tax Other 3 Total tax 4 taxes
2009 39,822 13,366 11,927 10,548 3,803 6,278 2,101 1,473 4,398 4,857 4,550 2,571 44,028 32,421 10,936
2010 39,838 13,492 11,713 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 . 5,290 4,404 2,452 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 14,414 12,781 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 . 6,366 4,246 2,484 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 14,143 13,624 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 . 7,389 4,305 2,508 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 13,820 14,378 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 . 8,394 4,633 2,696 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 14,612 15,047 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 . 9,339 5,452 2,764 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 14,921 15,930 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 . 11,249 6,290 2,801 60,396 45,752 13,215
2014          Q1 4,675 2,477 3,577 5,642 1,861 1,550 556 555 . 2,385 1,314 782 14,070 10,829 2,880
         Q2 9,868 3,708 3,955 2,096 2,517 1,718 470 − 1,458 . 2,149 1,501 668 15,485 11,684 3,495         Q3 10,029 3,735 3,498 2,423 2,265 1,716 499 779 . 2,387 1,331 677 14,316 10,458 3,529         Q4 15,185 4,691 4,016 1,886 1,859 1,653 535 3,266 . 2,418 1,306 638 13,858 10,792 2,786
2015          Q1 4,704 2,223 3,783 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 . 2,760 1,668 779 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 3,683 4,278 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 . 2,561 1,617 660 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,981 3,714 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 . 3,021 1,335 672 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 5,034 4,155 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 . 2,906 1,670 689 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016          Q1 4,620 2,722 3,979 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 . 3,217 1,668 787 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,139 4,470 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 . 2,952 2,283 717 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,010 3,938 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 . 3,050 1,501 713 ... ... ...
2015          Sep 3,592 1,201 1,813 552 701 505 171 439 . 996 494 221 . . .2016          Sep 3,399 1,170 1,949 592 719 548 164 283 . 991 531 255 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- after relate to the booking of cash flows. 3Notably betting, lottery and beer tax. 4In-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2As of 1 July 2009, motor vehicle tax rev- cluding revenue from offshore wind farms.   
enue is attributable to central government. Postings to state government shown there-
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2009 244,689 169,183 74,313 244,478 208,475 14,431 + 211 16,821 16,614 23 64 120 4,525
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251
         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016          Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue
Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2009 34,254 22,046 711 7,777 48,057 17,291 5,322 9,849 4,866 1,617 5,398 − 13,804 −
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016          Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2009 169,837 158,662 7,200 170,825 55,977 30,696 27,635 11,219 9,578 7,258 8,949 − 988
2010 6 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016          Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. Including ad-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ministrative expenditure on disease management programmes. 6Data on individual
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- expenditure categories for 2010 only partly comparable with prior-year figures owing
butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid- to a change in the statistical definition. 
ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2009 21,300 21,137 20,314 2,742 9,274 4,443 878 984 + 986
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016          Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2009 + 312,729 + 66,821 − 8,184 + 106 2009 1,785,468 4,440 556,048 188,858 138,591 897,531
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,088,726 4,440 691,572 208,244 131,939 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,128,123 4,440 642,358 208,075 120,745 1,152,5052012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,204,507 4,440 646,022 200,458 139,984 1,213,6032013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,189,153 4,440 636,617 190,956 144,524 1,212,6162014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 
p 2,188,671 4,440 623,661 190,364 130,527 1,239,679
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 p 2,157,880 77,220 610,429 186,682 146,173 1,137,375
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 2,178,434 4,440 633,639 190,651 129,784 1,219,920
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 2,184,835 4,440 631,114 189,890 129,978 1,229,413
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 2,185,986 4,440 632,943 189,142 126,665 1,232,797
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 2,188,671 4,440 623,661 190,364 130,527 1,239,679
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 p 2,194,643 12,335 630,965 189,258 135,350 1,226,734
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 p 2,160,596 34,310 617,084 187,360 137,228 1,184,615
         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 p 2,162,331 54,990 620,916 188,234 138,627 1,159,565
         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 p 2,157,880 77,220 610,429 186,682 146,173 1,137,375
2016          Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 p 2,167,043 100,051 611,769 183,184 144,912 1,127,127
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 p 2,168,192 133,297 598,358 181,386 158,980 1,096,171
         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2016
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks
Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,903 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,606 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,254 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,806 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013 1,816,017 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,429 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,809,286 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,383 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 1,821,829 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,729 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 1,818,450 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,889 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 1,817,015 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 276,723 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,821,890 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,509 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 1,807,271 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,661 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 1,811,599 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 270,467 42 110,741 4,440 2
         Q4 1,804,625 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 263,303 59 112,972 4,440 2
2016          Q1 p 1,815,357 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 279,869 59 109,023 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,811,955 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 276,877 59 107,769 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016          Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
         Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2
         Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2
State government
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,870 1,975 283,601 .... 154,844 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,836 950 299,750 .... 138,698 52 101,386 . 1
2013 545,814 125 313,412 .... 133,899 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 540,134 261 309,346 .... 132,020 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 542,656 1,098 314,024 .... 128,616 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 546,756 856 322,362 .... 125,257 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 544,419 0 326,188 .... 119,529 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 547,487 1,821 323,055 .... 123,943 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 538,594 2,040 320,492 .... 117,935 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 544,260 2,056 326,447 .... 117,506 5 98,245 . 1
         Q4 543,311 895 333,429 .... 109,985 5 98,996 . 1
2016          Q1 p 542,072 1,278 328,858 .... 116,551 5 95,379 . 1
         Q2 p 536,189 1,173 328,397 .... 111,956 6 94,657 . 1
Local government9
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 140,198 . − . . 1,046 . 135,811 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 140,719 . − . . 1,046 . 136,332 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 141,274 . − . . 1,046 . 136,888 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 142,468 . − . . 1,297 . 136,686 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 147,362 . − . . 1,597 . 141,278 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 147,039 . − . . 1,847 . 140,705 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 147,669 . − . . 1,997 . 141,185 37 4,450 . .
         Q4 147,573 . − . . 2,047 . 139,493 54 5,980 . .
2016          Q1 p 148,894 . − . . 2,076 . 140,785 54 5,980 . .
         Q2 p 147,171 . − . . 2,453 . 138,685 54 5,980 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and itsnon-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2014   2015   2016
  2013   2014   2015   2013   2014   2015   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.8 110.0 111.8 − 0.4 5.0 1.6 4.5 0.8 1.9 1.7 1.9 0.9 3.9Construction 100.2 101.6 101.4 − 2.3 1.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 2.4 1.0 5.2Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 106.2 106.6 108.6 − 0.7 0.4 1.9 0.7 2.2 1.8 1.6 1.9 1.2 3.8Information and communication 120.2 125.9 129.1 3.8 4.8 2.5 4.9 1.7 2.8 2.5 3.0 2.4 2.9Financial and insuranceactivities 111.2 105.8 106.5 9.7 − 4.8 0.7 − 4.0 − 0.6 2.2 1.6 − 0.4 1.5 1.8Real estate activities 103.3 101.8 102.6 1.7 − 1.5 0.9 − 2.0 0.5 0.8 0.9 1.2 0.5 0.8Business services 
1 104.0 106.6 109.0 0.5 2.4 2.3 2.1 1.6 2.6 2.1 3.0 2.3 4.5
Public services, education and
health 102.4 103.1 105.2 0.1 0.7 2.0 1.1 2.1 2.3 2.1 1.6 1.6 2.4Other services 97.8 97.3 97.6 − 1.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 0.2 2.1
Gross value added 104.7 106.3 107.9 0.5 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.2 3.2Gross domestic product 
2 104.7 106.4 108.2 0.5 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.3 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.1
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 103.5 104.4 106.5 0.7 0.9 2.0 1.4 2.1 1.7 2.2 2.1 1.7 2.4
Government consumption 103.2 104.5 107.4 1.2 1.2 2.7 1.6 2.2 2.8 2.6 3.4 4.4 3.9
Machinery and equipment 101.3 106.8 110.7 − 2.1 5.5 3.7 3.0 1.5 1.8 4.4 6.4 4.0 4.4Premises 107.5 109.5 109.8 − 1.1 1.9 0.3 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.1 3.1 2.4 5.1Other investment 
4 107.1 111.4 113.5 0.6 4.0 1.9 3.2 2.0 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4
Domestic demand 103.0 104.5 106.2 0.9 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.2 0.7 2.0 2.5 2.1 2.8Net exports 
6 . . . − 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.6
Exports 113.4 118.0 124.1 1.9 4.1 5.2 4.6 5.5 6.7 4.9 3.6 1.6 4.9Imports 110.3 114.8 121.0 3.1 4.0 5.5 5.0 6.0 4.9 6.0 5.0 3.1 4.5
Gross domestic product 
2 104.7 106.4 108.2 0.5 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.3 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.1
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,565.7 1,594.4 1,636.0 1.8 1.8 2.6 2.1 2.4 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.2 2.8
Government consumption 542.2 561.1 583.7 4.3 3.5 4.0 3.4 3.3 4.1 3.8 4.9 6.1 5.4Machinery and equipment 180.5 191.5 200.2 − 1.8 6.1 4.6 3.9 2.4 2.6 5.3 7.4 5.0 5.4Premises 277.2 288.7 295.0 1.5 4.2 2.2 2.0 − 0.0 1.9 1.9 4.9 4.0 7.0Other investment 
4 99.5 105.0 108.6 1.6 5.5 3.5 4.6 3.7 3.2 3.3 3.7 3.8 4.0
Changes in inventories 5 − 7.2 − 7.4 − 20.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,657.8 2,733.2 2,803.3 2.6 2.8 2.6 2.9 2.0 1.8 2.9 3.6 3.1 3.6Net exports 168.4 190.7 229.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,284.7 1,334.8 1,418.8 1.3 3.9 6.3 5.0 6.2 8.6 6.2 4.2 0.9 2.9Imports 1,116.4 1,144.1 1,189.3 1.5 2.5 3.9 3.6 3.7 4.5 4.7 2.8 0.1 0.3
Gross domestic product 
2 2,826.2 2,923.9 3,032.8 2.5 3.5 3.7 3.5 3.2 3.8 3.7 4.2 3.2 4.6
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 104.6 105.6 106.2 1.1 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.4Gross domestic product 104.6 106.6 108.7 2.0 1.8 2.0 1.8 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.1 1.7 1.4Terms of trade 98.2 99.5 102.0 1.1 1.3 2.6 1.7 3.0 2.1 2.5 2.6 2.3 2.2
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,430.0 1,485.5 1,539.9 2.8 3.9 3.7 3.8 3.2 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.1 3.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 677.7 694.1 723.4 2.2 2.4 4.2 0.5 4.0 3.6 4.1 5.3 1.9 9.8
National income 2,107.8 2,179.5 2,263.2 2.6 3.4 3.8 2.9 3.4 3.8 3.9 4.3 3.3 5.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,893.9 2,988.9 3,098.8 2.5 3.3 3.7 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.7 4.2 3.4 4.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2016. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2012 106.2 105.9 97.4 107.4 104.6 113.3 100.5 99.8 107.3 107.8 115.2 112.7
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.8 114.8
2014 107.9 108.4 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.5 106.0 97.5 110.3 106.2 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.5 114.8 119.3
 
2015          Q3 109.0 113.8 93.1 110.4 107.4 116.6 100.2 103.2 112.2 111.0 113.5 117.5
         Q4 111.3 117.9 100.7 111.7 103.3 122.6 105.4 104.4 109.7 111.3 122.5 116.5
2016          Q1 106.8 86.4 101.9 110.3 107.6 116.6 106.7 100.7 112.9 108.9 109.1 124.9
         Q2 108.9 108.0 89.1 111.6 108.3 119.0 104.4 101.1 114.4 109.3 113.0 124.2
         Q3 x,p 109.8 115.3 91.5 111.4 108.0 117.9 103.1 103.7 112.2 113.1 113.9 119.6
 
2015          Sep 113.3 115.1 94.5 115.5 109.9 125.1 112.7 103.9 116.0 116.2 118.9 128.9
         Oct 113.9 119.0 99.0 115.2 110.2 123.2 109.5 106.7 117.6 112.6 116.1 130.3
         Nov 115.7 120.6 101.3 116.9 109.5 127.0 113.4 108.7 117.1 115.8 121.3 129.5
         Dec 104.2 114.2 101.7 103.1 90.2 117.7 93.4 97.7 94.3 105.5 130.1 89.7
2016          Jan 100.3 71.5 106.5 103.6 103.2 105.7 100.1 99.6 107.6 102.2 96.1 114.8
         Feb 104.1 84.7 96.9 107.9 105.1 114.9 105.4 96.1 110.0 106.6 106.3 125.4
         Mar 115.9 103.1 102.4 119.5 114.6 129.1 114.5 106.4 121.2 117.9 125.0 134.5
         Apr 108.3 104.8 91.3 110.9 108.0 118.0 105.1 99.8 114.1 107.4 110.1 127.9
         May 106.4 106.7 89.8 108.5 107.2 113.1 97.9 101.0 112.2 105.6 107.8 116.0
         June 112.1 112.5 86.1 115.4 109.6 125.8 110.1 102.4 116.9 114.9 121.0 128.6
         July 2,x 110.3 118.5 91.8 111.6 109.3 117.9 100.3 102.5 113.6 112.2 111.8 122.0
         Aug 2,x 104.5 111.5 91.0 105.2 104.0 108.1 94.9 102.4 106.9 108.1 106.6 104.7
         Sep x,p 114.7 116.0 91.7 117.4 110.8 127.7 114.0 106.2 116.2 119.1 123.3 132.1
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 − 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 3.6 − 1.5 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 1.8 + 0.1
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.9
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 4.1
2015 + 0.6 − 2.2 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
 
2015          Q3 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 7.5 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Q4 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.0
2016          Q1 + 1.5 + 2.8 − 2.6 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.8
         Q2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 2.5 + 3.2
         Q3 x,p + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.8 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 2.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.8
 
2015          Sep + 0.2 − 2.6 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 4.3 − 1.0
         Oct + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 2.1 + 1.2 − 2.8 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.2 + 3.5
         Nov + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.6
         Dec 
− 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 2.7 − 4.4 − 7.0
2016          Jan + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 6.3
         Feb + 1.8 + 7.9 − 4.2 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 0.1
         Mar + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 0.2
         Apr + 0.8 − 0.9 − 4.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.9 + 5.9
         May − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 3.3
         June + 1.0 + 1.0 − 3.6 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 7.3 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.2 − 1.9 + 7.0
         July 2,x − 1.3 + 2.2 − 2.5 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 3.2 − 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 3.7
         Aug 2,x + 2.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 1.5 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 8.0
         Sep x,p + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 2.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2011 109.9 + 10.5 109.1 + 9.6 111.2 + 11.8 103.8 + 4.2 105.3 + 5.8 103.3 + 3.7
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.3 − 0.9 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.6 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2015          Sep 112.0 + 0.1 100.0 − 1.8 120.1 + 1.0 114.2 + 1.6 116.4 + 6.7 113.5 − 0.1
         Oct 113.8 − 1.0 102.9 − 3.9 120.6 + 0.0 120.2 + 4.9 114.8 + 5.8 122.1 + 4.5
         Nov 
116.6 + 1.7 105.3 + 1.1 124.9 + 2.1 115.4 + 1.9 109.6 + 4.6 117.4 + 1.0
         Dec 110.6 − 1.9 90.3 − 2.5 125.5 − 2.6 106.3 + 8.8 98.7 + 6.2 109.0 + 9.7
2016          Jan 114.1 + 0.2 102.8 − 5.2 120.3 + 2.0 126.6 + 11.6 116.1 + 10.6 130.3 + 12.0
         Feb 112.4 + 0.1 100.6 − 1.8 120.0 + 1.4 119.2 − 0.7 104.1 + 2.8 124.4 − 1.8
         Mar 127.3 + 1.4 108.8 − 3.9 141.1 + 4.3 123.1 + 4.9 118.0 + 3.6 124.9 + 5.2
         Apr 113.8 − 1.9 105.0 + 1.1 120.4 − 4.0 111.6 + 0.8 117.1 + 12.8 109.6 − 3.1
         May 112.2 − 1.3 101.1 − 3.3 120.1 − 0.3 111.9 + 0.9 100.3 − 1.5 115.9 + 1.6
         June 118.6 − 3.9 102.5 − 3.9 130.6 − 4.3 113.9 − 0.3 110.8 + 2.6 114.9 − 1.4
         July 114.9 − 1.5 103.0 − 1.9 123.1 − 1.0 117.1 − 1.3 109.9 + 1.9 119.6 − 2.4
         Aug 104.2 + 1.5 93.9 + 0.5 110.3 + 1.8 112.6 + 2.6 102.5 + 3.0 116.0 + 2.4
         Sep p 114.3 + 2.1 101.2 + 1.2 123.4 + 2.7 116.2 + 1.8 119.0 + 2.2 115.2 + 1.5
From the domestic market
2011 109.7 + 10.3 109.7 + 10.3 110.8 + 11.4 103.5 + 3.9 110.2 + 10.9 101.1 + 1.5
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015
107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.8 106.3 + 4.0
2015          Sep 105.4 + 3.1 96.2 − 0.6 114.3 + 6.8 107.8 + 2.4 115.0 + 2.4 105.3 + 2.4
         Oct 107.8 − 1.1 98.8 − 3.1 116.8 + 0.4 108.3 + 1.5 113.0 + 2.1 106.7 + 1.3
         Nov 110.4 + 4.2 102.0 + 1.8 119.1 + 6.2 108.3 + 5.6 108.4 + 2.0 108.2 + 6.8
         Dec 97.9 + 0.7 84.1 − 4.2 112.8 + 4.4 90.8 + 2.7 83.6 − 1.4 93.4 + 4.1
2016          Jan 105.6 − 2.3 98.3 − 5.7 112.7 + 0.4 107.1 + 0.8 105.2 + 3.4 107.8 − 0.1
         Feb 105.6 + 0.6 95.0 − 2.4 115.5 + 3.3 110.1 − 0.7 99.4 + 0.5 113.9 − 1.1
         Mar 117.2 − 4.2 102.9 − 5.1 132.3 − 4.2 113.1 + 2.0 114.7 + 5.7 112.6 + 0.7
         Apr 108.7 + 0.6 102.2 + 1.7 116.3 − 0.9 101.8 + 2.7 105.1 + 5.3 100.6 + 1.8
         May 105.1 − 0.7 95.6 − 5.4 114.5 + 2.9 105.5 + 4.7 94.6 + 2.6 109.4 + 5.4
         June 108.5 + 1.2 96.7 − 4.0 121.6 + 6.2 100.6 − 1.4 101.2 + 1.2 100.4 − 2.2
         July 106.5 − 5.2 98.9 − 2.6 114.5 − 7.3 104.6 − 5.5 102.3 − 2.2 105.4 − 6.6
         Aug 99.8 + 0.9 91.4 − 1.8 107.7 + 4.1 103.4 − 3.0 102.7 + 3.0 103.6 − 5.0
         Sep p 104.8 − 0.6 93.9 − 2.4 115.5 + 1.0 105.5 − 2.1 116.1 + 1.0 101.7 − 3.4
From abroad
2011 109.9 + 10.3 108.4 + 8.8 111.4 + 11.8 104.1 + 4.5 101.0 + 1.4 105.2 + 5.6
2012 109.3 − 0.5 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.8 − 0.4 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.8 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.3 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.8 + 0.4 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.4 126.0 + 2.0
2015          Sep 117.3 − 2.0 104.5 − 3.0 123.6 − 2.1 119.7 + 1.0 117.6 + 10.6 120.4 − 1.9
         Oct 118.6 − 1.0 107.7 − 4.7 122.9 − 0.2 130.4 + 7.4 116.3 + 9.2 135.2 + 6.9
         Nov 121.7 − 0.2 109.2 + 0.2 128.4 − 0.2 121.5 − 0.7 110.7 + 7.0 125.2 − 2.9
         Dec 121.0 − 3.4 97.7 − 0.6 133.3 − 6.0 119.6 + 13.2 111.8 + 11.8 122.3 + 13.7
2016          Jan 121.0 + 1.9 108.2 − 4.6 125.0 + 3.0 143.3 + 19.9 125.6 + 16.5 149.4 + 21.0
         Feb 118.0 − 0.3 107.1 − 1.1 122.7 + 0.2 126.9 − 0.8 108.2 + 4.7 133.3 − 2.3
         Mar 135.5 + 5.8 115.8 − 2.6 146.5 + 9.7 131.6 + 7.0 120.9 + 1.9 135.3 + 8.7
         Apr 118.0 − 3.7 108.3 + 0.4 122.9 − 5.8 119.9 − 0.6 127.6 + 18.9 117.3 − 6.3
         May 118.0 − 1.8 107.5 − 1.0 123.6 − 2.1 117.3 − 1.9 105.2 − 4.5 121.5 − 1.1
         June 126.9 − 7.1 109.4 − 3.9 136.2 − 9.3 125.2 + 0.2 119.2 + 3.7 127.2 − 0.9
         July 121.8 + 1.5 107.8 − 1.3 128.4 + 2.7 127.7 + 1.7 116.6 + 5.5 131.6 + 0.6
         Aug 107.8 + 1.9 96.9 + 3.3 111.9 + 0.4 120.4 + 7.1 102.4 + 3.1 126.6 + 8.3
         Sep p 122.1 + 4.1 109.7 + 5.0 128.3 + 3.8 125.4 + 4.8 121.5 + 3.3 126.7 + 5.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 107.1 + 7.5 112.1 + 12.4 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.8 91.5 − 8.1 102.0 + 2.5 112.7 + 13.2 95.9 − 3.7
2012 114.7 + 7.1 121.4 + 8.3 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.8 + 0.3 107.9 + 5.8 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
 
2015          Aug 123.9 + 2.0 130.1 + 6.2 157.6 + 24.1 123.1 − 5.7 96.8 + 7.9 117.6 − 2.3 119.3 − 4.3 115.0 − 0.8
         Sep 134.3 + 10.3 151.3 + 16.3 202.3 + 35.8 133.8 + 3.7 103.1 + 7.3 117.3 + 3.3 128.3 + 4.0 113.1 + 3.5
         Oct 117.7 + 3.5 128.0 − 1.0 158.4 + 4.2 116.4 − 10.0 102.8 + 21.7 107.4 + 9.6 120.5 + 1.1 98.6 + 6.4
         Nov 118.8 + 19.6 137.1 + 21.3 152.4 + 17.1 144.6 + 24.0 84.9 + 24.3 100.5 + 17.3 140.4 + 28.9 83.2 + 7.8         Dec 123.3 + 21.0 135.0 + 10.6 166.7 + 8.0 125.4 + 8.9 101.2 + 27.6 111.6 + 36.4 114.8 + 4.6 114.6 + 57.2
2016          Jan 108.5 + 13.9 117.7 + 15.5 147.4 + 20.5 106.6 + 6.1 92.0 + 40.0 99.3 + 11.8 111.5 + 7.0 89.7 + 19.0
         Feb 120.6 + 15.0 126.0 + 11.0 157.8 + 15.4 115.4 + 9.2 94.7 + 4.2 115.3 + 19.7 109.5 + 5.7 117.1 + 25.4         Mar 164.7 + 15.5 168.4 + 12.3 227.3 + 19.9 146.7 + 9.9 117.0 − 2.9 161.0 + 19.0 150.0 + 9.6 154.6 + 19.2
         Apr 150.9 + 18.8 155.3 + 16.7 195.8 + 14.2 142.3 + 20.0 114.0 + 13.0 146.6 + 21.3 140.3 + 18.8 143.8 + 21.7
         May 157.4 + 18.5 176.1 + 27.4 209.6 + 24.8 173.7 + 32.6 117.6 + 16.1 138.7 + 8.9 156.0 + 19.4 137.9 + 14.0         June 165.1 + 19.9 181.0 + 24.4 223.4 + 27.7 174.6 + 25.5 116.8 + 9.5 149.1 + 14.7 161.3 + 20.3 145.5 + 15.0
         July 152.7 + 15.7 163.7 + 17.4 194.8 + 5.6 158.6 + 31.8 117.4 + 9.5 141.8 + 13.8 144.2 + 19.5 144.5 + 18.1
         Aug 138.9 + 12.1 148.6 + 14.2 184.2 + 16.9 141.5 + 14.9 99.6 + 2.9 129.1 + 9.8 132.3 + 10.9 127.4 + 10.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail tradeclothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 
2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices inprices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 102.7 + 2.6 101.1 + 1.0 102.5 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.8 99.4 − 0.5 103.7 + 3.7 100.3 + 0.3 107.1 + 7.9
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 0.3 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.6 + 0.9 100.7 + 0.4 105.8 − 1.2
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.1 + 0.8 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.2 103.4 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 108.2 + 1.9 102.8 + 1.5 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.7 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 107.1 + 2.5
2015 3 110.9 + 2.5 105.3 + 2.4 114.8 + 2.9 105.4 + 0.5 95.6 + 1.1 104.7 + 2.7 116.5 + 5.2 115.1 + 7.5
 
2015          Sep 108.2 + 3.1 102.5 + 3.3 110.0 + 3.7 112.3 + 4.5 93.0 + 1.5 102.1 + 3.3 113.6 + 4.8 114.1 + 6.5
         Oct 114.1 + 2.2 107.7 + 1.8 115.5 + 1.8 120.6 + 6.1 97.8 − 0.7 110.7 + 1.9 119.3 + 4.4 124.4 + 7.2
         Nov 115.6 + 2.6 109.5 + 2.0 116.4 + 3.1 104.4 − 2.9 110.7 + 1.1 114.6 + 3.6 122.6 + 5.9 124.0 + 9.9         Dec 131.3 + 3.3 125.5 + 3.0 133.9 + 3.6 124.4 + 0.7 148.3 + 1.2 113.6 + 5.8 130.6 + 4.0 106.0 + 4.1
2016          Jan 103.6 + 2.5 99.6 + 2.0 108.2 + 3.4 92.3 + 3.9 98.6 − 2.3 93.1 + 3.0 116.1 + 3.9 105.4 + 10.1
         Feb 99.8 + 2.1 95.5 + 2.1 105.6 + 3.5 80.6 − 1.1 85.7 + 0.2 94.2 + 4.0 113.3 + 4.7 110.2 + 8.9         Mar 113.5 + 0.9 107.4 + 0.8 117.1 + 1.3 98.1 − 7.5 91.3 + 1.7 112.2 +
 0.0 123.7 + 4.3 134.2 + 4.7
         Apr 
112.7 + 0.8 106.0 + 0.8 117.1 + 0.2 113.4 + 4.0 81.9 + 0.5 111.3 + 2.1 118.6 + 2.5 130.0 + 6.0
         May 113.1 + 1.5 106.3 + 1.3 118.6 + 1.0 109.6 + 1.6 79.4 − 2.0 109.3 + 1.0 118.1 + 4.8 125.1 + 4.2         June 110.2 + 1.7 104.2 + 1.7 116.1 + 1.8 104.2 − 1.3 85.1 + 4.2 103.3 + 1.1 117.1 + 3.4 127.9 + 5.8
         July 113.5 + 2.0 107.7 + 1.5 119.0 + 3.0 108.9 + 0.7 89.7 − 1.1 106.4 + 3.0 124.1 + 3.8 122.0 + 3.2
         Aug 109.1 + 1.4 103.7 + 1.3 115.6 + 0.3 98.2 + 2.0 84.2 − 2.2 101.2 + 2.1 117.6 + 5.4 113.9 + 8.0         Sep 108.6 + 0.4 102.3 − 0.2 112.1 + 1.9 102.2 − 9.0 87.7 − 5.7 101.6 − 0.5 118.4 + 4.2 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2015 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2011 41,577 + 1.4 28,687 + 2.4 8,580 19,094 794 5,014 148 100 2,976 893 7.1 466
2012 42,062 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 4782013 42,327 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 4572014 42,662 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,057 + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 88 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2013          Q3 42,512 + 0.6 29,776 + 1.2 8,810 19,955 772 5,050 70 57 2,903 934 6.7 471
         Q4 42,644 + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,878 20,234 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 42,214 + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,760 20,103 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,626 + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,829 20,255 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487         Q3 42,849 + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 800 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512         Q4 42,958 + 0.7 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 42,512 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,985 + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560         Q3 43,272 + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595         Q4 43,457 + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 77 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016          Q1
r 43,059 r + 1.3 31,064 + 2.3 8,927 21,120 793 4,786 166 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 r 43,489 r + 1.2 8 31,323 8 + 2.1 8 8,983 8 21,278 8 820 8 4,829 ... 8 47 2,674 782 9 6.1 653
         Q3 10 43,660 10 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,651 808 6.0 682
2013          June 42,390 + 0.6 29,616 + 1.1 8,764 19,866 747 5,066 99 86 2,865 897 6.6 459
         July 42,425 + 0.7 29,596 + 1.2 8,769 19,817 773 5,086 81 68 2,914 943 6.8 469         Aug 42,475 + 0.5 29,843 + 1.2 8,826 20,002 776 5,031 60 47 2,946 956 6.8 471         Sep 42,635 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,906 20,228 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473         Oct 42,731 + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,900 20,255 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,710 + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,889 20,252 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,490 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,783 20,161 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 42,164 + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,739 20,060 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,183 + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,750 20,088 729 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,296 + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,797 20,162 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,486 + 0.9 30,060 + 1.7 8,826 20,244 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,643 + 0.8 30,125 + 1.6 8,836 20,292 751 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481         June 42,748 + 0.8 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,780 + 0.8 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,804 + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 42,964 + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,053 + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,010 + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,810 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan 42,443 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,464 + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,630 + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,820 + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 43,002 + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557         June 43,134 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,177 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,232 + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep 43,408 + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct 43,492 + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov 43,526 + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec 43,353 + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 105 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016          Jan 
r 42,978 r + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 169 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,021 r + 1.3 31,055 + 2.3 8,921 21,116 793 4,771 177 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,179 r + 1.3 31,195 + 2.2 8,951 21,205 804 4,783 152 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,325 r + 1.2 31,299 + 2.1 8,980 21,267 809 4,808 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,520 r + 1.2 8 31,397 8 + 2.2 8 8,999 8 21,326 8 827 8 4,852 ... 8 45 2,664 774 9 6.0 655
         June r 43,623 r + 1.1 8 31,353 8 + 1.9 8 8,989 8 21,274 8 844 8 4,871 ... 8 43 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July r 43,594 r + 1.0 8 31,234 8 + 1.6 8 8,972 8 21,168 8 851 8 4,866 ... 8 30 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug r 43,607 r + 0.9 8 31,460 8 + 1.5 8 9,023 8 21,330 8 863 8 4,803 ... 8 25 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep 10 43,779 10 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,540 756 5.8 691
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2014
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- and 2015, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 0.3 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal 1.4 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given mum of 31.2 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From May 2016 calculated
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Fed-
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located eral Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Consumer price index HWWI
Indices of Index of World Market
of which foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding prices of sold on the struction
excluding house House price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food energy 
1 Energy 1 rents 2 rents 2 index market 3 products 3 Exports Imports Energy 5 materials  6 
Period 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2011 7 102.1 102.2 100.8 110.1 101.0 101.3 102.9 105.3 113.4 103.3 106.4 155.2 135.9
2012 7 104.1 105.7 102.0 116.4 102.4 102.5 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 105.7 110.4 103.0 118.0 103.8 103.8 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 106.6 111.5 103.9 115.5 105.5 105.4 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 106.9 112.4 105.1 107.4 106.9 106.7 111.3 103.9 8 107.0 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
 
2014          Dec 106.7 110.8 104.4 109.1 107.0 106.0 104.8 102.7 103.9 101.0 108.2 104.9
2015          Jan 105.6 111.4 103.6 105.6 105.3 106.1 104.2 102.4 104.4 100.2 92.1 106.8
         Feb 106.5 112.3 104.0 107.8 106.9 106.2 110.8 104.3 104.8 104.7 101.6 108.0 105.9
         Mar 107.0 112.2 105.1 109.3 106.8 106.3 104.4 105.1 105.3 102.6 109.0 107.1
         Apr 107.0 113.2 105.3 109.8 106.0 106.5 104.5 106.0 105.6 103.2 115.5 105.6
         May 107.1 113.2 105.1 110.9 106.2 106.5 111.1 104.5 104.8 105.4 103.0 116.8 104.7
         June 107.0 112.6 104.9 110.4 106.3 106.6 104.4 105.3 105.3 102.5 113.3 103.4
         July 107.2 111.8 104.4 109.8 107.8 106.7 104.4 104.5 105.4 101.8 106.0 101.6
         Aug 107.2 111.5 104.9 107.5 108.1 106.8 111.5 103.9 102.1 104.9 100.3 91.5 96.0
         Sep 107.0 112.1 105.9 105.7 107.0 106.9 103.5 8 107.4 104.6 99.6 90.8 94.1
         Oct 107.0 112.7 106.1 104.9 106.9 107.0 103.1 108.9 104.4 99.3 91.6 93.4
         Nov 107.1 112.9 106.0 105.0 107.1 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.6 104.5 99.1 89.6 92.7         Dec 107.0 112.4 105.6 102.0 108.4 107.1 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016          Jan 106.1 112.4 105.0 99.5 106.8 107.3 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 106.5 113.2 105.1 98.6 107.7 107.4 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6         Mar 107.3 113.7 106.1 99.6 108.8 107.5 101.2 106.5 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 106.9 113.8 106.8 100.5 106.6 107.6 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 107.2 113.2 106.7 102.1 107.5 107.7 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2         June 107.3 112.7 106.1 103.3 108.0 107.8 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 107.6 113.0 105.6 102.1 109.5 107.9 102.3 109.9 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 107.6 112.5 105.9 101.2 109.6 108.1 113.7 102.2 106.6 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6         Sep 107.7 112.6 107.0 101.9 108.5 108.3 102.0 104.6 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 107.9 112.7 107.4 103.4 108.2 108.5 ... ... ... ... 96.2 99.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2011 7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 2.9 + 5.3 + 13.4 + 3.3 + 6.4 + 33.7 + 15.8
2012 7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 5.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.2 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.8 8 − 3.7 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
 
2014          Dec + 0.2 − 1.2 + 1.1 − 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 16.1 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 32.7 − 6.3
2015          Jan − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 2.2 − 14.3 + 0.4 − 4.4 − 41.4 − 3.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 7.3 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 2.1 − 12.2 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 30.1 − 4.6
         Mar + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 5.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 1.7 − 12.7 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 27.3 − 2.9
         Apr + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.5 − 12.5 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 21.6 − 6.4
         May + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 21.5 − 5.8
         June + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 5.9 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 1.4 − 10.5 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 25.0 − 4.6
         July + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 6.2 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 1.3 − 8.3 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 26.5 − 5.1
         Aug + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 8.4 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 35.5 − 10.4
         Sep + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.3 − 9.3 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 2.1 8 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 37.2 − 10.4
         Oct + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.5 − 8.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 32.5 − 11.6
         Nov + 0.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 − 7.5 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 29.3 − 13.1         Dec + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 6.5 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016          Jan + 0.5 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 5.8 + 1.4 + 1.1 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb +
 0.0 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar 
+ 0.3 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 8.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 3.1 + 1.3 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 8.5 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 7.9 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June
+ 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 6.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 7.0 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 2.0 + 5.2 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 5.9 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.4 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7
         Sep + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 2.6 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... + 5.0 + 6.9
Source:
Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data provided gas. 6Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 7From May
by the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw 2011 and from January 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 8From September 2015
Materials: HWWI. 1Electricity, gas and other fuels. 2Net rents. 3Excluding onwards, provisional figures. 
value-added tax. 4For the euro area, in euro. 5Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2016
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2008
1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 356.2 0.4 1,027.0 2.3 1,582.6 2.6 165.9 4.9 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.5 3.0 778.4 2.9 396.1 2.2 1,174.5 2.6 1,719.8 1.4 154.1 − 2.2 9.0
2014 1,213.0 3.9 807.1 3.7 407.7 2.9 1,214.8 3.4 1,759.5 2.3 165.1 7.1 9.4
2015 1,260.6 3.9 836.6 3.6 422.9 3.7 1,259.4 3.7 1,811.2 2.9 175.2 6.1 9.7
2015          Q1 292.2 3.4 193.7 2.7 107.6 4.0 301.3 3.1 447.6 2.9 57.8 6.5 12.9
         Q2 308.5 4.1 200.1 3.5 104.2 4.3 304.4 3.8 449.5 2.8 41.9 6.1 9.3
         Q3 311.3 4.0 211.1 3.8 105.7 3.5 316.8 3.7 454.8 3.0 37.1 6.0 8.2
         Q4 348.7 4.2 231.6 4.5 105.3 3.0 337.0 4.0 459.3 3.0 38.4 5.7 8.4
2016          Q1 305.0 4.4 201.8 4.2 109.5 1.8 311.3 3.3 457.9 2.3 59.4 2.8 13.0
         Q2 319.4 3.5 207.6 3.7 106.9 2.6 314.5 3.3 462.7 2.9 43.6 4.2 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2016. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2008 96.4 2.8 96.3 2.9 96.1 3.1 95.9 3.3 97.6 2.4
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.3 2.3 98.2 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.7 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.1 2.5 107.1 2.5 107.4 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.02014 110.4 3.0 110.2 2.9 110.4 2.8 110.4 2.9 111.4 2.8
2015 113.0 2.4 112.8 2.3 113.0 2.3 113.1 2.4 114.4 2.7
2015          Q2 106.0 2.3 105.8 2.2 106.1 2.3 112.9 2.3 112.2 2.9
         Q3 115.2 2.5 115.1 2.4 115.4 2.4 113.7 2.4 112.6 2.7         Q4 126.1 2.4 125.9 2.3 126.2 2.3 113.9 2.4 125.1 2.7
2016          Q1 106.6 2.0 106.4 1.9 106.8 2.3 114.3 2.3 110.5 2.8
         Q2 108.3 2.2 108.1 2.2 108.1 1.9 115.2 2.1 114.6 2.1
         Q3 117.5 2.0 117.3 1.9 117.7 2.0 116.0 2.0 . .
2016          Mar 107.0 1.6 106.8 1.6 107.2 2.3 114.8 2.3 . .
         Apr 108.3 2.0 108.1 2.0 108.3 1.9 114.9 2.0 . .
         May 108.2 1.9 108.0 1.9 108.3 1.8 115.4 2.3 . .
         June 108.3 2.6 108.0 2.5 107.7 1.9 115.3 1.9 . .
         July 136.2 2.0 135.9 1.9 136.3 2.0 115.8 2.0 . .
         Aug 108.2 2.0 107.9 2.0 108.3 2.0 116.0 2.0 . .
         Sep 108.3 2.0 108.0 2.0 108.4 2.0 116.1 2.0 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2016. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-quarter data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2011 1,838.5 1,116.0 340.0 477.4 232.9 722.5 190.6 180.4 119.3 537.8 1,300.7 663.6 347.3 637.1 176.8 160.9
2012 1,904.7 1,178.7 380.6 490.5 240.6 726.0 189.9 179.1 125.9 561.6 1,343.1 719.0 380.1 624.1 180.0 160.6
2013 1,938.4 1,196.1 387.1 499.5 241.0 742.3 189.0 179.8 139.0 576.1 1,362.3 726.4 383.3 635.9 191.3 166.8
2014 2,117.2 1,311.0 433.0 534.4 260.1 806.3 204.4 190.7 135.8 588.0 1,529.2 835.3 434.3 693.9 216.0 179.8
2015 2,277.6 1,428.2 476.5 582.6 283.4 849.4 216.8 195.8 140.8 641.9 1,635.6 887.8 475.2 747.8 234.6 186.1
2015          Q1 2,257.4 1,399.4 456.7 558.9 284.4 858.0 220.3 212.5 139.0 607.7 1,649.8 910.0 454.1 739.7 224.9 184.3
         Q2 2,218.5 1,384.0 459.8 557.6 281.8 834.5 219.1 204.4 132.0 629.9 1,588.6 857.6 449.8 731.0 224.7 180.7         Q3 2,206.1 1,368.1 450.6 553.4 277.8 838.0 219.0 195.9 142.1 622.7 1,583.4 861.4 450.4 722.0 213.9 179.3         Q4 2,277.6 1,428.2 476.5 582.6 283.4 849.4 216.8 195.8 140.8 641.9 1,635.6 887.8 475.2 747.8 234.6 186.1
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 60.7 18.5 26.0 12.7 39.3 10.4 9.8 6.5 29.3 70.8 36.1 18.9 34.7 9.6 8.8
2012 100.0 61.9 20.0 25.8 12.6 38.1 10.0 9.4 6.6 29.5 70.5 37.8 20.0 32.8 9.5 8.4
2013 100.0 61.7 20.0 25.8 12.4 38.3 9.8 9.3 7.2 29.7 70.3 37.5 19.8 32.8 9.9 8.6
2014 100.0 61.9 20.5 25.2 12.3 38.1 9.7 9.0 6.4 27.8 72.2 39.5 20.5 32.8 10.2 8.5
2015 100.0 62.7 20.9 25.6 12.4 37.3 9.5 8.6 6.2 28.2 71.8 39.0 20.9 32.8 10.3 8.2
2015          Q1 100.0 62.0 20.2 24.8 12.6 38.0 9.8 9.4 6.2 26.9 73.1 40.3 20.1 32.8 10.0 8.2
         Q2 100.0 62.4 20.7 25.1 12.7 37.6 9.9 9.2 6.0 28.4 71.6 38.7 20.3 33.0 10.1 8.2
         Q3 100.0 62.0 20.4 25.1 12.6 38.0 9.9 8.9 6.4 28.2 71.8 39.1 20.4 32.7 9.7 8.1
         Q4 100.0 62.7 20.9 25.6 12.4 37.3 9.5 8.6 6.2 28.2 71.8 39.0 20.9 32.8 10.3 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2011 1,474.2 860.6 221.7 373.8 214.9 613.6 172.3 143.6 92.7 421.6 1,052.6 530.5 260.8 522.2 151.2 116.72012 1,540.7 921.3 258.9 388.0 222.1 619.4 172.5 140.4 98.1 443.7 1,097.0 581.8 286.6 515.2 161.0 116.52013 1,559.6 933.2 259.1 398.7 224.1 626.4 172.7 140.0 106.6 457.3 1,102.3 580.9 286.2 521.4 170.4 118.62014 1,693.7 1,016.3 278.4 425.8 246.5 677.4 187.0 143.6 102.1 456.2 1,237.5 667.4 325.9 570.0 194.4 126.42015 1,819.7 1,102.0 305.8 460.6 268.2 717.7 199.9 150.0 108.1 490.9 1,328.8 712.5 360.0 616.3 209.5 131.2
2015          Q1 1,810.1 1,084.9 291.7 445.3 269.4 725.2 202.3 162.9 108.4 470.3 1,339.8 730.0 341.4 609.8 202.0 134.5
         Q2 1,782.5 1,075.0 295.2 446.2 267.7 707.5 202.0 156.0 107.0 492.7 1,289.8 693.7 343.5 596.1 195.9 132.0         Q3 1,771.2 1,058.9 286.4 440.9 263.7 712.3 201.8 148.8 114.7 482.6 1,288.5 697.3 345.0 591.2 185.1 129.7         Q4 1,819.7 1,102.0 305.8 460.6 268.2 717.7 199.9 150.0 108.1 490.9 1,328.8 712.5 360.0 616.3 209.5 131.2
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 58.4 15.0 25.4 14.6 41.6 11.7 9.7 6.3 28.6 71.4 36.0 17.7 35.4 10.3 7.9
2012 100.0 59.8 16.8 25.2 14.4 40.2 11.2 9.1 6.4 28.8 71.2 37.8 18.6 33.4 10.5 7.6
2013 100.0 59.8 16.6 25.6 14.4 40.2 11.1 9.0 6.8 29.3 70.7 37.3 18.4 33.4 10.9 7.6
2014 100.0 60.0 16.4 25.1 14.6 40.0 11.0 8.5 6.0 26.9 73.1 39.4 19.2 33.7 11.5 7.5
2015 100.0 60.6 16.8 25.3 14.7 39.4 11.0 8.2 5.9 27.0 73.0 39.2 19.8 33.9 11.5 7.2
2015          Q1 100.0 59.9 16.1 24.6 14.9 40.1 11.2 9.0 6.0 26.0 74.0 40.3 18.9 33.7 11.2 7.4
         Q2 100.0 60.3 16.6 25.0 15.0 39.7 11.3 8.8 6.0 27.6 72.4 38.9 19.3 33.4 11.0 7.4
         Q3 100.0 59.8 16.2 24.9 14.9 40.2 11.4 8.4 6.5 27.3 72.8 39.4 19.5 33.4 10.5 7.3
         Q4 100.0 60.6 16.8 25.3 14.7 39.4 11.0 8.2 5.9 27.0 73.0 39.2 19.8 33.9 11.5 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2011 364.3 255.4 118.3 103.6 17.9 108.9 18.3 36.8 26.6 116.2 248.1 133.1 86.5 115.0 25.6 44.12012 364.0 257.4 121.7 102.6 18.4 106.5 17.4 38.7 27.9 117.9 246.1 137.1 93.6 108.9 18.9 44.22013 378.8 262.9 128.0 100.8 16.8 115.9 16.3 39.8 32.4 118.8 260.0 145.4 97.1 114.5 20.8 48.22014 423.5 294.7 154.7 108.6 13.6 128.9 17.4 47.1 33.7 131.8 291.7 167.9 108.4 123.8 21.6 53.42015 457.8 326.2 170.7 122.1 15.2 131.7 16.9 45.8 32.8 151.0 306.8 175.3 115.1 131.5 25.1 54.9
2015          Q1 447.3 314.5 165.0 113.6 14.9 132.8 17.9 49.6 30.6 137.3 310.0 180.1 112.7 129.9 23.0 49.8
         Q2 436.0 309.1 164.6 111.4 14.1 126.9 17.1 48.3 25.0 137.3 298.8 163.9 106.3 134.9 28.8 48.7         Q3 434.9 309.2 164.2 112.5 14.1 125.6 17.2 47.1 27.4 140.0 294.8 164.0 105.3 130.8 28.8 49.6         Q4 457.8 326.2 170.7 122.1 15.2 131.7 16.9 45.8 32.8 151.0 306.8 175.3 115.1 131.5 25.1 54.9
as a percentage of total assets
2011 100.0 70.1 32.5 28.5 4.9 29.9 5.0 10.1 7.3 31.9 68.1 36.5 23.8 31.6 7.0 12.1
2012 100.0 70.7 33.4 28.2 5.1 29.3 4.8 10.6 7.7 32.4 67.6 37.7 25.7 29.9 5.2 12.1
2013 100.0 69.4 33.8 26.6 4.4 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.6 31.4 68.6 38.4 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 8.0 31.1 68.9 39.6 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.2 37.3 26.7 3.3 28.8 3.7 10.0 7.2 33.0 67.0 38.3 25.1 28.7 5.5 12.0
2015          Q1 100.0 70.3 36.9 25.4 3.3 29.7 4.0 11.1 6.8 30.7 69.3 40.3 25.2 29.0 5.1 11.1
         Q2 100.0 70.9 37.8 25.6 3.2 29.1 3.9 11.1 5.7 31.5 68.5 37.6 24.4 30.9 6.6 11.2
         Q3 100.0 71.1 37.8 25.9 3.2 28.9 3.9 10.8 6.3 32.2 67.8 37.7 24.2 30.1 6.6 11.4
         Q4 100.0 71.2 37.3 26.7 3.3 28.8 3.7 10.0 7.2 33.0 67.0 38.3 25.1 28.7 5.5 12.0
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial reduced from quarterly to half-yearly. First results for the period ending 30 June 2016
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added will be made available in December of this year. 1Including cash equivalents. 2Includ-
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. Beginning with the 2016 ing groups in agriculture and forestry. 
reporting year, the frequency of the consolidated financial statement statistics will be

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2008 1,307.5 6.4 164.5 − 5.6 12.6 − 1.6 5.8 11.6 17.6 80.9 − 16.6 6.2 − 1.7 2.5 6.6 12.1
2009 1,175.4 − 10.5 138.4 − 16.4 11.8 − 0.8 4.0 9.5 15.8 57.9 − 28.0 4.9 − 1.2 0.3 5.1 9.3
2010 1,340.0 13.2 184.3 30.4 13.8 1.8 6.0 11.2 18.6 100.4 64.9 7.5 2.3 3.1 6.5 12.1
2011 1,434.5 8.4 177.9 − 0.3 12.4 − 1.1 5.5 10.7 17.4 94.6 − 5.4 6.6 − 1.0 2.7 6.6 11.9
2012 1,552.7 6.6 190.8 3.3 12.3 − 0.4 5.0 10.0 17.4 96.9 − 7.1 6.2 − 0.9 1.8 6.0 10.9
2013 1,557.4 − 0.5 188.5 − 2.5 12.1 − 0.2 5.0 9.9 18.2 99.9 6.2 6.4 0.4 1.8 5.8 10.8
2014 1,586.1 1.0 200.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.6 10.2 17.2 109.2 7.4 6.9 0.4 1.8 6.2 11.1
2015 1,672.6 6.7 199.5 − 0.4 11.9 − 0.9 5.9 10.5 17.3 91.8 − 15.5 5.5 − 1.4 1.4 6.4 10.8
2013          Q2 393.6 1.1 48.3 − 1.4 12.3 − 0.3 4.1 9.2 16.7 27.3 − 4.8 6.9 − 0.4 0.9 4.9 10.2
         Q3 384.3 − 1.6 47.2 − 1.0 12.3 0.1 5.1 10.3 16.1 25.6 99.8 6.7 3.5 1.3 5.8 11.8
         Q4 406.7 − 0.4 47.6 − 1.6 11.7 − 0.1 5.2 11.1 19.5 20.5 − 12.2 5.0 − 0.7 0.9 6.7 12.6
2014          Q1 381.5 − 0.1 50.2 8.9 13.2 1.1 3.7 8.7 16.2 30.6 15.3 8.0 1.1 0.1 5.1 10.2
         Q2 386.7 − 2.0 47.9 − 0.2 12.4 0.2 4.6 9.7 16.9 26.4 − 2.3 6.8 − 0.0 1.3 5.7 11.1
         Q3 394.7 2.8 49.9 3.9 12.6 0.1 5.4 11.3 18.3 28.6 8.2 7.2 0.4 1.8 6.8 12.7
         Q4 423.6 3.0 52.8 7.2 12.5 0.5 4.0 11.6 19.3 23.5 8.7 5.6 0.3 0.5 6.7 12.0
2015          Q1 409.8 7.3 51.2 1.9 12.5 − 0.7 4.5 9.7 17.2 28.8 − 5.9 7.0 − 1.0 − 0.8 5.9 11.4
         Q2 425.7 9.9 52.9 10.3 12.4 0.0 4.7 9.7 16.6 30.8 16.7 7.2 0.4 1.3 5.6 10.9
         Q3 416.8 5.4 49.5 − 0.6 11.9 − 0.7 4.8 10.5 16.6 17.2 − 39.5 4.1 − 3.1 1.0 6.3 11.5
         Q4 437.0 4.6 46.3 − 12.2 10.6 − 2.0 6.9 11.5 18.3 15.4 − 35.1 3.5 − 2.1 2.0 7.4 12.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2008 966.1 7.2 122.6 − 6.2 12.7 − 1.8 5.8 11.3 15.6 62.0 − 17.1 6.4 − 1.9 2.4 6.7 11.4
2009 854.1 − 11.5 97.7 − 19.9 11.4 − 1.2 2.9 9.2 14.0 41.9 − 31.0 4.9 − 1.4 − 1.3 4.7 8.8
2010 999.2 15.7 139.1 38.1 13.9 2.3 6.3 11.2 16.2 77.7 70.0 7.8 2.5 2.9 7.0 11.9
2011 1,098.9 10.6 131.9 − 2.6 12.0 − 1.6 5.3 10.7 16.2 74.8 − 6.5 6.8 − 1.3 2.1 6.8 11.22012 1,194.3 7.6 143.1 5.5 12.0 − 0.2 5.0 10.1 15.9 83.0 2.8 7.0 − 0.3 1.7 6.1 9.82013 1,195.9 − 0.7 140.2 − 2.2 11.7 − 0.2 4.3 9.9 15.4 75.1 − 5.1 6.3 − 0.3 1.2 5.6 9.82014 1,217.7 0.9 149.9 5.7 12.3 0.6 5.1 9.4 15.1 81.8 7.8 6.7 0.4 1.0 5.8 9.9
2015 1,301.7 6.8 146.3 − 2.1 11.2 − 1.0 6.2 10.3 15.3 64.8 − 19.3 5.0 − 1.7 1.5 6.3 9.82013          Q2 303.3 1.4 36.0 − 2.1 11.9 − 0.4 3.6 9.1 15.2 20.6 − 8.4 6.8 − 0.7 0.4 5.0 9.4
         Q3 290.7 − 2.2 33.4 − 0.4 11.5 0.2 4.5 10.1 15.0 17.5 15.3 6.0 1.0 0.8 5.7 10.1         Q4 311.6 − 0.5 34.6 1.9 11.1 0.3 4.5 10.7 15.5 14.3 − 7.3 4.6 − 0.3 0.0 6.0 10.4
2014          Q1 297.8 0.1 39.1 6.4 13.1 0.8 3.5 8.7 14.5 25.0 10.4 8.4 0.8 0.3 5.3 9.0
         Q2 297.2 − 2.3 36.1 0.3 12.1 0.3 4.0 9.4 15.3 20.5 − 0.2 6.9 0.2 1.1 5.3 10.6         Q3 300.0 3.3 36.4 6.3 12.1 0.3 4.2 10.3 16.0 20.9 12.6 7.0 0.6 1.2 6.3 10.3         Q4 322.9 2.8 38.4 10.1 11.9 0.8 3.3 10.6 15.6 15.5 9.1 4.8 0.3 − 0.7 6.1 10.3
2015          Q1 319.0 7.0 41.2 5.4 12.9 − 0.2 5.4 9.7 14.9 25.3 1.4 7.9 − 0.4 0.9 6.0 9.6
         Q2 329.0 10.5 40.1 11.2 12.2 0.1 4.4 9.5 15.2 24.1 18.0 7.3 0.5 1.4 5.3 9.7         Q3 316.5 5.3 34.3 − 5.2 10.8 − 1.2 4.6 10.0 15.1 8.8 − 54.6 2.8 − 4.0 1.0 5.8 10.1         Q4 338.0 4.9 30.7 − 19.4 9.1 − 2.8 5.9 11.0 16.2 6.6 − 53.7 2.0 − 2.8 2.0 6.4 10.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2008 341.4 4.0 41.9 − 3.7 12.3 − 1.0 5.9 12.5 19.7 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.8 6.6 12.72009 321.3 − 7.4 40.8 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.8 5.8 45.2 8.7 13.3 0.3 5.9 10.8 19.9 22.7 46.7 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.6 1.5 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.7 10.6 20.9 19.8 − 0.8 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.4 13.82012 358.4 3.0 47.7 − 3.3 13.3 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 23.2 13.9 − 47.1 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 361.5 − 0.1 48.2 − 3.5 13.3 − 0.5 5.3 9.9 21.1 24.8 91.7 6.9 3.0 2.7 5.9 12.22014 368.4 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.2 12.7 23.2 27.4 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 7.2 14.1
2015 370.9 6.4 53.3 5.3 14.4 − 0.1 5.9 11.1 22.0 27.0 − 1.5 7.3 − 0.6 1.2 6.5 14.02013          Q2 90.3 − 0.3 12.2 1.0 13.5 0.2 4.9 9.4 19.2 6.7 12.0 7.4 0.8 1.2 4.8 13.9
         Q3 93.5 0.5 13.8 − 2.8 14.8 − 0.5 5.7 10.7 21.0 8.1 307.7 8.6 12.5 2.0 6.2 13.1         Q4 95.1 0.1 13.0 − 11.1 13.6 − 1.7 6.4 13.2 24.0 6.2 − 24.2 6.6 − 1.9 2.0 8.1 16.1
2014          Q1 83.7 − 0.6 11.1 20.1 13.3 2.3 3.8 8.9 21.2 5.6 49.8 6.7 2.2 − 0.4 4.6 13.1
         Q2 89.5 − 0.5 11.9 − 1.8 13.3 − 0.2 4.8 10.4 18.7 6.0 − 10.0 6.7 − 0.7 1.4 6.0 13.0         Q3 94.7 1.1 13.5 − 2.9 14.2 − 0.6 7.1 13.1 24.6 7.7 − 3.4 8.1 − 0.4 3.1 7.8 13.8         Q4 100.7 3.7 14.4 − 1.6 14.3 − 0.7 5.4 15.6 25.3 8.1 7.5 8.0 0.2 2.1 8.4 19.5
2015          Q1 90.9 8.7 10.1 − 12.1 11.1 − 2.7 3.8 9.6 22.2 3.5 − 45.4 3.9 − 3.4 − 2.6 5.6 14.3
         Q2 96.7 7.8 12.8 7.0 13.2 − 0.1 5.0 11.4 21.7 6.7 11.2 6.9 0.2 1.3 6.7 13.8         Q3 100.3 5.9 15.2 13.8 15.2 1.1 5.2 12.1 20.0 8.4 9.1 8.4 0.3 0.7 7.1 13.1         Q4 99.0 3.5 15.6 9.7 15.7 0.9 7.7 14.0 25.8 8.7 9.2 8.8 0.5 2.1 9.6 17.4
*Non-financial groups listed in Germany which publish IFRS consolidated financial preciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted re-
statements on a quarterly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added turn on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of
in Germany. Excluding groups in real estate activities. Beginning with the 2016 large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical
reporting year, the frequency of the consolidated financial statement statistics will be Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups in agriculture
reduced from quarterly to half-yearly. First results for the period ending 30 June 2016 and forestry. will be made available in December of this year. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, de-

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2015
2016
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug p
Current account + 215,988 + 241,245 + 323,657 + 104,364 + 60,319 + 87,847 + 36,138 + 33,846 + 23,576 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,913,552 1,963,183 2,112,240 539,337 501,817 534,918 186,232 173,335 162,221
Imports 1,703,376 1,721,836 1,757,521 441,137 421,349 427,480 146,801 140,464 138,174
Balance + 210,173 + 241,345 + 354,720 + 98,200 + 80,466 + 107,438 + 39,431 + 32,871 + 24,048
2 Services
Receipts 646,905 710,777 767,970 200,174 177,972 192,545 68,239 68,012 65,475
Expenditure 576,355 633,319 709,178 187,723 168,455 177,665 62,241 60,399 60,824
Balance + 70,546 + 77,458 + 58,792 + 12,452 + 9,518 + 14,880 + 5,998 + 7,613 + 4,651
3 Primary income
Receipts 610,254 626,709 632,419 164,036 138,530 150,646 52,645 45,633 44,482
Expenditure 530,432 562,506 588,637 140,247 123,747 162,511 54,578 41,512 37,687
Balance + 79,822 + 64,203 + 43,783 + 23,790 + 14,783 − 11,865 − 1,933 + 4,121 + 6,795
4 Secondary income
Receipts 86,685 91,481 103,901 26,869 22,490 27,478 9,336 7,759 7,304
Expenditure 231,239 233,243 237,538 56,949 66,939 50,083 16,693 18,518 19,221
Balance − 144,555 − 141,764 − 133,639 − 30,078 − 44,448 − 22,606 − 7,358 − 10,760 − 11,917
Capital account + 19,338 + 13,053 − 12,363 + 8,957 − 1,329 + 387 + 308 + 521 + 479 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 423,350 + 329,295 + 299,839 + 156,954 + 4,701 + 92,034 + 60,044 + 6,927 + 26,141 C
1 Direct investment + 27,130 + 62,686 + 245,526 + 21,176 + 40,654 − 25,468 − 20,174 + 21,830 + 45,813
By resident units abroad + 512,758 + 161,435 + 821,514 + 227,721 + 115,238 − 21,035 − 45,794 + 19,443 + 55,911
By non-resident units in the euro area + 485,627 + 98,749 + 575,987 + 206,545 + 74,586 + 4,432 − 25,620 − 2,388 + 10,098
2 Portfolio investment − 27,145 + 68,959 + 108,975 + 123,343 + 92,830 + 174,236 + 49,230 + 59,107 + 34,009
By resident units abroad + 271,362 + 460,696 + 403,915 + 111,503 + 134,117 + 127,007 + 45,013 + 42,004 + 38,766
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 167,450 + 141,720 + 21,878 + 2,998 − 18,293 + 4,916 − 1,557 + 11,310 + 6,288
Long-term debt securities + 77,038 + 226,560 + 369,718 + 75,107 + 140,465 + 114,326 + 18,911 + 49,907 + 27,539
Short-term debt securities + 26,876 + 92,414 + 12,318 + 33,397 + 11,946 + 7,763 + 27,659 − 19,213 + 4,939
By non-resident units in the euro area + 298,505 + 391,735 + 294,939 − 11,840 + 41,288 − 47,230 − 4,218 − 17,103 + 4,757
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 203,379 + 282,558 + 268,432 + 88,079 − 14,336 + 73,844 + 46,750 + 25,227 − 811
Long-term debt securities + 62,540 + 127,161 + 75,120 − 51,537 + 31,034 − 171,949 − 61,291 − 14,071 + 2,981
Short-term debt securities + 32,585 − 17,984 − 48,612 − 48,382 + 24,591 + 50,876 + 10,324 − 28,260 + 2,588
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 31,797 + 45,483 + 85,767 + 55,616 + 27,332 − 47,780 − 12,366 + 6,002 − 2,598
4 Other investment + 386,921 + 147,803 − 150,999 − 47,760 − 157,084 − 11,140 + 42,658 − 79,134 − 52,881
Eurosystem + 57,976 + 55,898 − 13,611 + 3,184 − 7,278 − 19,282 − 17,900 − 3,092 − 16,785
General government − 8,831 + 11,850 + 19,268 + 3,248 + 7,153 + 1,344 + 2,040 − 1,956 + 3,651
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 275,227 + 98,549 − 124,235 − 44,442 − 89,483 − 24,197 + 31,930 − 77,326 − 20,385
Enterprises and households + 62,547 − 18,491 − 32,416 − 9,747 − 67,477 + 30,999 + 26,590 + 3,239 − 19,363
5 Reserve assets + 4,647 + 4,361 + 10,569 + 4,579 + 970 + 2,186 + 695 − 877 + 1,799
Net errors and omissions + 188,025 + 74,997 − 11,455 + 43,634 − 54,289 + 3,802 + 23,598 − 27,440 + 2,086 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2001 − 7,911 + 101,273 + 3,321 − 62,833 − 17,195 − 29,155 − 3,258 + 947 − 6,032 + 12,116
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,6062003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,960
2006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,1302008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,351
2011 + 164,581 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,482 + 69,156 − 35,520 + 1,642 + 120,858 + 2,836 − 45,365
2012 + 193,593 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 65,825 − 39,858 − 413 + 144,802 + 1,297 − 48,3782013 + 190,420 + 211,647 − 4,331 − 43,223 + 65,754 − 43,758 − 591 + 219,079 + 838 + 29,2512014 + 212,880 + 226,499 − 7,739 − 35,353 + 62,387 − 40,653 + 1,138 + 244,445 − 2,564 + 30,4262015 
r + 252,580 + 259,621 − 4,407 − 31,230 + 63,739 − 39,550 − 159 + 225,551 − 2,213 − 26,870
2013          Q4 + 62,069 + 53,496 − 1,273 − 6,470 + 26,157 − 11,114 − 1,738 + 71,549 + 1,464 + 11,218
2014          Q1 + 48,137 + 52,292 + 168 − 6,298 + 17,061 − 14,918 + 2,142 + 60,275 − 565 + 9,996
         Q2 + 44,982 + 54,295 − 2,031 − 7,242 + 4,641 − 6,712 + 519 + 55,959 − 610 + 10,457         Q3 + 54,257 + 60,313 − 2,818 − 15,461 + 17,223 − 7,818 + 367 + 59,285 + 332 + 4,661         Q4 + 65,503 + 59,599 − 3,058 − 6,352 + 23,462 − 11,206 − 1,890 + 68,926 − 1,722 + 5,312
2015          Q1 
r + 57,887 + 60,084 − 1,680 − 4,714 + 18,340 − 15,822 + 218 + 30,366 − 21 − 27,739
         Q2 r + 57,431 + 68,318 − 2,043 − 5,941 + 2,107 − 7,052 + 1,098 + 72,772 − 465 + 14,243
         Q3 r + 65,022 + 67,108 + 577 − 13,852 + 18,393 − 6,628 + 703 + 64,092 − 1,455 − 1,634
         Q4 r + 72,240 + 64,112 − 1,260 − 6,722 + 24,898 − 10,048 − 2,178 + 58,322 − 272 − 11,740
2016          Q1 + 64,276 + 64,017 + 333 − 5,707 + 19,425 − 13,460 − 417 + 23,864 + 1,228 − 39,995
         Q2 r + 72,095 + 77,103 + 38 − 5,040 + 4,515 − 4,482 + 1,557 + 58,500 + 761 − 15,152
         Q3 p + 61,636 + 68,907 + 216 − 13,012 + 16,426 − 10,685 + 409 + 58,445 − 261 − 3,600
2014          Apr + 16,501 + 18,418 − 720 − 1,585 + 2,911 − 3,243 + 186 + 29,516 + 151 + 12,830         May + 12,180 + 17,917 − 1,675 − 1,948 − 2,726 − 1,063 − 72 + 9,391 − 631 − 2,717         June + 16,301 + 17,960 + 363 − 3,708 + 4,456 − 2,406 + 405 + 17,051 − 130 + 345
         July + 20,303 + 22,747 − 1,684 − 4,991 + 5,562 − 3,016 − 402 + 13,450 + 431 − 6,451
         Aug + 10,707 + 14,254 − 748 − 6,617 + 5,430 − 2,359 + 426 + 13,062 + 166 + 1,930         Sep + 23,247 + 23,312 − 385 − 3,853 + 6,231 − 2,442 + 343 + 32,773 − 265 + 9,182
         Oct + 21,331 + 22,823 − 1,448 − 4,994 + 6,058 − 2,556 − 112 + 15,292 + 203 − 5,928
         Nov + 18,686 + 18,095 − 382 − 2,039 + 6,130 − 3,500 + 152 + 22,905 + 30 + 4,067         Dec + 25,486 + 18,681 − 1,228 + 681 + 11,274 − 5,150 − 1,930 + 30,729 − 1,955 + 7,173
2015          Jan  
r + 14,676 + 15,484 − 1,154 − 1,713 + 5,103 − 4,199 + 20 − 3,642 + 372 − 18,338
         Feb  r + 16,055 + 19,360 − 948 − 1,625 + 5,826 − 7,505 + 24 + 11,595 + 266 − 4,485
         Mar  r + 27,157 + 25,240 + 422 − 1,376 + 7,411 − 4,117 + 173 + 22,413 − 660 − 4,917
         Apr  r + 21,110 + 22,116 − 1,240 − 1,432 + 3,303 − 2,877 + 348 + 31,171 − 69 + 9,712
         May r + 11,366 + 21,155 − 437 − 2,002 − 5,805 − 1,982 + 557 + 17,540 − 78 + 5,617
         June r + 24,955 + 25,047 − 367 − 2,507 + 4,609 − 2,194 + 192 + 24,061 − 318 − 1,086
         July r + 25,002 + 25,102 − 1,024 − 4,339 + 6,553 − 2,314 + 462 + 20,319 − 1,170 − 5,146
         Aug  r + 14,231 + 16,658 + 472 − 5,423 + 5,735 − 2,739 + 40 + 19,460 − 180 + 5,189
         Sep  r + 25,788 + 25,348 + 1,129 − 4,090 + 6,106 − 1,575 + 201 + 24,313 − 105 − 1,677
         Oct  r + 21,741 + 23,867 + 23 − 5,847 + 6,808 − 3,087 − 94 + 16,508 + 154 − 5,140
         Nov  r + 24,894 + 22,245 − 378 − 1,741 + 6,874 − 2,485 + 163 + 20,149 − 548 − 4,908
         Dec  r + 25,604 + 17,999 − 905 + 866 + 11,216 − 4,476 − 2,248 + 21,665 + 123 − 1,692
2016          Jan + 14,029 + 13,619 − 183 − 2,455 + 5,140 − 2,275 − 89 − 5,464 − 186 − 19,404
         Feb + 20,754 + 22,484 + 673 − 1,143 + 6,932 − 7,518 + 426 + 9,544 + 1,478 − 11,636         Mar + 29,492 + 27,914 − 158 − 2,109 + 7,353 − 3,666 − 754 + 19,784 − 64 − 8,955
         Apr + 27,944 + 27,243 − 188 − 845 + 3,238 − 1,692 + 1,267 + 36,312 + 696 + 7,101
         May + 18,088 + 23,445 + 500 − 1,584 − 3,181 − 591 + 153 + 4,135 + 776 − 14,106         June 
r + 26,063 + 26,414 − 274 − 2,611 + 4,458 − 2,199 + 137 + 18,052 − 711 − 8,148
         July + 20,073 + 21,040 + 508 − 3,868 + 6,337 − 3,435 − 135 + 19,073 + 342 − 865         Aug + 17,360 + 21,681 − 342 − 5,559 + 5,749 − 4,510 − 114 + 16,116 + 93 − 1,131         Sep  
p + 24,202 + 26,185 + 50 − 3,585 + 4,341 − 2,739 + 658 + 23,256 − 695 − 1,604
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2016
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2016
Ländergruppe/Land
 2013  2014  2015 May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p Jan. / Aug. 
All countries 1 Exports 1,088,025 1,123,746 1,193,555 794,563 96,960 106,484 96,255 96,431 106,400
Imports 890,393 910,145 949,245 626,001 76,246 82,007 76,921 76,482 82,021Balance + 197,632 + 213,601 + 244,310 + 168,562 + 20,714 + 24,477 + 19,334 + 19,949 + 24,379
I Exports 743,067 761,914 803,425 543,701 66,762 72,708 65,376 64,019 ...European countries
Imports 625,934 642,738 653,782 432,060 53,106 57,217 53,503 51,125 ...Balance + 117,133 + 119,176 + 149,643 + 111,641 + 13,656 + 15,491 + 11,873 + 12,894 ...
Exports 618,383 648,446 692,493 468,672 57,536 62,550 56,215 54,281 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 509,738 527,117 543,334 363,394 44,988 48,469 45,066 42,136 ...
Balance + 108,645 + 121,329 + 149,159 + 105,277 + 12,548 + 14,082 + 11,148 + 12,145 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 405,220 413,753 434,075 292,224 36,108 38,924 35,554 32,801 ...countries Imports 343,487 350,550 356,643 237,684 29,387 32,115 29,883 27,021 ...
Balance + 61,732 + 63,203 + 77,432 + 54,540 + 6,721 + 6,809 + 5,671 + 5,780 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,217 55,807 58,217 39,396 4,768 5,185 4,781 4,851 ...
Imports 36,734 36,218 37,250 25,527 3,089 3,390 3,305 3,015 ...Balance + 19,483 + 19,590 + 20,967 + 13,869 + 1,680 + 1,794 + 1,477 + 1,835 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,954 47,345 46,196 31,299 3,892 4,174 3,623 3,683 ...Luxembourg Imports 41,965 42,548 40,116 27,538 3,083 4,327 3,289 3,292 ...
Balance + 5,989 + 4,797 + 6,079 + 3,761 + 809 − 153 + 334 + 391 ...
France Exports 99,250 100,580 102,762 67,146 8,098 8,877 7,987 7,135 ...
Imports 63,489 66,714 66,819 44,292 5,649 5,916 5,654 4,432 ...Balance + 35,761 + 33,866 + 35,943 + 22,854 + 2,449 + 2,961 + 2,334 + 2,703 ...
Italy Exports 53,212 54,240 57,987 40,409 5,097 5,496 5,223 3,949 ...
Imports 46,911 48,522 49,038 34,075 4,353 4,515 4,571 3,792 ...Balance + 6,301 + 5,718 + 8,949 + 6,334 + 744 + 981 + 652 + 157 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,975 72,736 79,191 52,082 6,292 6,882 6,610 6,323 ...
Imports 88,698 87,796 87,889 55,033 6,861 7,026 6,925 6,853 ...Balance − 17,723 − 15,060 − 8,697 − 2,951 − 569 − 145 − 315 − 530 ...
Spain Exports 31,349 34,820 38,715 26,791 3,454 3,663 3,203 2,771 ...
Imports 23,639 24,804 26,442 18,004 2,355 2,442 2,144 1,775 ...Balance + 7,709 + 10,016 + 12,273 + 8,787 + 1,099 + 1,221 + 1,059 + 996 ...
Other EU member Exports 213,163 234,693 258,417 176,447 21,429 23,626 20,661 21,480 ...states Imports 166,251 176,567 186,691 125,710 15,602 16,353 15,184 15,115 ...
Balance + 46,912 + 58,126 + 71,727 + 50,737 + 5,827 + 7,273 + 5,477 + 6,365 ...
of which
United Exports 71,280 79,163 89,018 58,583 6,710 7,816 6,923 6,914 ...Kingdom Imports 39,466 38,545 38,414 23,415 2,939 2,880 2,894 2,711 ...
Balance + 31,815 + 40,618 + 50,604 + 35,168 + 3,771 + 4,936 + 4,029 + 4,203 ...
Exports 124,684 113,468 110,932 75,029 9,226 10,158 9,161 9,738 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,196 115,621 110,448 68,666 8,118 8,748 8,436 8,989 ... countries
Balance + 8,488 − 2,153 + 484 + 6,363 + 1,108 + 1,410 + 725 + 749 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,924 46,202 49,070 33,032 3,934 4,371 4,099 4,157 ...
Imports 38,321 39,392 42,089 28,154 3,267 3,763 3,535 3,363 ...
Balance + 8,603 + 6,810 + 6,981 + 4,879 + 667 + 608 + 565 + 795 ...
II Exports 341,213 358,337 387,398 250,290 30,097 33,751 30,753 32,316 ...Non-European
Imports 264,459 267,407 295,461 193,918 23,139 24,771 23,418 25,356 ... countries
Balance + 76,754 + 90,930 + 91,936 + 56,372 + 6,959 + 8,980 + 7,334 + 6,960 ...
Exports 21,803 22,505 23,897 16,268 1,941 2,112 1,818 2,015 ... 1 Africa
Imports 23,108 20,242 18,307 10,648 1,299 1,523 1,318 1,333 ...
Balance − 1,305 + 2,263 + 5,590 + 5,620 + 643 + 589 + 500 + 682 ...
Exports 130,427 135,293 156,982 97,916 11,755 13,119 12,142 12,062 ... 2 America
Imports 75,023 74,191 85,582 55,011 6,763 6,990 6,839 7,027 ...
Balance + 55,404 + 61,103 + 71,400 + 42,906 + 4,992 + 6,129 + 5,303 + 5,035 ...
of which
Exports 89,348 95,928 113,733 70,750 7,854 9,519 8,836 8,575 ... United States
Imports 48,582 49,207 60,217 38,625 4,764 4,709 4,738 4,900 ...Balance + 40,766 + 46,721 + 53,516 + 32,125 + 3,089 + 4,810 + 4,098 + 3,675 ...
Exports 179,038 190,973 196,297 129,429 15,660 17,603 15,885 17,334 ... 3 Asia
Imports 162,960 170,050 188,621 126,209 14,772 16,022 15,027 16,751 ...
Balance + 16,077 + 20,923 + 7,676 + 3,220 + 888 + 1,582 + 857 + 583 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,754 35,462 39,518 24,137 3,161 3,164 2,370 3,359 ...
Imports 8,921 7,865 7,330 4,209 581 572 515 548 ...Balance + 23,833 + 27,598 + 32,188 + 19,928 + 2,581 + 2,593 + 1,855 + 2,811 ...
Japan Exports 17,076 16,910 16,968 11,812 1,359 1,542 1,587 1,632 ...
Imports 19,492 19,007 20,180 14,505 1,770 1,885 1,712 1,906 ...Balance − 2,416 − 2,097 − 3,213 − 2,693 − 412 − 344 − 125 − 274 ...
Exports 66,912 74,369 71,284 48,991 5,812 6,814 6,413 6,301 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 74,544 79,828 91,930 60,349 6,845 7,613 7,182 8,115 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 7,633 − 5,459 − 20,646 − 11,358 − 1,032 − 799 − 769 − 1,813 ...Exports 45,894 48,476 51,510 33,370 3,944 4,581 4,072 4,548 ...
New industrial countries
Imports 36,672 38,782 42,478 28,267 3,393 3,688 3,308 3,592 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,222 + 9,695 + 9,032 + 5,103 + 551 + 892 + 764 + 956 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,946 9,566 10,221 6,676 741 916 908 906 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,368 2,924 2,951 2,050 305 237 235 246 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,578 + 6,641 + 7,271 + 4,626 + 436 + 680 + 673 + 660 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
the current position. Euro-area including Lithuania. 1Including fuel and other Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2011 − 32,482 − 8,533 − 33,755 + 7,812 + 2,389 + 857 − 6,787 + 2,939 + 3,358 + 64,718 + 1,081
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 3,155 + 61,666 + 1,0052013 − 43,223 − 12,075 − 37,713 + 8,123 + 3,605 − 758 − 5,912 + 3,078 + 523 + 64,008 + 1,2232014 − 35,353 − 13,254 − 37,653 + 7,817 + 4,274 + 2,600 − 1,785 + 3,035 + 259 + 61,258 + 8712015 − 31,230 − 12,655 − 36,632 + 10,181 + 5,118 + 3,796 − 3,659 + 3,102 + 735 + 63,370 − 366
2015          Q1 − 4,714 − 2,926 − 5,740 + 2,319 + 1,306 + 278 − 347 + 904 + 799 + 18,598 − 1,057
         Q2 − 5,941 − 2,218 − 7,808 + 2,272 + 1,093 + 1,298 − 1,155 + 830 − 31 + 3,256 − 1,118         Q3 − 13,852 − 3,352 − 14,495 + 2,779 + 847 + 292 − 594 + 770 − 445 + 20,042 − 1,204         Q4 − 6,722 − 4,158 − 8,590 + 2,811 + 1,872 + 1,928 − 1,563 + 598 + 411 + 21,474 + 3,013
2016          Q1 − 5,707 − 2,439 − 6,421 + 2,272 + 1,243 + 249 − 1,168 + 840 + 754 + 19,316 − 645
         Q2 − 5,040 − 1,190 − 8,057 + 2,369 + 1,119 + 1,108 − 955 + 855 − 154 + 5,752 − 1,084         Q3 
p − 13,012 − 1,484 − 15,654 + 1,886 + 1,498 + 482 − 383 + 852 − 442 + 18,042 − 1,174
2015          Nov − 1,741 − 1,530 − 1,759 + 1,044 + 609 + 260 − 683 + 220 + 139 + 7,175 − 440
         Dec + 866 − 1,220 − 1,304 + 1,081 + 826 + 1,471 − 205 + 143 + 128 + 7,223 + 3,864
2016          Jan − 2,455 − 921 − 1,687 + 952 + 184 − 459 − 722 + 276 + 258 + 5,227 − 345
         Feb − 1,143 − 1,039 − 1,723 + 607 + 774 + 165 − 138 + 290 + 272 + 6,590 + 70         Mar − 2,109 − 479 − 3,011 + 714 + 285 + 543 − 308 + 274 + 224 + 7,498 − 370
         Apr − 845 − 443 − 1,174 + 809 + 480 − 5 − 666 + 300 − 33 + 3,726 − 455
         May − 1,584 − 277 − 3,302 + 854 + 743 + 197 − 268 + 251 − 90 − 2,748 − 344         June − 2,611 − 470 − 3,582 + 707 − 104 + 916 − 22 + 305 − 32 + 4,774 − 285
         July − 3,868 − 394 − 4,284 + 725 + 568 − 204 − 411 + 296 − 173 + 6,867 − 357
         Aug − 5,559 − 598 − 6,541 + 588 + 830 + 64 − 248 + 264 − 136 + 6,289 − 405         Sep  
p − 3,585 − 492 − 4,828 + 573 + 100 + 622 + 277 + 292 − 132 + 4,885 − 412
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2011 − 35,520 − 21,293 − 4,446 + 6,718 − 14,227 − 2,977 − 2,977 + 1,642 + 1,148 + 494
2012 − 39,858 − 25,493 − 5,214 + 5,206 − 14,366 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,1582013 − 43,758 − 29,708 − 5,611 + 6,177 − 14,050 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 591 + 1,076 − 1,6672014 − 40,653 − 28,169 − 6,076 + 8,088 − 12,485 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 1,138 + 2,782 − 1,6432015 − 39,550 − 25,546 − 7,065 + 9,800 − 14,004 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 159 + 2,136 − 2,295
2015          Q1 − 15,822 − 12,975 − 2,614 + 1,327 − 2,847 − 885 − 881 + 218 − 10 + 228
         Q2 − 7,052 − 1,803 − 1,161 + 6,278 − 5,249 − 885 − 881 + 1,098 + 1,143 − 45         Q3 − 6,628 − 3,850 − 1,196 + 1,212 − 2,778 − 885 − 881 + 703 + 870 − 167         Q4 − 10,048 − 6,918 − 2,094 + 981 − 3,130 − 885 − 881 − 2,178 + 134 − 2,312
2016          Q1 − 13,460 − 10,054 − 2,704 + 1,284 − 3,406 − 1,270 − 1,267 − 417 − 676 + 259
         Q2 − 4,482 − 998 − 1,618 + 5,527 − 3,484 − 1,056 − 1,053 + 1,557 + 2,072 − 516         Q3 
p − 10,685 − 6,953 − 1,704 + 1,753 − 3,732 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 409 + 1,072 − 663
2015          Nov − 2,485 − 1,543 − 722 + 77 − 941 − 295 − 294 + 163 + 274 − 110         Dec − 4,476 − 3,094 − 979 + 707 − 1,383 − 295 − 294 − 2,248 − 281 − 1,966
2016          Jan − 2,275 − 1,167 − 1,181 + 586 − 1,109 − 441 − 440 − 89 + 2 − 91
         Feb − 7,518 − 6,258 − 1,079 + 281 − 1,260 − 441 − 440 + 426 + 188 + 238         Mar − 3,666 − 2,629 − 444 + 416 − 1,038 − 388 − 387 − 754 − 866 + 112
         Apr − 1,692 − 703 − 509 + 1,217 − 989 − 354 − 353 + 1,267 + 1,411 − 144
         May − 591 + 555 − 408 + 3,020 − 1,147 − 351 − 350 + 153 + 244 − 91         June − 2,199 − 850 − 701 + 1,290 − 1,348 − 351 − 350 + 137 + 417 − 281
         July − 3,435 − 2,335 − 451 + 378 − 1,100 − 352 − 350 − 135 + 98 − 233
         Aug − 4,510 − 3,013 − 983 + 257 − 1,497 − 350 − 350 − 114 + 157 − 271         Sep  
p − 2,739 − 1,605 − 270 + 1,118 − 1,134 − 351 − 350 + 658 + 817 − 159
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2016
Item
2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 p July Aug Sep p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 60,705 + 299,954 + 253,658 + 154,533 + 158,948 + 48,208 − 465 + 29,876 + 18,798
1 Direct investment + 68,688 + 85,658 + 98,017 + 30,747 + 11,281 + 19,636 + 6,615 − 195 + 13,216
Equity + 43,586 + 66,413 + 69,542 + 22,203 + 10,478 + 16,271 + 4,858 + 7,108 + 4,305
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 17,880 + 21,373 + 15,866 + 7,335 + 5,100 + 9,871 + 3,158 + 3,395 + 3,317
Debt instruments + 25,103 + 19,246 + 28,475 + 8,544 + 804 + 3,365 + 1,757 − 7,303 + 8,911
2 Portfolio investment + 140,366 + 149,023 + 124,134 + 47,212 + 34,264 + 19,637 − 819 + 8,540 + 11,916
Shares 2 + 18,946 + 12,380 + 19,737 + 1,314 + 4,668 + 8,061 + 1,824 + 3,546 + 2,691
Investment fund shares 3 + 32,407 + 41,302 + 35,495 + 9,724 + 7,875 + 8,707 + 1,484 + 3,421 + 3,802
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 84,469 + 95,794 + 73,923 + 31,209 + 26,381 + 5,757 − 1,048 + 995 + 5,810
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 4,543 − 454 − 5,021 + 4,965 − 4,659 − 2,889 − 3,079 + 578 − 388
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 23,944 + 31,769 + 25,796 + 4,925 + 3,940 + 9,846 + 3,126 + 1,805 + 4,914
4. Other investment 7 − 173,131 + 36,069 + 7,923 + 70,420 + 108,702 − 649 − 9,729 + 19,632 − 10,552
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 56,929 + 76,305 − 90,287 + 11,342 + 38,457 − 29,468 + 19,509 − 2,176 − 46,801
Long-term − 50,777 + 21,149 − 2,803 + 1,948 + 8,368 + 7,704 + 1,189 + 5,605 + 910
Short-term − 6,152 + 55,156 − 87,484 + 9,394 + 30,089 − 37,172 + 18,320 − 7,781 − 47,711
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 21,335 − 7,517 − 13,097 + 29,038 − 4,036 − 11,062 − 8,000 + 722 − 3,784
Long-term + 7,033 + 2,091 + 12,588 − 772 − 219 + 986 − 371 + 2,739 − 1,381
Short-term + 14,302 − 9,608 − 25,685 + 29,810 − 3,817 − 12,049 − 7,629 − 2,017 − 2,403
General government + 7,982 + 17,161 − 12,057 + 5,061 + 2,400 + 4,824 − 487 + 3,927 + 1,384
Long-term + 15,663 − 405 − 7,425 − 1,367 − 832 − 978 − 843 − 208 + 73
Short-term − 7,681 + 17,566 − 4,632 + 6,428 + 3,232 + 5,802 + 356 + 4,135 + 1,311
Bundesbank − 145,519 − 49,880 + 123,364 + 24,980 + 71,881 + 35,056 − 20,750 + 17,159 + 38,648
5. Reserve assets + 838 − 2,564 − 2,213 + 1,228 + 761 − 261 + 342 + 93 − 695
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) − 158,374 + 55,510 + 28,106 + 130,669 + 100,449 − 10,236 − 19,539 + 13,760 − 4,458
1 Direct investment + 47,079 + 6,240 + 41,579 + 26,907 + 28,169 + 8,136 − 4,266 + 1,017 + 11,384
Equity + 685 + 23,991 + 18,498 + 6,492 + 5,101 + 3,401 + 1,496 + 1,782 + 123
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 − 4,538 + 3,662 + 5,765 + 3,677 + 800 + 3,555 + 1,339 + 1,215 + 1,001
Debt instruments + 46,394 − 17,751 + 23,081 + 20,416 + 23,068 + 4,735 − 5,761 − 765 + 11,261
2 Portfolio investment − 20,184 + 11,583 − 75,003 + 6,102 − 32,275 − 29,093 − 30,432 + 8,384 − 7,046
Shares 2) + 4,933 + 5,137 + 10,255 − 2,998 − 5,660 + 1,160 + 241 + 1,590 − 671
Investment fund shares 3 + 6,069 − 5,154 + 5,515 − 2,777 − 1,864 − 2,332 − 1,521 − 567 − 244
Long-termdebt securities 
4 − 8,329 + 14,785 − 97,980 − 6,427 − 32,283 − 23,955 − 15,379 + 5,296 − 13,872
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 22,857 − 3,185 + 7,207 + 18,303 + 7,533 − 3,966 − 13,773 + 2,066 + 7,740
3. Other investment 7 − 185,270 + 37,687 + 61,529 + 97,659 + 104,554 + 10,721 + 15,159 + 4,358 − 8,796
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 158,518 + 32,484 − 41,137 + 41,213 + 68,410 + 506 + 35,931 + 375 − 35,800
Long-term − 16,819 − 14,555 − 19,517 − 3,913 − 3,177 + 5,121 + 2,899 + 2,285 − 62
Short-term − 141,699 + 47,039 − 21,621 + 45,126 + 71,587 − 4,615 + 33,033 − 1,910 − 35,738
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 1,957 + 16,777 + 18,120 + 39,419 − 486 − 25,294 − 20,145 − 5,709 + 561
Long-term − 13,166 − 2,008 + 15,290 + 141 − 1,454 + 2,109 + 863 + 275 + 971
Short-term + 11,209 + 18,785 + 2,829 + 39,278 + 968 − 27,403 − 21,008 − 5,984 − 411
General government − 1,900 − 5,610 − 11,235 + 5,643 + 6,643 − 2,766 − 3,390 + 1,029 − 406
Long-term + 8,979 − 931 − 3,654 − 2,478 + 2,897 − 50 − 28 − 6 − 15
Short-term − 10,878 − 4,680 − 7,582 + 8,121 + 3,746 − 2,716 − 3,361 + 1,036 − 390
Bundesbank − 22,895 − 5,964 + 95,782 + 11,384 + 29,988 + 38,274 + 2,762 + 8,663 + 26,849
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 219,079 + 244,445 + 225,551 + 23,864 + 58,500 + 58,445 + 19,073 + 16,116 + 23,256
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,213 37,7352003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,296 12,098
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,199
2014          Feb 718,317 152,432 104,678 12,862 7,728 27,165 511,660 499,232 54,225 394,012 324,305
         Mar 687,557 150,615 102,179 12,866 7,720 27,850 482,503 470,075 54,440 382,743 304,814
         Apr 692,956 150,048 101,564 13,057 7,893 27,534 490,117 477,688 52,792 403,530 289,426
         May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 406,416 274,472         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 399,788 278,348
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 378,120 282,401
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 380,001 301,323         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 386,216 310,586
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 396,445 285,345
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 400,850 282,119         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 452,230 298,833
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 444,069 300,483         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 435,366 332,490
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,617 325,820
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 437,079 321,421         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 440,233 316,029
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 446,157 317,090
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 443,522 337,764         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 466,216 308,212
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 474,882 311,811
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 491,813 321,506         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,199
2016          Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 485,028 322,943
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 501,590 337,745         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 504,447 332,928
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 509,204 347,063
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 516,540 368,347         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 534,708 387,524
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 537,414 366,631
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 546,066 372,626         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 572,879 384,981
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 568,022 379,696
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents
Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2012 740,809 271,964 468,845 294,248 174,597 158,825 15,772 910,837 170,262 740,575 578,391 162,184 94,292 67,892
2013 785,507 281,970 503,537 323,869 179,668 164,454 15,214 936,110 143,112 792,998 630,740 162,258 95,301 66,9572014 822,028 278,523 543,506 357,855 185,651 170,854 14,797 939,809 150,429 789,379 624,860 164,519 98,104 66,4152015 852,363 264,278 588,085 395,013 193,072 178,495 14,576 976,497 142,494 834,003 652,968 181,035 108,750 72,285
2016          Apr 890,888 298,645 592,243 397,288 194,955 179,780 15,175 1,027,429 167,545 859,884 679,990 179,894 105,422 74,472
         May 881,076 281,620 599,455 405,152 194,303 179,006 15,297 1,027,622 148,798 878,823 699,546 179,278 104,941 74,337         June 880,231 275,683 604,547 404,619 199,928 184,927 15,001 1,051,943 151,906 900,037 715,827 184,209 109,968 74,241
         July 872,867 269,516 603,351 408,811 194,540 179,557 14,984 1,025,343 137,347 887,996 708,327 179,669 105,137 74,532
         Aug  
r 864,498 271,893 592,605 405,951 186,654 171,668 14,986 1,018,942 133,955 884,987 710,397 174,589 99,789 74,800
         Sep 869,497 266,007 603,490 406,465 197,026 181,902 15,123 1,029,138 131,674 897,464 715,334 182,130 107,804 74,326
Industrial countries 1
 
2012 653,244 269,560 383,684 265,387 118,297 104,957 13,339 824,118 167,853 656,265 542,976 113,289 79,107 34,1812013 694,860 278,667 416,194 294,116 122,077 108,620 13,458 849,161 141,744 707,417 593,197 114,219 79,543 34,6762014 720,924 273,624 447,300 321,894 125,406 112,308 13,098 851,172 149,212 701,960 585,678 116,282 81,103 35,1792015 747,289 260,378 486,912 354,225 132,687 119,558 13,129 881,625 137,526 744,099 617,932 126,168 89,593 36,575
2016          Apr 784,153 295,131 489,022 355,235 133,787 120,105 13,682 930,270 158,850 771,420 646,146 125,274 87,540 37,734
         May 774,260 277,851 496,410 363,225 133,184 119,399 13,785 931,064 140,435 790,629 665,236 125,393 87,134 38,259         June 773,332 271,873 501,459 363,357 138,102 124,648 13,454 950,300 141,757 808,543 680,114 128,428 91,144 37,285
         July 767,312 265,844 501,468 368,406 133,062 119,682 13,380 930,002 132,545 797,457 673,228 124,229 87,151 37,078
         Aug  
r 760,349 268,276 492,073 365,959 126,114 112,725 13,389 922,549 128,036 794,514 675,080 119,434 82,278 37,155
         Sep 763,825 262,134 501,692 366,667 135,025 121,554 13,471 933,864 125,536 808,329 681,620 126,708 89,672 37,036
EU member states 1
 
2012 541,602 247,534 294,068 209,426 84,642 74,167 10,474 695,152 156,550 538,602 458,488 80,114 53,607 26,5072013 586,790 264,116 322,674 235,608 87,066 76,539 10,527 710,428 127,372 583,057 503,394 79,662 53,339 26,3232014 606,568 258,507 348,061 259,475 88,585 77,975 10,611 712,497 134,943 577,555 496,878 80,677 53,797 26,8802015 613,734 242,218 371,516 276,868 94,648 84,071 10,577 725,496 127,114 598,383 513,560 84,823 58,469 26,354
2016          Apr 655,949 278,786 377,162 281,741 95,422 84,334 11,087 767,248 148,165 619,084 535,043 84,041 56,975 27,065
         May 645,080 260,815 384,265 288,942 95,323 84,146 11,177 766,982 130,473 636,509 552,330 84,180 56,627 27,553         June 636,918 254,792 382,126 284,614 97,513 86,675 10,838 778,440 128,084 650,357 564,103 86,253 59,287 26,966
         July 632,816 248,022 384,794 291,338 93,456 82,665 10,791 762,484 122,432 640,052 557,228 82,824 56,116 26,708
         Aug  
r 628,502 251,471 377,032 288,412 88,620 77,811 10,809 754,013 118,565 635,448 555,534 79,913 53,039 26,874
         Sep 628,521 244,777 383,744 289,062 94,683 83,843 10,840 760,257 114,799 645,458 560,067 85,391 58,731 26,659
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2012 392,642 188,317 204,325 149,452 54,873 48,975 5,898 572,475 110,053 462,423 408,485 53,937 36,741 17,1962013 427,049 197,297 229,752 173,609 56,143 49,968 6,175 602,056 101,150 500,906 447,404 53,502 36,670 16,8322014 449,392 203,069 246,323 189,755 56,568 50,348 6,220 598,660 105,883 492,777 440,290 52,487 35,568 16,9192015 457,947 195,011 262,936 201,414 61,522 54,913 6,609 589,407 91,735 497,672 444,542 53,130 37,976 15,155
2016          Apr 479,513 208,903 270,610 207,865 62,745 55,745 7,001 624,101 107,214 516,886 463,344 53,543 38,321 15,222
         May 473,673 202,636 271,037 208,569 62,468 55,501 6,967 621,900 96,071 525,829 472,502 53,327 37,892 15,434         June 469,798 198,645 271,153 207,677 63,476 56,689 6,787 634,180 96,858 537,322 482,312 55,011 39,693 15,318
         July 463,405 194,782 268,623 207,441 61,182 54,455 6,727 621,855 92,779 529,076 476,124 52,952 37,770 15,182
         Aug  
r 462,132 196,653 265,478 207,231 58,248 51,495 6,752 619,740 90,989 528,751 477,999 50,751 35,495 15,256
         Sep 461,475 189,648 271,827 210,486 61,341 54,556 6,784 623,766 87,075 536,691 482,871 53,820 39,029 14,791
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2012 87,552 2,404 85,147 28,858 56,289 53,856 2,432 86,688 2,409 84,279 35,415 48,864 15,181 33,6832013 90,640 3,303 87,337 29,751 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,946 1,368 85,578 37,543 48,035 15,755 32,2802014 101,101 4,899 96,202 35,957 60,244 58,546 1,699 88,634 1,217 87,417 39,182 48,235 17,001 31,2342015 104,086 3,093 100,994 40,788 60,205 58,758 1,448 90,701 997 89,704 34,836 54,868 19,157 35,710
2016          Apr 105,756 2,701 103,055 42,041 61,014 59,521 1,493 89,565 1,301 88,264 33,645 54,619 17,881 36,738
         May 105,804 2,956 102,848 41,893 60,956 59,444 1,512 89,407 1,412 87,995 34,110 53,885 17,806 36,078         June 105,866 2,995 102,871 41,228 61,643 60,096 1,547 92,780 1,526 91,254 35,513 55,741 18,785 36,956
         July 104,512 2,855 101,656 40,370 61,286 59,682 1,604 91,998 1,659 90,339 34,900 55,440 17,986 37,453
         Aug  
r 102,872 2,566 100,306 39,957 60,348 58,751 1,597 91,505 1,272 90,232 35,118 55,115 17,470 37,645
         Sep 104,362 2,779 101,583 39,763 61,820 60,167 1,653 90,145 1,267 88,878 33,514 55,365 18,092 37,272
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2015          Nov 1.5011 1.4248 6.8398 7.4602 131.60 9.2572 9.3133 1.0833 0.70658 1.0736
         Dec 1.5009 1.4904 7.0193 7.4612 132.36 9.4642 9.2451 1.0827 0.72595 1.0877
2016          Jan 1.5510 1.5447 7.1393 7.4619 128.32 9.5899 9.2826 1.0941 0.75459 1.0860
         Feb 1.5556 1.5317 7.2658 7.4628 127.35 9.5628 9.4105 1.1018 0.77559 1.1093         Mar 1.4823 1.4697 7.2220 7.4569 125.39 9.4300 9.2848 1.0920 0.78020 1.1100
         Apr 1.4802 1.4559 7.3461 7.4427 124.29 9.3224 9.2027 1.0930 0.79230 1.1339
         May 1.5461 1.4626 7.3864 7.4386 123.21 9.3036 9.2948 1.1059 0.77779 1.1311         June 1.5173 1.4477 7.4023 7.4371 118.45 9.3278 9.3338 1.0894 0.79049 1.1229
         July 1.4694 1.4428 7.3910 7.4390 115.25 9.3690 9.4742 1.0867 0.84106 1.1069
         Aug 1.4690 1.4557 7.4537 7.4408 113.49 9.3030 9.4913 1.0881 0.85521 1.1212         Sep 1.4768 1.4677 7.4819 7.4475 114.22 9.1971 9.5655 1.0919 0.85228 1.1212
         Oct 1.4470 1.4594 7.4198 7.4402 114.47 9.0009 9.7073 1.0887 0.89390 1.1026
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2016
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.9 85.2 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.3 85.1 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.8
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.1 90.5 86.9 91.5 96.4 85.9 90.0 92.9 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.5 95.0 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.5 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.8 106.9 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.6 94.8 97.1 96.5 96.72004 104.5 105.0 103.3 104.3 111.5 105.1 95.9 93.2 100.0 95.1 98.5 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.5 101.2 102.3 109.5 102.5 94.7 91.9 99.1 92.9 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.5 100.5 101.2 109.4 101.8 93.5 90.3 98.5 91.2 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.3 106.2 102.4 103.5 112.9 103.8 94.4 89.4 102.5 91.5 100.9 97.9 97.02008 109.4 108.3 103.8 106.7 117.1 105.8 94.6 88.0 105.6 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.8 109.0 104.6 111.5 120.0 106.8 94.8 88.8 104.8 91.0 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.3 96.3 103.4 111.5 97.8 92.3 88.4 98.4 87.2 98.8 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.2 94.2 102.1 112.2 97.2 91.9 88.2 97.8 86.4 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.6 95.0 88.7 95.8 107.0 92.4 90.1 88.2 92.8 83.8 95.9 89.8 88.22013 101.2 98.2 91.8 98.9 111.9 95.5 92.5 88.7 98.6 85.8 98.3 91.6 90.32014 101.8 97.8 92.0 100.0 114.7 96.0 93.3 89.6 99.2 86.6 98.5 91.8 91.0
2015 92.4 88.4 83.9
p 90.7 106.5 p 87.8 90.9 90.7 90.9 83.2 94.7 86.9 p 86.3
2013          Oct 102.5 99.0 114.1 96.8 98.9 92.1 91.1
         Nov 102.2 98.7 92.9 99.6 114.1 96.6 93.4 89.0 100.4 86.7 98.8 92.1 91.1         Dec 103.4 99.9 115.7 98.0 99.3 92.7 91.9
2014          Jan 103.0 99.4 115.8 97.9 99.2 92.5 91.9
         Feb 103.2 99.6 93.6 101.9 116.3 98.2 93.7 89.2 100.9 87.1 99.0 92.6 92.0         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.0 99.3 93.1 92.4
         Apr 104.2 100.4 117.0 98.4 99.2 93.0 92.2
         May 103.6 99.5 93.4 101.4 116.1 97.3 93.6 89.5 100.2 87.3 98.8 92.6 91.5         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.5 98.7 92.3 91.2
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 95.9 98.6 92.2 91.0
         Aug 101.5 97.4 91.3 99.5 114.0 95.3 93.0 89.7 98.4 86.3 98.4 91.8 90.7         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.0 91.0 89.9
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.2 97.6 90.4 89.4
         Nov 99.0 94.9 89.6 97.3 111.9 93.2 92.8 90.0 97.3 85.5 97.7 90.3 89.5         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.8 97.6 90.2 89.8
2015          Jan 95.2 91.1 108.9 90.1 95.7 88.2 87.5
         Feb 93.3 89.5 84.3
p 91.7 107.0 88.7 90.8 90.4 91.2 83.1 95.2 87.5 86.8
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 85.9 94.3 86.1 85.2
         Apr 89.7 86.1 102.4 84.7 94.0 85.7 84.5
         May 91.6 87.8 82.6 p 89.7 104.7 86.5 90.5 90.6 90.0 82.5 94.6 86.6 85.6
         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 87.5 94.7 86.9 86.1
         July 91.3 87.5 105.1 86.6 94.3 86.3 85.6
         Aug 93.0 88.9 84.3 p 91.1 108.1 88.9 91.1 90.8 91.2 83.5 94.9 87.2 87.0
         Sep 93.8 89.7 109.6 90.1 95.2 87.6 87.7
         Oct 93.6 89.6 109.0 89.6 95.1 87.6 87.4
         Nov 91.1 87.1 84.3 p 90.5 106.0 p 86.8 91.1 91.0 91.0 83.5 94.1 86.3 p 85.8
         Dec 92.5 88.3 108.0 p 88.3 94.3 86.7 p 86.5
2016          Jan 93.6 89.1 109.9 p 89.6 94.5 87.2 p 87.3
         Feb 94.7 90.0 p 85.8 p 91.7 111.3 p 90.8 91.6 91.2 91.8 84.3 95.0 87.6 p 87.7
         Mar 94.1 89.5 110.0 p 89.9 95.0 87.4 p 87.3
         Apr 94.8 90.1 110.6 p 90.2 95.4 87.9 p 87.6
         May 95.1 90.5 p 86.4 p 92.1 111.1 p 90.7 91.6 91.1 92.1 84.6 95.2 88.1 p 87.9
         June 94.7 90.2 110.5 p 90.3 95.0 87.9 p 87.6
         July 94.9 p 90.4 110.2 p 89.9 95.3 p 88.0 p 87.4
         Aug 95.2 p 90.6 ... ... 110.6 p 90.2 ... ... ... ... 95.4 p 88.0 p 87.4
         Sep 95.4 p 90.7 110.9 p 90.3 p 95.5 p 88.0 p 87.6
         Oct 95.5 p 90.8 110.6 p 90.1 p 95.7 p 88.0 p 87.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November not available due to the state of emergency in the national statistical system declared2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more by the government of Argentina on 7 January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina isdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 not included in the calculation of the EER-38 CPI deflated series from February 2016.(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB The policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5Euro-area countries (from 2001 including
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, fromlia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro-area countries and
wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro-area countries and countries
countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2015 see the index attached 
to the January 2016 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2015
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2014
– Deposit protection in Germany
January 2016
– The impact of alternative indicators of price 
competitiveness on real exports of goods 
and services
– Investment in the euro area
– The supervision of less significant institutions 
in the Single Supervisory MechanismFebruary 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2016
– On the weakness of global trade
– German balance of payments in 2015
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: 
results of the 2014 survey
– The role and effects of the Agreement on 
Net Financial Assets (ANFA) in the context of 
implementing monetary policy
April 2016
– Stock market valuations – theoretical basics 
and enhancing the metrics
– The Phillips curve as an instrument for ana -
lysing prices and forecasting inflation in Ger -
many
May 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017 and 
an outlook for 2018
– The macroeconomic impact of quantitative 
easing in the euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
83•

– Structure and dynamics of manufacturing 
production depth as reflected in the financial 
statements of German enterprises
July 2016
– Evolution of the Bank Lending Survey 
since the onset of the financial crisis
– Approaches to resolving sovereign debt 
 crises in the euro area
– Bank recovery and resolution – the new 
TLAC and MREL minimum requirements
August 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2016
– Distributional effects of monetary policy
– Globalisation and the transmission of global 
financial shocks to the euro-  ar ea countries 
– implications for (national)  economic policy
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2015
October 2016
– Local government finances: Development 
and selected aspects
– Significance and impact of high-  fr equency 
trading in the German capital market
November 2016
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich   von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mar ch 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
July 20162, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20162, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 010 to 
2015, May 20162
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2012 bis 2013 , 
May 20162, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20161, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
35/2016  
Solving RE models with discontinuous policy 
rules – an application to minimum wage setting 
in Germany
36/2016  
On the suitability of alternative competitiveness 
indicators for explaining real exports of ad -
vanced economies37/2016  
Potential implications of a NSFR on German 
banks‘ credit supply and profitability
38/2016  
The effects of government bond purchases on 
leverage constraints of banks and non-  financial 
firms
39/2016  
Learning about banks‘ net worth and the slow 
recovery after the financial crisis
40/2016  
Thoughts on a fiscal union in EMU41/2016  
Financial shocks and inflation dynamics42/2016  
Spillover effects of credit default risk in the euro 
area and the effects on the euro: a GVAR ap -
proach
43/2016  
The determinants of CDS spreads: evidence 
from the model space44/2016  
Optimal fiscal substitutes for the exchange rate 
in a monetary union
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
November 2016  
86•

