Monthly Report
November 2017
Vol 69  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 17 November 2017.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The impact of hurricanes on economic activity in the United States  ....................................  14
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  19
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  20
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  32
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  41
The volatility of the traditional core inflation rate in Germany  ............................................  49
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  53Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
5

Overview
German economy still 
on strong growth path
The global economy continued to expand 
briskly in the third quarter of 2017. Global eco -
nomic output is likely to have accelerated at a 
similarly strong pace as in the second quarter. 
The United States, in particular, was able to 
maintain the fairly rapid pace of growth seen in 
the second quarter. Although economic activity 
in some US states was temporarily disrupted by 
two hurricanes, the dampening impact of this 
on the economy as a whole is – in line with 
past experiences – likely to have been small. 
Real gross domestic product (GDP) in the euro 
area continued to expand at a markedly faster 
pace than potential output in the third quarter, 
even though it did not quite match the strong 
pace of growth of the second quarter. The high 
level of growth in China remained remarkably 
stable compared to its international peers.
The robust global economic activity is attribut -
able, not least, to the fact that the upswing has 
broadened to include more countries compared 
with the previous years. In 2012-13, the global 
economy was adversely affected by the debt cri -
sis in a number of European countries and in 
2015-16 by the recessions in major commodity 
exporters. This year, economic activity is declin -
ing in only a small number of countries. Not least 
the international exchange of goods is benefiting 
from the broadly based upward movement. At 
the beginning of the fourth quarter, the senti -
ment indicators were still not pointing to any sig -
nificant change in the underlying cyclical trend.
In addition to the favourable economic outlook, 
the expectations of market participants regard -
ing monetary policy, in particular, were shaping 
the international financial markets in the third 
quarter. Government bond yields initially came 
under pressure on both sides of the Atlantic as 
investors firmed their expectation of a con -
tinued highly accommodative monetary policy for the euro area and lowered their expectations 
of interest rate hikes for the United States. Fur -
thermore, the Eurosystem’s decision to continue 
the asset purchase programme – at a reduced 
pace – beyond the turn of the year up until at 
least September 2018, and to lower risk pre -
miums on government bonds of peripheral 
countries resulted in declining yields in the euro 
area. In the United States, on the other hand, 
yields in the second half of the quarter were in -
creasingly supported by expectations regarding 
the planned tax reform. Following the Fed’s an -
nouncement that it would reduce its balance 
sheet, market participants were also again more 
confident that the Fed would pursue a less ex -
pansionary monetary policy course. As a result, 
US yields rose slightly on balance. On the inter -
national stock markets, the positive economic 
outlook was reflected in higher profit expect -
ations, as a result of which prices increased 
pretty much across the board and new highs 
were reached temporarily in both Germany and 
the United States. In the foreign exchange mar -
kets, the euro was buoyed by the positive eco -
nomic data for the euro area. On average, the 
euro appreciated against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners by just under 2%.
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) has left the key interest rates un -
changed. At its monetary policy meeting in Oc -
tober, the ECB Governing Council decided to 
continue the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme at the current monthly volume of €60 
billion up until the end of 2017. From January 
2018, the net monthly purchases of assets at 
the reduced volume of €30 billion will run until 
the end of September 2018, or beyond, if ne -
cessary, and in any case until the ECB Govern -
ing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation consistent with its inflation 
aim. The ECB Governing Council justified its de -
cision to reduce the purchase volume by saying 
that confidence in the gradual convergence of 
inflation rates towards its inflation aim has Global economy 
gaining  momentum
Confident 
 economic assessment and monetary policy expectations are shaping finan-cial market developmentsMonetary policy: ECB Governing Council to reduce monthly asset purchase volumes from 2018Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
6

grown further on account of the increasingly 
robust and broadly based economic expansion. 
The principal payments from maturing secur -
ities purchased under the programme are also 
to be reinvested for an extended period of time 
after the end of the net asset purchases, and in 
any case for as long as necessary.
Moreover, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to continue conducting the Eurosystem’s regu -
lar refinancing operations as fixed- rate tender 
procedures with full allotment for as long as 
necessary, and at least until the end of the last 
reserve maintenance period of 2019.
The positive underlying dynamics in the monet -
ary indicators persisted in the reporting quarter. 
The broad monetary aggregate M3 again ex -
panded considerably in the third quarter of 
2017 against the backdrop of the low interest 
rates and the broadly based economic growth 
in the euro area. Once again, the mainstay of 
monetary growth was lending. On the one 
hand, this comprised the continued expansion 
in bank loans to households and non- financial 
corporations. On the other hand, the Eurosys -
tem’s bond purchases again decisively sup -
ported the securities- based lending to domes -
tic non- banks by the MFI sector.
The German economy continues to grow 
strongly. According to the Federal Statistical 
 Office’s flash estimate, real GDP in the third 
 quarter of 2017 grew by a seasonally and 
calendar-adjusted 0.8% on the quarter after 
very strong growth had already been recorded 
in the first half of the year. Aggregate output 
has therefore been expanding considerably 
faster than potential output since the begin -
ning of the year, meaning that aggregate cap -
acity utilisation levels are now likely to be sig -
nificantly higher than the longer- term average. 
The sentiment in trade and industry, which is at 
a record high level, together with the excellent 
order situation in industry and the ongoing 
very high level of consumer optimism suggest 
that the strong upturn in the German economy 
will also continue in the fourth quarter.The brisk industrial activity since the beginning 
of the year was the main driver of the strong 
upswing in the third quarter of 2017. The 
business- related services sectors are also likely 
to have shown marked growth in line with the 
vigorous developments in industry. In the con -
struction sector, on the other hand, which had 
been a second major driver of growth in the 
first half of the year, it was probably not pos -
sible to increase activity further. However, given 
the high production levels, the exceptional 
mood and the well- filled order books in the 
sector, this should not be interpreted as the 
end of the current construction boom.
On the demand side, GDP growth was broad in 
scope. It was supported by both external and 
domestic stimuli, with the former coming more 
to the fore in the wake of the upbeat global 
economy. Favourable sales opportunities in the 
export markets, in combination with the grow -
ing utilisation of industrial capacities, contrib -
uted to the fact that along with exports, invest -
ment in machinery and equipment also saw a 
significant increase. Private consumption is 
likely to have persisted at roughly the same 
level as in the previous quarter after posting 
significant growth rates previously.
German banks again markedly expanded their 
lending to the domestic private sector in the 
quarter under review. The largest net gains 
were recorded in loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, the upward trend of which was driven 
by the favourable financing conditions coupled 
with enterprises’ exceptionally positive business 
expectations. Moreover, banks’ lending busi -
ness with domestic households grew distinctly 
on balance, with the brisk demand for housing 
loans being primarily responsible for this.
Once again, the buoyant expansion of the Ger -
man economy improved the already very posi -
tive labour market situation in the reporting 
quarter. Employment rose strongly in the third 
quarter, unemployment continued to decline 
from its already low level and enterprises re -
ported an even greater number of vacancies. Full allotment 
extended until end-2019
Ongoing monet -
ary growth in 
the euro area
German 
 economy’s 
robust upswing 
continued in Q3Industry is the main driver of 
growth
External 
impulses on the 
demand side more in the foreground
Marked expan-
sion in loans to the domestic private sector in Germany
Labour market: 
situation and outlook still very buoyantDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
7

The employment growth was due primarily to 
an increase in the number of positions subject 
to social security contributions. By contrast, 
other forms of employment, such as exclusively 
low- paid part- time employment or self-  
employment, declined slightly. The outlook for 
the next few months is favourable.
Wage growth remained moderate in the third 
quarter of 2017, as in the preceding quarters. 
However, the exceptionally good economic 
setting, staff shortages in the labour market 
and the impact of the rise in the minimum 
wage at the beginning of the year suggest 
that, as in the previous quarters, the rise in ac -
tual earnings was more pronounced than the 
increase in negotiated rates of pay.
In the third quarter, consumer prices as meas -
ured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) recorded stronger growth again 
after lower energy prices caused a temporary 
lull in the spring. The increase, which stood at 
a seasonally adjusted +0.5% on the quarter, 
was as sharp as in the final quarter of 2016 and 
the first quarter of 2017. Although energy 
prices continued to decline despite higher 
crude oil prices owing to the appreciation of 
the euro, at the same time, food prices rose 
again considerably. Prices of industrial goods 
(excluding energy) likewise rose markedly, 
meaning that the earlier appreciation of the 
euro, which was reflected in lower import 
prices, had probably not filtered through to the 
consumer level. The price of services rose sub -
stantially overall. This was mainly on account of 
travel services, but the price of other services 
(excluding rents) also went up distinctly, as in 
the previous quarter. By contrast, the increase 
in rents, which had been slightly higher than 
the long- term average since the beginning of 
the final quarter of 2016, weakened again. 
Overall, year- on- year price inflation increased 
from +1.6% in the previous quarter to +1.7%. 
Excluding energy and food, it also went up by 
0.1 percentage point to 1.5%, meaning that, as 
in the second quarter, it was considerably 
higher than its average since 1999. Admittedly, this was also attributable to the steep rise in 
the prices of travel services, clothing and foot -
wear, which generally fluctuate fairly sharply. 
However, even excluding these volatile com -
ponents, the rate went up slightly to +1.3%.
Buoyed by the boom in industrial activity, the 
German economy is likely to remain on a 
strongly expansionary path in the final quarter 
of 2017, too. The recent very strong inflow of 
orders in the manufacturing sector, in particu -
lar, suggests that industrial output will continue 
to make a significant contribution to aggregate 
economic activity. In line with this, the stock of 
industrial orders still being processed has 
reached its highest level for more than a dec -
ade according to data from the Ifo Institute. 
The business climate in the manufacturing sec -
tor has gone from record to record in the last 
few months. In addition, lively domestic and 
foreign demand and further increasing capacity 
utilisation are likely to make industrial enter -
prises significantly more willing to invest in new 
machinery and equipment. However, a grow -
ing shortage of skilled labour could place 
greater constraints on continued strong output 
growth in future. This is indicated by the Ifo 
survey results on production stoppages in the 
manufacturing sector. In the construction in -
dustry, too, a dwindling supply of skilled work -
ers is likely to prevent output from expanding 
sharply. Construction activity is therefore no 
longer expected to drive overall economic 
growth as strongly as in the first half of the 
year. Ultimately, the extremely positive labour 
market environment and the fact that income 
prospects remain upbeat will ensure that pri -
vate consumption stimulates domestic activity.
German government finances continue to show 
a very positive development, with the surplus 
likely to remain at around 1% this year (having 
stood at 0.8% of GDP in 2016). Government 
budgets are benefiting from the strong eco -
nomic upswing and the very good labour market 
situation, as well as the extremely favourable fi -
nancing conditions and, once again, extraordin -
ary growth in profit- related taxes. This more or Wage growth 
still moderate
Consumer prices 
excluding energy and food up sig-nificantly in Q3Sharp upturn 
likely to 
 continue
German 
 government finances con-tinue to develop favourablyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
8

less offsets the burdens caused by nuclear fuel 
tax repayments and the significant increase in 
expenditure on long- term care, healthcare and 
pensions, for example. As things stand, the 
framework conditions for public finances also 
look set to remain very favourable in the me -
dium term. Without a policy change, the surplus 
could therefore continue to rise over the next 
few years and significantly exceed 1% of GDP . In 
structural terms (ie excluding cyclical and tem -
porary effects), a relatively stable surplus amount -
ing to 1% of GDP would ensue. However, as 
time progresses, it is to be assumed that at least 
some of the financial leeway at central, state 
and local government level under the budgetary 
rules will be utilised and that social security con -
tribution rates could be lowered markedly over -
all. It may therefore be expected that the struc -
tural surpluses will shrink noticeably and that 
government finances will follow an expansionary 
path. Regardless of this, the debt ratio is likely to 
fall below the 60% mark in 2019.
In principle, moderate structural surpluses for 
Germany’s government finances appear appro -
priate as a means of continuing to quickly re -
duce the debt ratio. This will allow the pro -
spective challenges posed by demographic 
change to be tackled more effectively as well as 
considerably enhancing the resilience of public 
finances. Moreover, moderate structural sur -
pluses in central and state governments’ fiscal 
plans create a budgetary buffer to cushion the 
impact of any unexpected negative budgetary 
developments within the debt brake rules. This 
would allow procyclical consolidation to be 
avoided in the event of an economic downturn.
Also with the aim of modest structural sur -
pluses, a certain amount of fiscal leeway opens 
up given the very favourable medium- term 
conditions. Even now, the Federal Employment 
Agency is already significantly benefiting from 
the continued healthy labour market situation, 
which suggests there may be a considerable 
cut in the contribution rate. Moreover, lower 
(additional) contribution rates for the statutory 
pension insurance scheme and the health in -surance institutions currently appear plausible. 
Provided that the future Federal Government 
avoids new net borrowing in its central govern -
ment budget plan and does not liquidate the 
extensive refugee reserve to finance new pro -
jects, central government will have a moderate 
amount of leeway at first, also taking into ac -
count the most recent official tax estimate. 
Only as time passes will a significant increase in 
this leeway probably be seen. Not least in view 
of the considerable surpluses expected for state 
and local governments overall, room for man -
oeuvre will be opened up here, too, meaning 
that they are unlikely to be in urgent need of 
additional transfers from central government.
However, room for fiscal policy is not limited to 
using available surpluses. Regardless of the cur -
rent positive environment, policymakers must 
not forget to consistently exploit efficiency re -
serves and to consider the possibility of budget 
shifts in order to fund the political priorities cur -
rently being debated in the areas of education, 
investment or national and international secur -
ity, for example. With regard to taxation, relief 
measures on the solidarity surcharge and in -
come tax seem plausible. It would be worth 
considering a more extensive approach to re -
form that additionally limits exemptions. In 
principle, this would provide funding for a 
more extensive cut in tax rates (after factoring 
in the solidarity surcharge). In the longer term, 
budgetary policy for central, state and local 
government and for pension, long- term care 
and health insurance needs to be geared to -
wards tackling the additional burdens brought 
about by demographic change. Moreover, cen -
tral, state and local governments will have to 
weather less favourable financing conditions 
again at some point. At any rate, an additional 
expansion of benefits that are related to demo -
graphics would further increase the associated 
pressure on future budgets. In comparison, on 
the expenditure side, in the next few years it 
would seem appropriate to place greater em -
phasis on expenditure aimed at strengthening 
long- term growth, such as in the area of edu -
cation or infrastructure.Moderate struc-
tural surpluses and reduction of debt ratio to well below 60% appropriate
Fiscal leeway 
availableFuture burdens must be borne in mind when undertaking reformsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economy continued to expand 
briskly in the third quarter. Global economic 
output is likely to have accelerated at a similarly 
strong pace as in the second quarter. The 
United States in particular was able to maintain 
the fairly rapid pace of growth seen in the 
second quarter. Although economic activity in 
some US states was temporarily disrupted by 
two hurricanes, the dampening impact of 
those events on the economy as a whole is – in 
line with econometric evidence regarding past 
hurricanes  – likely to have been small. Real 
gross domestic product (GDP) in the euro area 
continued to expand at a markedly faster pace 
than potential output in the third quarter, even 
though it did not quite match the strong pace 
of growth of the second quarter. Conversely, 
economic activity in the United Kingdom picked up slightly after the subdued development of 
the previous two quarters. Chinese growth, 
high by international standards, remained re -
markably stable. At the same time, the overall 
economic recovery in Brazil and Russia con -
tinued.
Cyclical recovery in some commodity- exporting 
countries as well as in major advanced econ -
omies prompted the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) to revise its global growth projec -
tions for 2017 and 2018 slightly upwards com -
pared to the projections from July in the Octo -
ber edition of its World Economic Outlook. For 
both years, it is now expecting the largest gains 
in global economic output since 2011.1
The improvement is attributable, not least, to 
the fact that the global upswing has broad -
ened to include more countries compared to 
previous years. In 2012-13, the global economy 
was adversely affected by the debt crisis in a 
number of European countries, and in 2015-16 
by recessions in major commodity- exporting 
countries. In those years, countries with con -
tracting real GDP accounted for between 7% 
and 9% of global economic activity.2 Based on 
IMF projections, this share is likely to have 
fallen to 1% in 2017. This would be the lowest 
value since the strong upswing prior to the 
global financial and economic crisis.
The international exchange of goods is also 
benefiting from the broadly-based upward 
movement. According to figures provided by 
the Dutch Centraal Planbureau, the average 
volume of global goods trade in the July-  August 
two- month period was 5% higher than in the Global economy 
gaining momen-tum
Slight increase 
in IMF growth 
projections
Broad- based 
upswing
Indicators still 
favourable at the current endPrevalence of recessionary tendencies*
Sources:  IMF,  Haver  Analytics  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Defined as a decline in annual average real GDP compared to 
the  previous  year.  According  to  IMF  projections  for  2017 
(World  Economic  Outlook,  October  2017).  1 From  a  fixed 
group  of  171  countries.  2 Aggregate  based  on  purchasing 
power parities.
Deutsche Bundesbank1995 00 05 10 15 170102030405060708090
010203040506070Number of countries 1
Those countries’
proportion of global
economic output 2%
1 Aggregated using purchasing power parities, global 
growth is forecast to be 3.6% this year and 3.7% next year. 
Based on market exchange rates, this represents an in -
crease of 3.0% and 3.1% respectively.
2 The calculation is based on an assessment of the IMF 
database in the current World Economic Outlook. The pro -
portions of global economic output are derived from pur -
chasing power parities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
10

same period last year. This was the largest in -
crease recorded for more than six years, per -
ceptibly exceeding the 3¾% growth rate in 
global industrial output. At the beginning of 
the fourth quarter, sentiment indicators were 
not pointing to any significant change in the 
underlying cyclical trend.
The price of crude oil rose significantly over the 
reporting period. In the first half of November, 
the spot price for a barrel of Brent crude oil 
was more than US$60 – its highest level since 
mid-2015. The favourable macroeconomic 
environment  was just one factor behind the re -
cent price hike. Another was the prospect that 
production cutbacks by key oil-  producing 
countries could be extended to the end of 
2018. Above all, however, it is likely that the 
current political conflicts in the Middle East 
played a part. The fact that forward quotations 
did not rise to as great an extent suggests that 
short- term factors were key. As this report 
went to press, a barrel of Brent crude oil cost 
US$62 and forward deliveries were trading at 
marked discounts over the entire maturity 
range. The prices of other commodities showed 
uneven movement over the past few months. 
All in all, the HWWI price index for non- energy 
commodities slightly surpassed its July level in 
October.
The higher crude oil prices also had an impact 
on consumer prices in industrial countries. En -
ergy prices were 7% up on the year in Septem -
ber, while they had only been 2.2% up in June. 
Accordingly, headline inflation rose from 1.5% 
to 1.9%. However, excluding energy and food 
products from the basket of consumer goods, 
price inflation remained moderate. In Septem -
ber, core inflation stood at 1.4%, or 1.6% if 
Japan is not included in the calculation.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, real GDP in 
China was up by 6.8% on the year in the third quarter of 2017. The growth rate of the Chi -
nese economy was therefore only slightly lower 
than in the first half of the year. Growth had 
also remained remarkably stable previously: 
since the beginning of 2015, year- on- year GDP 
growth had fluctuated by no more than one-  
tenth of a percentage point from one quarter 
to the next. This contrasts to some extent with 
the volatility of other economic indicators. For 
example, goods exports have seen substantial 
growth over the course of the year so far, par -
tially offsetting their previous decline. At the 
same time, there have been considerable fluc -
tuations in passenger car production – one of Significant rise in 
crude oil prices
Accelerated 
 consumer price inflation
Stable economic 
growth in ChinaWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 10 November 2017, or 1 to 16 November 2017 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201733405060708090100110120130US dollar basis, monthly averages, log scale
60708090100110
405060
607080901001102011 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and 
beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
11

the most important industrial sectors – as a re -
sult of temporary tax incentives to purchase 
new cars. Finally, the real estate market has ex -
perienced pronounced ups and downs in re -
cent years.3 Consumer price movements are 
largely in line with the steady course of GDP 
growth. According to official figures, the rate 
of inflation stood at 1.5% in the third quarter 
of 2017. Since the beginning of 2015, the quar -
terly average has consistently been in the range 
of 1.4% to 2.3%.
Economic activity in India weakened once 
again in the second quarter of 2017, up to 
which national accounts data are available. At 
5.7%, year- on- year GDP growth was the low -
est for more than three years. Upward move -
ment could have continued to be held back by 
the cash reform of November 2016, due to 
which a large proportion of cash in circulation 
was removed from the economy. The recent 
introduction of a nationwide goods and service 
tax is likely to also be a drag on the economy. Although the reform was only fully imple -
mented in July 2017, it seems that merchants 
had already reduced their inventories in ad -
vance. In September, consumer prices rose by 
3.3% on the year. This meant that the rate had 
returned to almost the same level as at the end 
of 2016, after having declined to 1.5% in the 
meantime. Noticeable fluctuations in food 
prices were key in this context.
The economic improvement in Brazil is making 
only slow progress. In the second quarter, sea -
sonally adjusted economic output rose by just 
0.2% compared to the previous quarter, and 
growth did not pick up significantly in the third 
quarter either. Nevertheless, there are signs 
that investment may have recently bottomed 
out as well. However, a wide- ranging recovery 
in fixed capital formation – which seems neces -
sary given the comparatively low investment 
ratio of 15% of GDP – is not to be expected 
due to ongoing political uncertainties. The rate 
of inflation, as measured by the consumer price 
index (CPI), fell to 2.6% in the third quarter. The 
central bank therefore maintained its accom -
modative monetary policy stance. At 7.5%, the 
policy rate is now only slightly higher than its 
record low at the turn of the year 2012-13.
According to a preliminary estimate by the Rus -
sian Federal State Statistics Service, real GDP in 
Russia saw a year- on- year increase of 1.8% in 
the last quarter. Accordingly, the overall eco -
nomic recovery continued at a somewhat 
weaker pace.4 Private consumption remained a 
key pillar of the economy and is likely to have 
profited from the fact that households’ real 
scope for expenditure improved considerably 
as a result of easing consumer price inflation. 
The consumer price inflation rate fell further to 
3.4% on average in the third quarter, hitting its 
lowest level since the beginning of the trans -Indian economic 
growth slows down againSluggish eco-nomic improve-ment in Brazil
Russian 
 economy on 
road to recoverySelected activity indicators for China
Sources: NBS, China Customs Administration, China Passenger 
Car Association and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Based on floor 
space. 2 Nominal, US dollar basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170369
+++Year-on-year percentage change
Enlarged scale
Real GDP–20–100+10+20+30+40
Passenger car
production
Goods exports 2Residential property sales1
3 Following the sharp increase in residential property prices 
last year, local authorities took a number of measures to 
combat speculative purchases. Since then, the real estate 
market has shown clear signs of slowing down.
4 A factor in the slowdown may have been that the in -
creased stockpiling that had driven economic growth in the 
second quarter returned to normal levels.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
12

formation. Against this background, the Rus -
sian central bank cut its policy rate in Septem -
ber and again in October.
United States
At 0.7% on the quarter according to the first 
official estimate, seasonally and price-  adjusted 
GDP in the United States grew almost as 
strongly in the third quarter as it did in the 
second. However, this highly strong growth 
should be viewed in the light of the more sub -
dued upward movement in the final quarter of 
2016 and the first quarter of 2017. The under -
lying pace of economic growth is likely to have 
remained moderate. This is also suggested by 
the fact that growth in the third quarter was 
driven largely by restocking and, to a lesser ex -
tent, by foreign trade. By contrast, private final 
domestic demand, which may be more closely 
linked to underlying tendencies in economic 
activity, recorded its weakest growth for the 
last one and a half years. Private consumption 
had already received a considerable boost in 
September due to replacement purchases for 
cars that had been destroyed in the recent hur -
ricanes. This stimulating effect is indicative that 
the hurricane’s dampening impact on the aver -
age pace of overall economic growth for the 
quarter was likely to have been limited. This 
had also been the case in previous years (see 
box on pages 14 and 15). Employment growth 
stalled only temporarily in September, while un -
employment hit a new cyclical low in October 
at 4.1%. In September, rising energy prices in 
particular drove CPI inflation up to 2.2%, while, 
by contrast, core inflation remained moderate 
at 1.7%. In this environment, the Federal Re -
serve began implementing its programme to 
normalise its balance sheet in October.
Japan
The growth of the Japanese economy calmed 
down during the summer. According to a pro -
visional estimate, seasonally adjusted real GDP increased by 0.3% compared to the second 
quarter, in which it had grown by as much as 
0.6%. Domestic demand and especially private 
consumption were unable to maintain the high 
level they had reached in the spring. In parallel 
with this, imports were also significantly re -
duced. Exports, which grew fairly strongly, 
proved to be a bulwark of the economy. Al -
though the unemployment rate fell to its low -
est level in a little over 23 years in summer and 
employment continued to see brisk growth, 
there were few signs of a rise in domestic infla -
tion. The GDP deflator barely increased on the 
year and consumer prices excluding energy and 
food in September remained unchanged on 
the year. The Japanese central bank maintained 
its extremely expansionary monetary policy 
stance.
United Kingdom
Aggregate growth in the United Kingdom 
picked up only slightly in the third quarter. 
After adjustment for the usual seasonal vari -
ations, real GDP was up by 0.4% from the pre -
vious quarter according to a provisional esti -
mate, having increased by 0.3% in each of the 
first two quarters. This slight acceleration was 
mainly attributable to strong growth in produc -
tion in the manufacturing sector following a 
contraction in the spring. Meanwhile, construc -
tion continued its downward movement from 
its high level at the start of the year. The signifi -
cant services sector grew at a moderate pace 
as before. Last but not least, on the expend -
iture side, private consumption is likely to have 
remained weak. While unemployment fell in 
the summer to the lowest level for more than 
42 years, at 4.3%, wage growth fell far short 
of inflation, the level of which was consider -
able. Measured by the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), the inflation rate rose 
in September to 3.0%; the year before it had 
stood at 1.0%. At the beginning of November, 
the Bank of England raised its policy rate for 
the first time in more than ten years after hav -
ing lowered the rate further in August 2016.Economic 
growth remains brisk
Marked slow-
down in aggre-gate growthEconomic activ-ity remains weakDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
13

The impact of hurricanes on economic activity 
in the United States
In August and September, hurricanes left a 
trail of severe damage on the US Gulf Coast. This resulted in temporary production stop-
pages in the (petro)chemicals industry, 
which are likely to have played a major role in the slight decline in overall industrial pro-duction in the summer months.
1 Services, a 
far more important sector of the economy, 
seem to have been less strongly affected, 
however; the drag on aggregate economic 
output, therefore, probably remained 
small.2 Overall, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) grew in the third quarter at a rate 
similar to that in the second.
This is consistent with past experience. If real GDP growth rates are regressed on dummy variables for hurricane landfalls,
3 
their coeffi   cients turn out, individually and 
collectively, not to be signifi  cantly different 
from zero.4 The absence of evidence of any 
impact due to hurricane activity is likely to 
indicate that the fallout is local in nature 
and also typically shows up in regions which 
are not of much macroeconomic signifi  -cance. In addition, the adverse impact of 
hurricanes on economic activity is probably 
only very short- term, and these effects are 
obscured in the quarterly data.
One sign of this is that similar estimations 
conducted for a monthly GDP proxy and for 
real consumer expenditures and industrial 
production show distinct evidence of an im-
pact due to hurricane activity. The estima-tions, moreover, indicate a reversal in the 
subsequent month. One contributing factor 
in this is that losses in individual economic 
sectors are offset partly by increased activity 
elsewhere, such as in the construction sec-
tor. At least this is what the signifi  cantly posi-
tive contributions by contemporaneous and lagged hurricane variables to explaining the 
change in employment in this sector of the 
economy seem to be saying. For aggregate 
employment growth, however, there are no 
effects which are statistically different from zero.
5 Overall, the estimation results for 
monthly activity indicators suggest that the 
dampening impact in the current hurricane 
season has been somewhat more visible 
than usual even in quarterly time series since 
activity was impaired over a period of two 
months (August and September). Conversely, 
the resumption of usual economic activities 
and rebuilding efforts are likely to continue 
to boost US economic growth slightly at the start of the fi  nal quarter of the year.
1 According to US Federal Reserve estimations, hurri-
canes dampened the month- on- month change in in-
dustrial production in August by just under 0.7 per-
centage point and, in September, by 0.2 percentage 
point. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, Industrial production and capacity utilization: 
technical Q&As, Federal Reserve statistical release, 
published on 16 November 2017.
2 Some indicators also suggest compensatory re-
sponses. For example, it is likely that the jump in car 
sales in September could be attributable to replace-
ment purchases.
3 Information on 54 hurricanes which, according to 
data provided by the Atlantic Oceanographic and Me-teorological Laboratory, hit mainland USA in the period from 1980 to 2016 was used to calculate the indicator 
variables. In line with earlier approaches to analysing 
weather effects, the calculation takes account of di-
minishing trend growth over time and the change in 
cyclical conditions by incorporating indicator variables 
representing the NBER- dated economic cycles. The estimation  was performed using the least squares method. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Weather effects 
on real GDP growth in the USA in the fi  rst six months of 2014, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 22-24.
4 This result is consistent with the literature, which 
fi  nds no evidence of any signifi  cant impairment of eco-nomic growth at the national level. See E Strobl (2011), 
The economic growth impact of hurricanes: evidence 
from US coastal counties, Review of Economics and 
Statistics 93 (2), pp 575-589.
5 This contrasts with weak employment growth in 
September of the current year. A signifi  cant factor may have been that Hurricane Irma struck the United States 
during the reference week of the payroll survey con-
ducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
14

New EU member states
Economic activity remained lively during the 
third quarter in the new EU member states 
 (EU-6)5 as a whole. Real GDP for the region 
grew by just over 5% on the year, which was 
the fastest growth rate since the outbreak of 
the global financial and economic crisis. The 
mood in the industrial sector, the main driving 
force behind the strong upturn, has been very 
positive thus far. However, increasing labour 
market bottlenecks could constrain the sector’s 
further growth potential. In surveys carried out 
by the European Commission, a large number 
of businesses in manufacturing have named a 
labour shortage as a key obstacle to produc -
tion. Growth in aggregate wages and salaries 
continued to gain traction in many places in 
the second quarter. That said, consumer price 
inflation within this group, as measured by the 
HICP , remained muted last quarter, at 1.6% on 
the year. The inflation rate excluding energy 
and food was just 0.9%.Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The strong economic upswing of the summer 
months continued across the euro area. Ac -
cording to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in 
the third quarter of 2017 rose by 0.6% after 
seasonal adjustment compared to the preced -
ing quarter and by 2.5% on the year. This 
meant that the aggregate pace of growth re -
mained virtually unchanged compared to the 
first half of the year and continued to be far 
above the estimated pace of potential output 
growth. As in the two preceding quarters, the 
increase in GDP was boosted by the domestic 
economy as investment in particular grew no -
ticeably. Furthermore, the favourable external 
environment also once again provided key im -
petus, resulting in further strong increases in Sustained upturn
Underlying pace 
of economic growth remains relatively highRegression of the change in various indicators of activity* for the USA on dummy variables for hurricane inﬂ  uences
 
Item Real GDP GDP proxy 1Industrial 
productionHousehold consumptionEmployment
Total Construction
Hurricane dummy
2
Contemporaneous 0.27 – 2.89** – 2.26* – 1.25* – 6.69 6.31**
Lagged (one period) – 0.08 2.79** 1.38 1.39 35.1 7.22**
Lagged (two periods) 1.50 1.13 – 0.35 5.01 1.91
Lagged (three periods) – 2.84** 0.00 – 0.05 – 1.83 1.38
Constant and dummies for 
economic cycles 3 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Frequency Quarterly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly
Number of observations 147 299 441 441 441 441
R² 0.47 0.09 0.29 0.07 0.53 0.36
F-test of insignifi  cance of all hurricane variables (p-value) 0.75 0.02 0.17 0.31 0.67 0.04
Sources: BEA, Macroeconomic Advisers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, BLS, NBER, Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations. * Dependent variable expressed as an annual-ised period-on-period percentage change or, for employment variables, the absolute period-on-period change in thousands. Robust Newey-West standard errors; stars (*, **, ***) denote the statistical signifi  cance of the coeffi   cients at the usual levels (10%, 5% and 1% respectively). 1 Monthly GDP estimation by Macroeconomic Advisers. 2 Has the value of one for periods in which hurricanes struck mainland USA. 3 NBER-dated.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
15

euro area exports. The upbeat mood also 
augurs robust economic activity in the fourth 
quarter, which means that there is likely to be 
noticeably stronger aggregate growth for 2017 
compared to the GDP rise of 1.8% last year.
Private consumption is also likely to have picked 
up in the third quarter, even if probably some -
what less strongly than in the second quarter. 
For example, retail sales saw a visible rise in 
price and seasonally adjusted terms following 
the large increase in the previous quarter, while 
new passenger car registrations remained virtu -
ally unchanged from the second quarter. Con -
sumption growth was also buoyed by a re -
newed increase in consumer confidence, 
mainly on the back of more positive expect -
ations regarding future economic growth.
Investment appears to have accelerated in the 
third quarter against the backdrop of the con -
tinued favourable economic situation, with a 
probable clear rise in investment in machinery and equipment in particular. At the very least, 
production of capital goods was stepped up 
very strongly in the third quarter. It also ap -
pears that there was an increase in imports of 
capital goods. By contrast, the sideways move -
ment in construction output suggests that con -
struction investment rose moderately, at best.
The global economy’s continued robust growth 
is mirrored in the euro area’s foreign business. 
Although the foreign trade data for the third 
quarter indicate only a slight increase in rev -
enue from exports of goods to non- euro area 
countries, export prices saw a marked decline 
at the same time, resulting in a fairly steep rise 
in real terms. Price- adjusted imports of goods 
recorded notable growth, in keeping with the 
vigorous domestic economy. Intra- EU trade 
also continued to pick up.
Industrial production continued its growth tra -
jectory. In the third quarter, industrial output in 
the euro area rose by 1.1% on the quarter after 
adjustment for seasonal variations, resulting in 
an increase of 3.5% on the year. As in the 
second quarter, output growth was broadly 
based across sectors. Only energy production 
lagged behind the level of the preceding quar -
ter.
The economic situation improved markedly in 
most euro area member states. In France, real 
GDP in the third quarter was up by 0.5% from 
the preceding period, following on from a 
0.6% rise in the spring. Growth was fuelled 
mainly by the domestic economy, where pri -
vate consumption and investment saw consid -
erable increases. There was probably also a sig -
nificant build-  up of inventories, which should 
be viewed against the backdrop of strong rises 
in imports. The Italian economy grew 0.5% 
more strongly in the third quarter than in the 
second, when real GDP had increased by just 
0.3%. Growth was driven mainly by investment 
in machinery and equipment, and by exports. 
Industrial activity experienced very dynamic 
growth recently as a result. There were also 
positive trends on the labour market. While the Private consump -
tion somewhat 
less buoyant
Clear increase 
in investmentForeign trade 
continues to be 
buoyant
Industrial 
 production on clear upward trajectory
GDP rise across 
all regionsAggregate output in the euro area
98100102104106108110
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017
Source: Eurostat. 1 Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from 
2015 Q1 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank–3–2–10+1Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%Log scaleGDP
12010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, quarterly dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
16

unemployment rate remained the same over 
the summer, employment continued to rise. In 
Spain, economic output in the third quarter 
was up by 0.8% on the quarter. The pace of 
growth therefore only slowed slightly com -
pared to the spring. Private consumption is 
likely to have lost some momentum following 
significant gains in the second quarter. How -
ever, investment in machinery and equipment 
is expected to have expanded considerably, 
while additional stimulus is likely to have come 
from construction investment. The economy 
also proved to be mostly buoyant in other euro 
area member states, too. GDP growth was 
strong in Latvia, Finland, Cyprus and Slovakia, 
while in Austria, Portugal and the Netherlands 
it increased considerably. By contrast, economic 
output only picked up moderately in Belgium, 
and Lithuania saw hardly any growth.
Labour market conditions continued to im -
prove in the third quarter. The reduction in un -
employment continued: after seasonal adjust -
ments, the number of unemployed people fell 
by just over 200,000 compared to the second 
quarter of 2017 and by 1.5 million compared to 
the previous year. The standardised unemploy -
ment rate fell to 8.9% by September, com -
pared with 9.1% in June and 9.9% one year 
earlier. The available employment data, which 
are less up- to- date than the latest data on un -
employment, indicate a steep year- on- year rise 
in the number of employed persons, of ap -
proximately 2.4 million or 1.6% for the second 
quarter. Despite the improved labour market 
situation, wage growth remained subdued. 
The increase in gross hourly wages was down 
slightly on the year to 1.7% in the second quar -
ter. Overall, however, it was higher in the first 
half of the year than in the previous year.
HICP consumer prices in the euro area were up 
in the third quarter by 0.2% on the quarter, 
after adjustment for seasonal variations. There 
was a steep rise in food prices, while energy 
prices fell again significantly owing to the ap -
preciation of the euro, despite slightly higher 
international crude oil prices. There were no notable appreciation effects for the prices of 
non- energy industrial goods, which had risen 
slightly. Services prices once again increased 
quite strongly. Headline inflation rose by 1.4% 
on the year, much like in the second quarter 
(1.5%). Excluding energy and food, however, 
core inflation continued to increase to 1.2%, 
thereby exceeding the rate of the last quarter 
of 2016 by 0.4 percentage point.
In October, annual HICP inflation in the euro 
area fell slightly to 1.4% despite food prices, in 
particular, having risen quite steeply. HICP infla -
tion excluding energy and food even fell to 
0.9%. A steep decline in the prices of package 
holidays and considerable reductions in motor 
vehicle insurance premiums made themselves 
felt in Germany, while in Italy a decrease in tu -
ition fees was the key factor. While the effects 
of package holidays and motor vehicle insur -
ance prices are, at least in some cases, likely to 
be temporary, the change in tuition fees in Italy Continued 
improvement in the labour market
HICP inflation in 
summer virtually unchanged at 1.4%, while core inflation con-tinued to riseOctober rate also slightly lower due to one- off effectsSentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017–25–20–15–10–50Percentage balances, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
353025201510505101520
–––––––++++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
17

is expected to have a twelve- month dampen -
ing effect on inflation.
The core inflation rate frequently used for an -
alysis, which is defined as excluding energy and 
food, still includes components for which the 
prices are subject to significant fluctuations, 
such as clothing and travel (see also the box on 
pages 49 to 51), making it more difficult to fil -
ter out inflation trends. It therefore makes sense to consider a variety of indicators in the 
underlying inflation, such as other core rates 
(also excluding clothing and travel, for ex -
ample) or what are known as trimmed means, 
in which, on an alternating monthly basis, the 
components with the highest and lowest infla -
tion rates are factored out. Finally, econometric 
methods can be used to calculate trends. Look -
ing at the overall picture sketched by these in -
dicators shows a clear increase in trend infla -
tion in the euro area since the end of 2016.
Leading indicators suggest a stable and robust 
pace of growth for the fourth quarter. The Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index maintained its high 
level in October. The European Commission’s 
indicator of business and consumer sentiment 
rose yet again and has now surpassed the pre- 
crisis peak of spring 2007. Surveys indicate that 
businesses are planning to increase employ -
ment, which should bolster income growth 
and private consumption. The rise in capacity 
utilisation is likely to provide additional impetus 
to capital formation. The increase in orders 
from non- euro area countries and the bright -
ening sentiment among exporters suggest that 
foreign business has remained buoyant.Trend inflation 
higher than in 2016Economic growth probably robust in Q4, tooUnderlying inflation in the euro area
Year-on-year percentage change
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.  1 exE = 
HICP excluding energy; exEuF = HICP excluding energy and un-
processed  food;  exEF  =  HICP  excluding  energy  and  food; 
exEFTC  =  HICP  excluding  energy,  food,  travel  and  clothing; Trim10 = mean trimmed by 10%; Trim30 = mean trimmed by 
30%.
Deutsche BundesbankRange of indicators
of underlying inflation
(exE, exEuF, exEF, exEFTC,
Trim10, Trim30, Median) 1
HICP exEF
HICP exEFTC
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.53.0Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
18

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
On 26 October 2017, the Governing Council of 
the ECB in the context of its regular economic 
and monetary analysis decided to continue and 
recalibrate the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme (APP). The purchases are to be con -
ducted at a monthly pace of €60 billion until 
the end of 2017. From January 2018, the Euro -
system aims to conduct net monthly purchases 
of assets at the reduced volume of €30 billion 
until the end of September 2018, or beyond, if 
necessary, and in any case until the ECB Gov -
erning Council sees a sustained adjustment in 
the path of inflation consistent with its inflation 
aim. Redemption amounts will be reinvested 
alongside the net purchases. The Eurosystem 
will reinvest the principal payments from ma -
turing securities for an extended period of time 
after ending net asset purchases, and in any 
case for as long as necessary.
Moreover, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to continue conducting the Eurosystem’s stand -
ard refinancing operations as fixed- rate tender 
procedures with full allotment for as long as 
necessary, and at least until the end of the last 
reserve maintenance period of 2019. At the 
same time, the Governing Council left the key 
ECB interest rates unchanged in the reporting 
period. The main refinancing rate thus remains 
at 0%, while the marginal lending rate stands 
at 0.25% and the deposit facility rate at 
-0.40%. The Governing Council continues to 
expect the key interest rates to remain at their 
present levels for an extended period of time, 
and well past the horizon of its net asset pur -
chases.
The Governing Council justified the reduction 
of the monthly purchases under the APP from 
2018 onwards with the growing confidence in 
the gradual convergence of inflation rates to -
wards the inflation aim on account of the in -creasingly robust and broad- based economic 
recovery, the perceptible increase in core infla -
tion and the ongoing effective transmission of 
monetary policy measures to financing condi -
tions and the real economy.
The majority of the Governing Council mem -
bers nevertheless held the view that the agreed 
significant extension of the net purchases be -
yond the end of this year combined with a con -
tinued open end date was necessary to main -
tain the extremely favourable financing condi -
tions needed for a sustained return of inflation 
rates to levels below, but close to, 2%.
However, owing to the high level of the Euro -
system’s securities holdings and the continued 
policy of reinvestment, the assets purchased 
under the APP are guaranteed to remain a 
strong expansionary force even after net pur -ECB Governing 
Council decides to continue APP until end- September 2018 with reduced monthly  volume …
… and extends 
full allotment in refinancing operations, while policy rates remain unchanged
Growing confi-
dence that  inflation rates are gradually approaching inflation targetMajority in Gov-erning Council 
nevertheless 
in favour of 
extending 
 open-ended 
net  purchases
Reinvestment ensures high degree of accommodation even after net purchases end
Money market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 16 November 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 20170.40.200.20.40.60.8
––++++
01020Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
19

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 26 July 2017 and 31 October 2017 saw euro area liquidity needs stemming from autonomous factors increase again 
(see the table below). They rose to an aver-
age of €1,110.0 billion in the September- October 2017 reserve period, which was 
€21.4 billion more than the average for the 
June- July 2017 reserve period, ie the last one prior to the period under review. The 
sum of the autonomous factors fl  uctuated 
between €1,030.5 billion and an all- time 
high of €1,165.6 billion, which was reached 
on the last day of the September 2017 quarter. These increased liquidity needs 
were mainly due to the aggregate decline in net foreign assets and other factors, which are considered together because of liquidity- neutral valuation effects and which fell by a total of €26.4 billion in net terms, having a liquidity absorbing effect. The same period 
also saw a €6.5 billion rise in the volume of 
banknotes in circulation, which further ab-
sorbed central bank liquidity. By contrast, a 
reduction in government deposits with the 
Eurosystem served to provide additional li-
quidity, with the average for the September- 
October 2017 reserve period standing at 
€218.3 billion, down €11.5 billion from the 
June- July 2017 reserve period. The min-
imum reserve requirement fell slightly across 
the two reserve maintenance periods by a 
total of €0.2 billion to €122.3 billion in the September- October 2017 period, which led 
to a corresponding reduction in the calcu-
lated liquidity needs.
Comparing period averages, the total out-
standing tender volume barely changed (see 
the chart on page  23). In the September- 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2017
26 July
to
12 September13 September
to
31 October
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  6.2 –  0.3
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 48.0 – 36.5
3 Net foreign assets
1 – 17.9 –  4.0
4 Other factors 1 –  5.7 +  1.2
Total + 18.2 – 39.6
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  3.9 +  1.2
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  1.2 –  3.3
(c) Other operations + 74.1 + 89.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.1 –  0.1
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 16.1 – 36.7
Total + 55.4 + 50.1
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 73.5 + 10.6
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.4 –  0.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly Re-
port. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
20

October 2017 reserve period, the total vol-
ume averaged €772 billion, which was 
around €5 billion below its average level in 
the June- July 2017 period. As regards long- 
term tenders, the picture was mixed. On the 
one hand, there was an upturn in demand 
for three- month operations, with the vol-ume increasing by €1.6 billion in the same 
period to an albeit still low total of €8.3 bil-
lion. On the other hand, the volume of longer- term refinancing operations de-
creased overall. Voluntary early repayments 
from the third and fi  fth TLTRO I operations, 
which totalled €3.8 billion and were received on 27 September 2017, were a contributing factor here. The repayment option, available 
at the same time, for the fi  rst TLTRO I oper-
ation was not exercised. Repayments re-duced the total TLTRO I volume to roughly 
€16 billion, further reducing its signifi  cance 
relative to the approximately €740 billion 
outstanding in the TLTRO II (see the chart on page 22). June 2018 will see early voluntary 
repayment options for the TLTRO II being 
offered for the fi  rst time. In addition, the vol-
ume of main refi  nancing operations con-
tinued to follow a downward trend overall in 
the period under review, falling on average 
– compared with the June- July 2017 period – 
by €2.7 billion to €6.7 billion in the 
September- October 2017 period.
The Eurosystem continued to provide the 
bulk of liquidity through the monetary pol-
icy asset purchase programmes (see the adjacent  table). During the September- October 2017 period, they represented average balance sheet holdings of €2,239 
billion, which was €163 billion higher than 
the average balance sheet amount in the 
June- July 2017 period. Meanwhile, net pur-chases under the APP remained constant at a monthly sum of €60 billion.
Excess liquidity continued to climb, driven 
by asset purchases for monetary policy pur-poses. However, the degree of the increase 
observed varied between the two reserve 
maintenance periods. While excess liquidity 
in the July- September 2017 period was up 
by an average of €90 billion in comparison 
to the previous period, the corresponding increase in the September- October 2017 
period was only about half that, standing at 
€47 billion. This was primarily because higher liquidity needs stemming from au-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 10 Novem-
ber 2017
Active programmes
 PSPP + 147.4 1,817.2
CBPP3 +  11.2 237.4
CSPP +  20.1 124.0
ABSPP +   0.4 24.8
Completed programmes 
 SMP –   7.3 88.9
CBPP1 –   1.3 6.1
CBPP2 –   0.2 4.8
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug Sep Oct Nov
20170.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn%
1,4001,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
21

tonomous factors had an offsetting effect. 
In the period under review, excess liquidity 
rose by a total of €137 billion on average, 
however, similar to the growth recorded in 
the two previous reserve maintenance 
periods (€132 billion in total).
In light of the very high and still rising liquid-
ity surplus, overnight rates in the period 
under review continued to move in line with 
the deposit facility rate (see the chart on 
page 21). In the September- October 2017 reserve period, Eonia averaged -0.36%, ie four basis points above the deposit facility rate – as in the previous period (July- Sep-
tember 2017). Turnovers of €7.2 billion, and 
in the previous period €6.6 billion, meant 
distinctly lower volumes than in the previous 
year’s corresponding observation period, 
when turnover averaged €9.8 billion. In the September- October 2017 reserve period, se-cured overnight money in GC Pooling traded at an average of -0.44%, or four basis points below the deposit facility rate, in the ECB basket. In the previous period, this differ-
ence was still three basis points. Overnight 
money in the ECB EXTended basket (which contains a larger set of eligible securities) 
continued to trade at an average of -0.40%. 
Totalling €3.9 billion, the associated over-
night turnovers in the ECB and ECB EXTended  
baskets in the two reserve maintenance 
periods were €2.2 billion lower than in the 
previous observation period. This was attrib-utable to reduced turnovers in the ECB bas-
ket. At the close of the September 2017 
quarter, against a backdrop of smaller turn-overs, Eonia rose one basis point compared 
with the previous day to -0.35%, thus matching the June 2017 end- of- quarter 
rate. On that day, the rate for secured over-
night money in the ECB basket temporarily 
dropped by just over four basis points to 
-0.48%. This effect had also been observed 
for the ECB EXTended basket at the end of 
the half- year at the close of June.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
––––++++++
April May June July August September October November
2017Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancingoperations
 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series oftargeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO I)
 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
22

chases have ceased. With this in mind, it would 
have been acceptable, from the Bundesbank’s 
point of view, not only to recalibrate the APP 
but also to announce an end date for net pur -
chases.
On 10  November 2017, the Eurosystem held 
assets in the amount of €1,817.2 billion as part 
of the public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP). The average residual maturity of the 
PSPP portfolio fell yet again slightly to 7.8 years 
at present from the previous maturity of 7.9 
years. The outstanding amounts purchased to 
date under the third covered bond purchase 
programme (CBPP3) and the asset-  backed 
securities   purchase programme (ABSPP) came 
to €237.4 billion and €24.8 billion respectively. 
Purchases made under the corporate sector 
purchase programme (CSPP) totalled €124.0 
billion as at 10 November.
In the period under review, excess liquidity con -
tinued to follow the upward trend seen since the APP was launched, climbing by €117 billion 
to €1,859 billion. This increase was mainly pro -
pelled, as before, by the continued asset pur -
chases, while volumes in the standard tender 
operations eased again slightly. Due to pur -
chases under the APP being envisaged until 
September 2018, a further increase in the level 
of excess liquidity can be expected, although it 
is likely to slow down in sync with the reduc -
tion of the monthly purchase volumes from 
January 2018 onwards.
The unsecured overnight money market rate 
(Eonia) in the reporting period hovered in a 
narrow range of between -0.35% and -0.37%, 
just above the deposit facility rate of -0.40%, 
while the secured overnight rate (STOXX GC 
Pooling) was slightly below the deposit facility 
rate. The three- month Euribor was largely un -
changed in the reporting period, standing at 
-0.33% at last report. On the whole, money 
market rates have thus remained largely static 
for several months now. As was already the Purchase vol-
umes still in line with announced targetExcess liquidity continues upward trend
Market partici-
pants expect first policy rate increases in 2019Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 201703006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,000€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
23

case over the entire course of the year, forward 
rates were also subject to heavy fluctuations in 
the period under review. These were driven by 
a prolonged period of uncertainty in the money 
market regarding the future of monetary policy, 
particularly the path of key policy rates. Follow -
ing the recent decisions in October, forward 
rates reacted merely with a slight decline, 
which suggests that the Governing Council’s 
move did not come as a surprise to the major -
ity of market participants. At the current end, 
markets are pricing in an increase of 10 basis 
points for mid-2019.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
In the third quarter of 2017, the perceptible ex -
pansion in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
continued; the annual growth rate at the end 
of the quarter came to 5.1%, remaining at the 
level observed over the last two and a half 
years. The sustained expansion of the money 
stock was attributable to the money- holding 
sector’s ongoing strong preference for over -
night deposits given low opportunity costs. A 
glance at the counterparts reveals that lending 
by the MFI sector – which includes the Eurosys -
tem – to non- banks in the euro area was again 
the most significant driver of monetary growth 
in the reporting quarter. On the one hand, 
bank loans to private non- banks in the context 
of the still very low interest rates and the broad- 
based economic growth continued their sus -
tained upward trajectory. On the other hand, 
the Eurosystem’s bond purchases again de -
cisively supported the MFI sector’s securities-  
based lending to general government and pri -
vate non- banks.
Monetary growth from July to September was 
again characterised by strong inflows in over -
night deposits, received, in particular, from 
households but also from financial and non-  
financial corporations. Given the persistently 
low yield spread between long- term govern -
ment bonds and components of the monetary Accommodative 
monetary policy shapes monet -
ary dynamics
Overnight 
deposits still main driver of M3 growthMonetary aggregates and counterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial  
corporations. 4 Including non-profit institutions serving house-
holds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and counterpartsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Percentage growth
in M3
Remaining counterparts
Securities-based lending to
general government
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations
Households 4Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Percentage growth in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage pointsContribution of components in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
24

aggregates, money holdings, especially in risk- 
averse sectors, remainded attractive in the 
period under review. The shifts within the mon -
etary aggregate M3 from short- term time de -
posits to short-  term savings and, in particular, 
overnight deposits continued. These shifts were 
attributable to what continued to be low inter -
est rate spreads between these types of de -
posit, which favoured highly liquid monetary 
components.
Monetary growth in the reporting period was 
again mainly supported by MFI lending to non- 
banks in the euro area. One of the key drivers 
of growth were loans to private non- banks ad -
justed for securitisation and other one- off ef -
fects, which regained momentum following a 
weaker second quarter. Their annual growth 
rate rose slightly from the end of June to 2.7% 
at the end of September. Hence, the gap be -
tween monetary aggregate and loan growth is 
significantly narrower than in mid-2015; it did 
not narrow any further in the third quarter, 
though.
Following an unusually weak preceding quarter 
due to one-off factors, amongst other things, 
loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area managed to regain their previous upward 
momentum in the third quarter. On balance, 
the increase in the reporting quarter focused, as before, on medium and long- term loans. As 
a result, the annual growth rate of loans rose 
from 2.0% at the end of June to 2.5% at the 
end of September. The continued favourable 
underlying conditions in the euro area are re -
flected in the ongoing recovery of loans to en -
terprises. The rebound of economic activity is 
now not only broad- based across member 
states but also in terms of expenditure com -
ponents. Lending rates in the euro area as a 
whole remain close to historical lows and the 
business of lending to corporate customers is 
highly competitive. It is consistent with this 
environ ment that demand for loans to non-  
financial corporations again increased substan -
tially according to the results of the Bank Lend -
ing Survey (BLS) conducted in the third quarter. 
According to the survey participants, the main 
reasons for this were the low general interest 
rate level and the greater funding needs for 
fixed investment as well as for mergers, acqui -
sitions and corporate restructuring. At the same 
time, the surveyed institutions essentially left 
their credit standards for loans to corporate 
customers unchanged.
As in the preceding quarters, growth in loans 
to non- financial corporations in the euro area 
was fuelled chiefly by the contributions of 
banks in Germany and France (see the chart on 
page  26). By contrast, Italy and Spain again Lending to 
domestic non- banks largest counterpart once again
Loans to non- 
financial corpor-ations still on the riseCountry- specific differences in loan dynamicsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2017 Q3 2017 Q2
Central government deposits 87.8 –  7.6
Monetary aggregate M3 158.9 89.0
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 164.5 154.4
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 23.8 – 22.5
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 18.2 – 43.0
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 14.4 –  6.1
of which
Capital and reserves 43.3 14.8
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 57.7 – 20.9Assets 2017 Q3 2017 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 80.7 55.7
Loans 87.3 18.8
Loans, adjusted 1 93.0 42.0
Securities –  6.6 36.9
Credit to general government in the euro area 90.9 23.5
Loans – 10.0 –  3.2
Securities 101.0 26.6
Net external assets 35.9 – 18.9
Other counterparts of M3 24.7 15.1
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
25

provided only very weak impetus. In both 
countries, it was mainly loans to the real estate 
sector, which, despite a gradual pick- up in an -
nual growth rates, were still clearly negative. 
The fact that demand for credit to non- financial 
corporations in the euro area as a whole is not 
growing faster despite investment activity gain -
ing momentum is probably due to the suffi -
cient alternative sources of funding at enter -
prises’ disposal. It must therefore be assumed 
that, in the context of internal financing, the 
flows of funds to enterprises in Germany and 
Spain, in particular, were once again abundant 
in the reporting quarter. In addition, the issu -
ance of debt securities by non- financial corpor -
ations in the euro area as a whole, but espe -
cially in France, has gained in importance; one 
of the main reasons for this are the favourable 
financing conditions in the capital markets, 
which can be attributed in part to the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchase programmes.The other main means of support for lending 
to the private sector in the reporting quarter 
came from loans to households, although their 
net increase was moderately down when com -
pared with the two previous quarters. Once 
again, the largest contributions in terms of vol -
ume came from banks in Germany and France. 
Italy also continued its upward trend in this 
credit segment, with its annual growth rate 
reaching the euro area average. Loans for 
house purchase remained the driving force of 
growth in the euro area as a whole; their year- 
on- year rate rose from 3.3% at the end of June 
to 3.4% by the end of September. According to 
the bank managers surveyed as part of the BLS, 
household demand for loans for house pur -
chase was up in the third quarter as well; how -
ever, the pace of growth slowed further in rela -
tion to the previous quarters. Euro area banks 
cited the low general interest rate level, house -
holds’ continued upbeat assessment of hous -
ing market prospects, and stable consumer 
confidence as explanatory factors for the rise in 
the need for funds. Lending standards were 
eased significantly, primarily as a result of the 
high level of competition among banks.
Consumer credit likewise continued to expand 
substantially during the period under review, 
with its annual growth rate climbing to 6.7% 
by the end of September. Upward momentum 
was evident in the large euro area countries, in 
particular, which is probably closely related to 
the persistent increases observed in the under -
lying path of private consumption. This is con -
sistent with the view expressed by the banks 
surveyed in the BLS that demand for consumer 
credit had yet again increased markedly. The 
respondents mainly put this down to stable 
consumer confidence, the low general level of 
interest rates and a high propensity to pur -
chase. Credit standards in this segment were 
eased slightly.
The Eurosystem’s asset purchases also sup -
ported monetary growth considerably in the 
third quarter. This was particularly apparent for 
securities- based lending to general govern -Clear growth in 
loans to house-holds driven by housing loans, …
… but also 
 continued steep rises in con-sumer credit
Securities- based 
lending bol-stered by Euro-system’s asset purchasesLoans to non-financial corporationsin the euro area
*
605040302010010203040
––––––++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Loans  adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Also adjusted for positions 
arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area 1... France
... Italy
... Spain
... GermanyMFIs in ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
26

ment, which was again heavily influenced by 
Eurosystem purchases under the PSPP in the re -
porting quarter, whereas other MFIs saw con -
siderably less activity in this credit segment (see 
the adjacent chart). Unlike in the previous quar -
ters, securities- based lending to the private sec -
tor declined slightly on balance between July 
and September, despite the purchases by the 
Eurosystem under the CSPP and ABSPP . This 
was attributable to sizeable net outflows from 
banks’ debt securities and equities.
The net external asset position of the MFI sec -
tor recorded net inflows again for the first time 
since the beginning of 2015 and thus also sup -
ported monetary growth in the reporting quar -
ter. This turnaround was notably due to the 
fact that non- resident investors bought increas -
ingly more domestic securities on balance, not 
least in view of the economic recovery in the 
euro area and the search for alternatives to US 
stocks. These purchases were concentrated on 
equities and investment fund shares. By con -
trast, the balance of payments data available so 
far for July and August 2017 indicate that for -
eign investors appear to have continued to re -
duce their holdings of euro area bonds issued 
by the general government and private non-  
MFI sectors. Overall, the outflows of funds 
from portfolio transactions with non-  residents 
have fallen in recent quarters, however, mean -
ing that inflows related to the persistently high 
current account surpluses in the euro area 
started to dominate developments in the MFI 
sector’s net external asset position again in the 
reporting quarter.
The supportive impact of MFI longer- term fi -
nancial liabilities vis- à- vis other euro area resi -
dents on the money supply, which has been 
observed since the end of 2011, also continued 
in the quarter under review. The money- holding 
sector markedly reduced its stock of longer-  
term time deposits and savings deposits as well 
as longer- term bank debt securities. It is likely 
that this was largely encouraged by the current 
interest rate levels and the persistently high in -
flows of funds to short- term deposits.German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
With regard to German banks’ deposit business 
with domestic customers, the sustained growth 
in short- term deposits that began in early 2010 
continued during the reporting quarter, while 
long- term deposits declined even further. Once 
again, it was mainly overnight deposits which 
recorded inflows. The growth of this highly li -
quid form of deposit is still being driven by the 
historically low interest rate level and the flat 
yield curve (see the chart on page 28).
From a sectoral perspective, this development 
was again chiefly due to households. Their 
overnight deposits grew at a similar rate during 
the reporting quarter as in the two preceding 
quarters, which suggests that this sector con -
tinues to prefer particularly liquid forms of in -
vestment which it perceives to be low-  risk. 
However, the fact that households –  while 
building up their bank deposits  – have in -
creased their purchases of fund units and 
shares in recent quarters, indicates that the 
search for yield has now also become some -Contribution of 
net external assets positive again for the first time since early 2015
MFI longer- term 
financial liabil-ities reduced  furtherDeposit growth still dominated by build- up of overnight deposits
Households 
again making greatest  contributionSecurities-based lending to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 172001000100200300400500600700
––+++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof whichExtended by the MFI sector as a wholeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
27

thing of a factor for this sector.1 In the quarter 
under review, the non- financial corporations 
sector, by contrast, recorded considerable out -
flows from overnight deposits. This, however, 
was primarily a countermovement to a sharp 
rise in the second quarter. If this effect is ex -
cluded, the positive development of this sec -
tor’s overnight deposits continued in the 
second and third quarters of 2017 – in line with 
the persistently strong corporate profitability.
Financial corporations, which traditionally have 
a very keen yield awareness, reduced their 
bank deposits in the reporting quarter on bal -
ance. Within the financial sector, it was mainly insurance undertakings and pension funds that 
once again reduced their long- term time de -
posits. This reduction is part of the ongoing 
portfolio shifts which are attributable not only 
to the search for higher- yielding forms of in -
vestment but also to regulatory requirements.2
As well as their deposit business, banks once 
again expanded their lending to the domestic 
non- bank sector during the reporting quarter, 
too. As in the previous quarters, this was due 
solely to the stronger flow of credit to private 
non- banks. By contrast, loans to general gov -
ernment declined again in the quarter under 
review, which, given the overall very favourable 
budgetary situation, is likely to be connected 
with the public sector’s further reduction in fi -
nancing needs.
The non- financial sector was once again re -
sponsible for the marked increase in lending to 
private non- banks, with loans to non- financial 
corporations making the biggest contribution 
to growth in lending business in the third quar -
ter, followed closely by loans to households. 
Once again, loans for house purchase were a 
decisive driver of growth in lending to house -
holds. However, their quarterly net increase has 
already been relatively constant for several 
quarters, meaning that at 3.9%, their annual 
growth rate remained unchanged on the year. 
Demand for housing loans was supported not 
only by households’ ongoing favourable in -
come and asset situation, but also by the con -
tinued exceptionally low financing costs. The 
interest rate on long- term loans for house pur -
chase rose slightly according to the MFI interest 
rate statistics to 2.0% over the course of the 
third quarter. Nevertheless, it still stood close to 
its all- time low since the harmonised statistics 
were introduced in 2003, which it reached in 
September 2016 (see the chart on page 30).Decline in 
deposits in the financial sector driven by insurers and pension funds
Further expan-
sion in lending to domestic non- banks
Loans to the 
 private sector driven by  non-financial segmentsInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the ba-
lance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017012345% pa, monthly data
01234Overall volume1
New business2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Acquisition of financial assets 
and external financing in Germany in the second quarter of 
2017, press release, 13 October 2017.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Ongoing portfolio shifts into 
higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly Report, May 
2017, pp 30-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
28

The results of the latest BLS provide evidence of 
further factors influencing these developments. 
They show that demand for loans for house 
purchase was supported by the positive out -
look for the housing market and robust con -
sumer confidence, in addition to the low gen -
eral level of interest rates. This impact, how -
ever, was offset by factors such as a greater 
inclination among households to draw on their 
own savings as well as a number of banks hav -
ing lost market share to competitors, both of 
which dampened demand, meaning that the 
demand reported in the BLS remained un -
changed on the whole. At the same time, the 
BLS revealed that banks’ lending policies helped 
to stimulate the demand for loans for house 
purchase in the quarter under review. Having 
eased their standards for the first time since 
2011 in the first quarter of this year, the report -
ing quarter saw banks relax their credit stand -
ards for the second time this year in net terms, 
although to date, this has not affected the en -
tire banking sector. On balance, banks expect 
credit standards to ease slightly further in the 
coming quarter.
In line with the persistent increases observed in 
the underlying path of private consumption in 
Germany, consumer credit also recorded dis -
tinct inflows again. This is consistent with the 
banks surveyed in the BLS having stated that 
consumer credit demand had continued its dy -
namic development of previous years in the 
third quarter of 2017, which they put down to 
households’ stable propensity to purchase, per -
sistently robust consumer confidence and the 
low general level of interest rates. By contrast, 
the surveyed banks barely mentioned any 
demand- curbing effects. The respondents 
eased their credit standards slightly in this seg -
ment, too, on balance.
German banks participating in the BLS also 
painted a more positive picture with regard to 
loans to enterprises. In addition to the low 
general interest rate level, the surveyed bank 
managers notably attributed the perceptible in -
crease in demand in this credit segment to en -terprises’ financing needs for fixed investment 
as well as for mergers, acquisitions and corpor -
ate restructuring. An additional bolstering ef -
fect on demand was brought about by the 
lending policies of the surveyed banks which, 
for the first time since the second quarter of 
2013, reported having eased their credit stand -
ards again on balance.
Taking the aggregate across all banks in Ger -
many, the favourable financing conditions 
combined with enterprises’ very positive busi -
ness expectations were reflected in accelerated 
growth in loans to domestic enterprises. With a 
year-  on- year rate of 3.7% at the end of Sep -Banks’ lending 
policies help stimulate demand for housing loans
Fresh inflows for 
consumer credit
Renewed 
increase in  lending to non- 
financial corpor-ations amid slight easing in credit standardsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2017
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 47.7 21.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 6.2 – 6.3
over 2 years – 7.0 – 2.2
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 1.7 0.3
over 3 months – 0.7 – 2.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 6.9 – 8.1
Securities – 5.9 – 4.8
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 22.0 28.2
of which to households 3 13.4 12.0
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 7.4 12.6
Securities 8.2 0.8
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
29

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: 
difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of re-
spondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for 
2017 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 20171.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30+60–300+30+60
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 171.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
3003060
–++
300306090
–+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over 
    €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
30

tember, the growth momentum in this credit 
segment has now even become appreciably 
stronger than for loans to households, which 
ended the reporting quarter with an annual 
growth rate of 3.1%.
The October BLS contained a number of add -
itional questions. The German banks reported 
in their responses that, given the situation in 
the financial markets, their funding situation 
had hardly changed compared with the pre -
ceding quarter. The Eurosystem’s expanded 
asset purchase programme continued to im -
prove banks’ liquidity position and funding 
conditions over the past six months. The in -
creased liquidity, which was primarily used for 
lending, was not only the result of higher cus -
tomer deposit volumes following sales of mar -
ketable assets, but was also produced by the 
banks’ own sales. However, the programme 
weighed on banks’ profitability. The negative 
interest rate on the deposit facility was another 
key factor in banks’ shrinking net interest in -
come over the past six months. Owing to the 
negative deposit rate, both lending rates and 
margins in all surveyed business lines fell, while 
the effects on the credit volume were limited.Banks’ profitabil-
ity dented by APP and nega-tive deposit facility rate
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017–10+1+2+3+4Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
32101234
–––++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and
up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
31

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the third quarter of 2017, the international 
financial markets were mainly shaped by the 
favourable economic outlook and market par -
ticipants’ monetary policy expectations. Gov -
ernment bond yields initially came under pres -
sure on both sides of the Atlantic as investors 
firmed their expectation of a continued highly 
accommodative monetary policy for the euro 
area and lowered their expectations of interest 
rate hikes in the United States. Moreover, in the 
euro area, the Eurosystem’s decision to con -
tinue the asset purchase programme – at a re -
duced volume – until at least September 2018 
and lower risk premiums on the government 
bonds of periphery countries led to declining 
yields, with the GDP-  weighted average falling 
on balance by 16 basis points to 1.0%. In the 
United States, by contrast, yields in the second 
half of the quarter were increasingly supported 
by expectations regarding the planned tax re -
form. At the same time, following the Fed’s an -
nouncement that it would reduce its balance 
sheet, market participants were again more 
confident that the Fed would pursue a less ex -
pansionary monetary policy course. On bal -
ance, US yields rose slightly to 2.4%. In the 
international stock markets, the positive eco -
nomic outlook was reflected in higher profit ex -
pectations, as a result of which prices increased 
pretty much across the board and new highs 
were reached temporarily in both Germany and 
the United States. In the foreign exchange mar -
kets, the euro was buoyed by the positive eco -
nomic data for the euro area. On average, the 
euro appreciated against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners by 1.8%.
Exchange rates
In the period under review, the euro appreci -
ated against the US dollar until the beginning 
of September, thus continuing the trend which emerged in June following ECB President Mario 
Draghi’s economic assessment at the Forum on 
Central Banking in Sintra, which had been per -
ceived as rather confident in the markets. Fa -
vourable economic data from the euro area, on 
the one hand, and waning hopes of economic 
policy impetus from the US Administration, on 
the other, gave the euro a boost. In addition, 
the expectations of rising interest rates in the 
United States weakened in August, following 
publication of the minutes of the US Federal 
Open Market Committee’s most recent meet -
ing. At the end of the month, uncertainty 
about the possible negative consequences for 
the US economy of two hurricanes depressed 
the US currency further still. Furthermore, after 
it was signalled during the press conference on 
the ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy 
meeting at the beginning of September that 
decisions on the future of the asset purchase 
programme would soon be announced, the 
euro temporarily rose to US$1.21 on 8 Septem -
ber, which was its highest level since the begin -
ning of 2015.
Subsequently, the mood switched in favour of 
the US currency, with the US dollar recovering 
on a broad basis, including against the euro. 
This was partly due to the fact that markets by 
then expected the burden on the US economy 
as a result of the storms to be smaller than pre -
viously anticipated and, at the same time, con -
sidered it again more likely that there would be 
a hike in key interest rates in December. From 
the end of September onwards, investor confi -
dence in the implementability of the US  Ad -
ministration’s planned tax reform rose, first 
after a draft reform was presented and subse -
quently when the 2018 budget was adopted. 
This put the euro under downward pressure, as 
did the flare- up in the conflict over Catalan in -
dependence and the attendant uncertainty 
over political developments in Spain. The euro 
weakened further at the end of October after 
the ECB Governing Council decided at its mon -Financial 
 markets shaped by economic confidence and monetary policy
Euro at two-year 
high against the 
US dollar in early  
September, ...... but subse-quently weakerDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
32

etary policy meeting to continue the asset pur -
chases – at a reduced volume – beyond 2017, 
with the end- date of the purchase programme 
remaining open. After the publication of fig -
ures showing unexpectedly strong German 
GDP growth, the euro rebounded and was lat -
terly trading at US$1.18, 3.1% above its level at 
the end of June.
The euro fluctuated between ¥128 and ¥131 
until the beginning of September, without any 
clearly discernible trend. On the one hand, the 
euro was buoyed by the above-  mentioned fa -
vourable economic data from the euro area 
and the prospect of the Bank of Japan’s mon -
etary policy stance remaining expansionary, 
which was fuelled by the renewed postpone -
ment of the deadline for meeting the inflation 
target. On the other hand, the demand for yen 
as a traditional financing currency for carry 
trades is likely to have increased during this 
period due to the unwinding of carry trades in 
response to the escalation of tensions in the 
conflict with North Korea. Subsequently, how -
ever, a countermovement set in as risk aversion 
eased again. At the end of the reporting period, 
the euro stood at ¥133 and was thus 4.2% 
above its level at the end of June.
In the period under review, the euro initially ap -
preciated substantially against the pound ster -
ling in the context of the slow- moving negoti -
ations on the announced withdrawal of the 
United Kingdom from the European Union. At 
the end of August, it reached its highest level 
for eight years. However, the mood then re -
versed in favour of the pound sterling after 
statements by representatives of the Bank of 
England fuelled speculation regarding a tighter 
monetary policy stance. Subsequently, the 
existing expectations of a rise in interest rates 
were intensified by the publication of the min -
utes of the monetary policy meeting of the 
Bank of England and the unexpectedly favour -
able retail sales in the United Kingdom, which 
caused the British pound to appreciate not only 
against the euro, but against a number of cur -
rencies. Then, when the Bank of England did in fact raise interest rates at the beginning of 
November  , the pound came under downward 
pressure when the absence of indications of 
further interest rate rises disappointed investor 
expectations. As this report went to press, the 
euro stood at £0.89, up 1.4% on its level at the 
end of June.
Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro appreciated by 1.8% 
overall compared with the end of June. The 
marked appreciation of the euro against the 
yen and the US dollar was exceeded by its ap -
preciation against the Swiss franc (+6.9%). For 
a while, the euro was trading at CHF1.17, its Euro appreciates 
against the yen...
… and against 
the pound  sterling
Effective euro exchange rate strongerExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM J J A S OND
2016 20171.051.101.151.201.25
110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
9095100105Daily data, log scale
US$
£¥against the ...
Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1... US dollar
Launch exchangerate: ¥133.73
 1... yen
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1... pound sterling
Launch exchangerate: 103.12
 1Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
33

highest level since January 2015. On the other 
hand, the single currency depreciated against a 
number of other currencies, including the 
Czech koruna (-2.4%). The price competitive -
ness of euro area suppliers deteriorated some -
what as a result of the euro’s appreciation, but 
in terms of the long-  term average their com -
petitive position can currently continue to be 
regarded as neutral.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
In recent months, bond markets have been 
driven mainly by the influence of more optimis -
tic expectations regarding economic activity 
and a reassessment of monetary policy. Yields 
fell until the beginning of September, when 
many market participants gradually revised 
their short- lived expectation, which had arisen 
towards the end of the second quarter, that a 
departure from the very expansionary monet -
ary policy in the euro area might be in the off -
ing earlier than previously expected. Investors 
increasingly withdrew funds from safe- haven 
investments in light of increased economic 
confidence and declining risk aversion, buoying 
yields for a time. However, following the deci -
sion of the ECB Governing Council on 26 Octo -
ber to continue the asset purchase programme beyond the end of the year, with a monthly 
purchase amount of €30 billion from the be -
ginning of next year until at least September 
2018, yields declined again perceptibly. As this 
report went to press, the yield on ten- year Fed -
eral bonds stood at 0.3%, 6 basis points lower 
than at the end of the previous quarter.
Together with the yields on ten- year Bunds, the 
entire yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities shifted downwards. As the decline in 
yields in the short- term maturity spectrum was 
more pronounced than in the long- term matur -
ity spectrum, the curve also became somewhat 
steeper. Most recently, yields up to a residual 
maturity of just under seven years were nega -
tive, while yields up to just shy of the five- year 
maturity category were lower than the deposit 
facility rate of -0.4%. Yields in the short- term 
maturity spectrum still seem to be markedly in -
fluenced by scarcity premiums, which are likely 
to reflect, inter alia,  the advantages of Federal 
securities in terms of their liquidity and their 
use in derivative financial instruments.
Yield spreads between ten- year Federal bonds 
and government bonds of other euro area 
countries fell for the most part, with the GDP- 
weighted average of yield spreads over Bunds 
narrowing by 10 basis points to 81 basis points. 
The spreads on Portuguese government bonds 
fell particularly sharply after a credit rating 
agency raised Portugal’s rating by one notch to 
investment grade, citing progress in the coun -
try’s debt situation and economic performance. 
The spreads on Italian government bonds, 
which also decreased significantly, were like -
wise influenced by positive reports on eco -
nomic growth and by an improved rating. In 
the period under review, yields on Spanish gov -
ernment bonds were strongly affected by the 
referendum on Catalan independence and the 
heightened uncertainty about how this political 
conflict would play out. In this context, the 
yield mark- ups on Spanish government bonds 
rose markedly for a while. However, towards 
the end of the reporting period, the political 
uncertainty faded somewhat into the back -Bond markets 
shaped by  economic  confidence and monetary policyDownward shift in yield curve
Narrowing of yield spreads in the euro areaYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.40.6
––––+++
Residual maturity in years16 November 201730 June 2017%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
34

ground from the perspective of market partici -
pants. As a result, the yield on Spanish govern -
ment bonds widened slightly.
Similarly to European government bonds, 
US Treasuries also saw declining yields until the 
beginning of September. On the one hand, 
market participants initially somewhat lowered 
their expectations of policy rate hikes in the 
United States following the publication of the 
minutes of the Federal Open Market Commit -
tee which revealed the discussion it had held 
on monetary policy. On the other hand, height -
ened geopolitical tensions such as the North 
Korea conflict increased demand for safe assets 
and thus also placed US Treasury yields under 
pressure. Subsequently, however, yields were 
increasingly boosted by positive economic re -
ports and the planned US tax reform. This was 
mainly driven by market participants’ expect -
ations that the tax reform would increase the 
US national debt and at the same time poten -
tially reduce demand for US  Treasuries.1 Fur-
thermore, following the Fed’s announcement 
at the end of September that it would grad -
ually reduce its balance sheet, market partici -
pants were again more confident of further 
policy rate rises. Against this background, US 
yields rose relatively sharply after having previ -
ously moved broadly in line with long- term 
yields in the euro area. On balance, they re -
covered from their decline in July and August 
and rose slightly to 2.4%.
In the United Kingdom, yield developments 
were dominated by market participants’ ex -
pectations about monetary policy and ongoing 
uncertainty about UK trade links with the EU 
after Brexit. The Bank of England’s decision to 
raise key interest rates by 25 basis points at the 
beginning of November, which was the first 
hike in interest rates in over ten years, had 
been largely anticipated by investors and is 
likely to have buoyed yields in advance of the 
decision. However, yields fell slightly immedi -
ately after interest rates were raised, implying 
that market participants had somewhat 
lowered their expectations of further interest rate increases. In addition, the uncertainty as -
sociated with the Brexit negotiations continued 
to put pressure on yields, which were, on bal -
ance, virtually unchanged from their level at 
the end of June. As this report went to press, 
yields in Japan remained practically unchanged 
at 0.1%. Yields on Japanese government bonds 
are still very much being influenced by the Bank 
of Japan’s yield curve control programme, 
which aims to maintain the yield on ten- year 
government bonds at close to 0%.
The average market- based inflation expect -
ations for the coming years in the euro area 
continued to follow a slight upward trajectory 
across all maturities, particularly for short hori -
zons. The five- year forward inflation rates in Slight increase 
in US yields on balance
Yields in the 
United Kingdom and Japan largely unchangedRise in forward inflation ratesYields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.7
–+++++++++% pa, weekly averages
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
Kingdom
1 An important element of the planned tax reform is a one- 
time repatriation tax at a low rate to bring corporate profits 
invested offshore back to the United States. As, according 
to market observers, some of these profits have been in -
vested in US Treasuries, such a repatriation of profits could 
prompt companies to reduce their exposure to US govern -
ment securities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
35

five years derived from inflation swaps rose 
relatively moderately by 9 basis points to 1.7%. 
At the same time, the probability of deflation 
over the next five years based on options data 
declined and is currently close to a multi- year 
low. Unlike the market- based forward inflation 
rates, the inflation expectations for the euro area six to ten years ahead, as computed by 
Consensus Economics on the basis of surveys, 
remained virtually unchanged of late at 1.9%. 
When interpreting this discrepancy, it is neces -
sary to bear in mind the possible liquidity and 
inflation risk premiums that influence market-  
based measures and reduce their informative 
value in economic terms.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with a maturity of seven to ten years have con -
tinued to decrease since the end of June. Bonds 
issued by non- financial corporations recorded a 
decline of 21 basis points, delivering a yield of 
1.4% as this report went to press. Meanwhile, 
yields on bonds issued by financial corporations 
fell by just under ½ percentage point to 1.9%. 
As in the government bond markets, the fact 
that many market participants’ expectations of 
a continued highly accommodative monetary 
policy strengthened over the course of the 
quarter is likely to have played a role in this de -
velopment. Up to the beginning of August, the 
market situation helped to gradually push the 
yields generated by both corporate sectors 
back down to their low level recorded in June 
and, after the last ECB  Governing Council 
meeting, to squeeze them even further. Des -
pite a parallel decline in the yields on govern -
ment bonds, yield spreads in the corporate sec -
tor over safe Federal bonds fell by 37 and 11 
basis points respectively for financial and non- 
financial corporations during the reporting 
period. Compared with their five- year average, 
financing conditions for enterprises therefore 
remain highly favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €257½ billion in the third quarter of 
2017, putting it slightly below its previous-  
quarter level (€265 billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net re -
demptions of instruments amounted to €22½ 
billion on balance. Moreover, foreign borrow -
ers placed debt securities worth €13 billion in 
the German market. The outstanding volume 
of debt instruments in the German market Decline in yields 
on corporate bonds
Net redemptions 
in the bond marketForward inflation rates and expectations in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. 1 Derived from the fixed cash flow arising 
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual 
inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco) realised over the next 
five or ten years. Weekly averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017Five-year 
forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swaps 1%
1.21.41.61.82.0Consensus inflation expectations
in six to ten years
Spreads of ten-year government bonds over German Federal bonds
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 201702004006008001 000 1 0001 200 1 2001 400 1 4001 600 1 6001 800 1 800Basis points, daily data
Italy
SpainIreland Portugal
FranceGreeceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
36

therefore decreased by €10 billion in the period 
under review.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€17½ billion, following net issuance of €8 bil -
lion in the second quarter. In particular, they 
redeemed other bank securities that can be 
structured flexibly (€14½ billion) but also, to a 
lesser extent, mortgage Pfandbriefe and public 
Pfandbriefe (€2 billion in each case).
The public sector redeemed bonds totalling 
€8½ billion net in the third quarter. These fig -
ures include issues by resolution agencies set 
up for German banks, which are ascribed to 
the public sector for statistical purposes. Cen -
tral government itself principally redeemed ten- 
year bonds (€8½ billion), but also two- year 
Federal Treasury notes (Schätze) totalling €3 bil -
lion, as well as Treasury discount paper (Bubills) 
worth €2½ billion. This contrasted with net is -
suance of five- year Federal notes (Bobls) in the 
amount of €9 billion and 30-year bonds worth 
€2½ billion. In the quarter under review, state 
governments redeemed their own bonds to the 
tune of €1½ billion in net terms.
German enterprises took advantage of the fa -
vourable financial market conditions and issued 
debt securities to the value of €3 billion in net 
terms in the third quarter, solely issuing bonds 
with a maturity of more than one year, on bal -
ance.
The Bundesbank was the predominant buyer of 
debt securities in the German bond market in 
the third quarter, adding €34½ billion worth of 
paper to its portfolio, mainly under the Euro -
system’s asset purchase programmes. Domes -
tic non- banks expanded their bond portfolios 
by €7 billion, placing a particular emphasis on 
foreign instruments. By contrast, non- resident 
investors parted with German debt securities to 
the tune of €27½ billion net, which, on bal -
ance, mainly took the form of bonds issued by 
the public sector. German credit institutions 
likewise disposed of interest- bearing paper Fall in credit 
institutions’ cap-ital market debt
Net public sec-
tor redemptions
Issuance of 
 corporate bonds 
mainly in the 
longer-term maturity  segment
Bundesbank 
chief buyer of debt securitiesYield spreads of corporate bondsin the euro area
*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 34.4 31.7 17.6
Credit institutions – 24.2 – 13.6 – 23.6
of which
Foreign debt securities –  8.9 0.9 –  5.7
Deutsche Bundesbank 48.9 38.4 34.3
Other sectors 9.8 6.9 6.8
of which
Domestic debt securities –  5.0 – 11.3 – 14.1
Non-residents – 28.1 –  1.0 – 27.4
SharesResidents 11.9 –  1.4 12.8
Credit institutions 0.6 3.1 –  3.0
of which
Domestic shares 0.1 6.7 –  0.7
Non-banks 11.3 –  4.5 15.8
of which
Domestic shares 0.4 –  3.3 5.1
Non-residents 1.2 –  2.2 –  2.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 17.4 9.3 10.5
Investment in open-end funds 3.8 7.6 8.9
of which
Equity funds 1.9 1.1 3.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
37

(€23½ billion), the vast majority of which was, 
on balance, domestic bank securities.
Equity market
The positive economic outlook and the expan -
sionary monetary policy stance in the euro area 
and Japan led to significant gains in the inter -
national equity markets in some instances. All 
in all, the political uncertainty triggered by the 
North Korea conflict, the ongoing Brexit nego -
tiations and the efforts in Catalonia to secure 
independence played only a minor, regionally 
limited role for market participants. Buoyed by better than expected quarterly earnings and 
higher medium-  term profit expectations, the 
US S&P 500 index was up by a total of 6.7%, 
posting new all- time highs on several occasions 
during the reporting period. The less expan -
sionary monetary policy stance on the part of 
the US Federal Reserve that had been antici -
pated by market participants did not lead to 
any strong reactions in the equity market. 
Meanwhile, the appreciation of the Japanese 
Nikkei 225 by 11.6% was even more pro -
nounced. In addition to the favourable eco -
nomic outlook, voters’ affirmation of the Jap -
anese government in the parliamentary elec -
tions, as predicted by most investors, and the 
prospect of a continued highly expansionary 
monetary policy stance presumably served to 
boost prices. The broad Euro Stoxx index was 
up by 4.1% as this report went to press, while 
the CDAX rose by as much as 6.9% and, as 
with the S&P 500, temporarily climbed to a ser -
ies of new all- time highs. In this context, much 
like with the other international indices, the 
European markets initially remained frozen in a 
relatively long period of sideways movement at 
the beginning of the period under review be -
fore then steadily turning upwards from Sep -
tember onwards, resulting in marked price 
gains. In addition to good corporate figures, 
the prospect of a continuation of the asset pur -
chase programme in the euro area had a par -
ticularly positive impact on prices. Notwith -
standing the slow pace of Brexit negotiations 
and the tightening of monetary policy initiated 
by the Bank of England, the FTSE  All-  Share 
index also went up in the United Kingdom, 
namely by 1.4%. In Spain, against the back -
drop of the troubles in Catalonia, the domestic 
equity market suffered losses (-3.1%).
The price/ earnings ratio, calculated on the basis 
of analysts’ earnings estimates for the next 12 
months, currently stands above the relevant 
five- year averages for both the Euro Stoxx and 
the S&P 500, pointing to a high valuation. A 
further indicator that can be used to assess 
stock market valuation is the implied equity risk 
premium, which is derived from a dividend dis -Marked price 
gains in inter-national equity marketsValuations up on both sides of the AtlanticEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Im-
plied equity risk premiums determined using dividend discount 
models  on  the  basis  of  earnings  and  dividend  expectations 
(I/B/E/S).
Deutsche BundesbankLin scaleRisk premiums on
the stock market
 1Bank indices
%
2015 2016 2017Beginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
Overall market indicesWeekly averages
60708090100110120130140
48121690100110120130Euro area (Euro Stoxx)
United Kingdom (FTSE All-Share)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
total total
banks banksEuro Stoxx S&P 500Euro area
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
38

count model.2 The size of this surcharge, de -
manded by investors for a risky investment in 
comparison to a safe investment, hardly 
changed in the period under review and re -
mains close to the respective averages for the 
past five years both for the S&P  500 and the 
Euro Stoxx. Hence, this figure does not, in the 
first instance, suggest any immediate overvalu -
ation. In contrast to the price/ earnings ratio, 
the risk premium is, however, a relative meas -
ure that considers alternative investment forms 
in the currently very low interest rate environ -
ment, which may itself be unsustainable. If one 
compares the two currency areas, it is notice -
able that both of these indicators signal a 
higher valuation for the US stock market in 
each case.
During the reporting period, bank shares 
underperformed the respective broad aggre -
gate indices on both sides of the Atlantic. US 
banks recorded price gains of 5.1% on average, 
whereas euro area bank shares saw only a 
moderate increase in value (up by 0.5%). While 
Portuguese bank securities experienced a sharp 
increase in prices, Greek bank shares, in par -
ticular, recorded significant losses in the period 
under review. Following considerable volatility 
because of the uncertainty arising from the 
conflict in Catalonia, Spanish bank shares like -
wise recorded net losses, roughly comparable 
to those in the Spanish market as a whole.
Domestic enterprises issued €2 billion worth of 
new shares in the third quarter of 2017, the 
majority of which were listed securities. The 
volume of foreign equities outstanding in the 
German market rose by €8½ billion. On bal -
ance, equities were acquired exclusively by do -
mestic non-  banks (€16 billion). German credit 
institutions and foreign investors trimmed their 
share portfolios by €3 billion and €2½ billion 
respectively.Bank shares 
weaker than those of the market as a whole
Equity issuance 
and acquisitionMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I Current account + 58.2 + 55.2 + 63.0
1 Goods 1 + 67.0 + 67.4 + 68.5
2 Services 2 – 11.7 –  4.0 – 11.1
3 Primary income + 13.5 +  4.7 + 16.4
4 Secondary income – 10.6 – 12.8 – 11.0
II Capital account +  0.2 0.0 +  0.4
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 61.5 + 64.7 + 52.5
1 Direct investment +  7.6 + 16.8 –  0.8
Domestic investment 
abroad + 14.7 + 22.7 + 21.4
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  7.1 +  5.9 + 22.2
2 Portfolio investment + 48.4 + 25.0 + 58.2
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 19.3 + 20.5 + 29.2
Shares
3 +  8.0 –  2.4 +  5.2
Investment fund shares 4+  8.9 +  4.4 + 11.0
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  0.5 –  4.4 +  0.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 +  5.2 + 19.5 + 14.7
of which
Denominated in euro 6 –  4.4 + 13.4 +  5.2
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  2.8 –  1.0 –  1.8
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 29.1 –  4.6 – 29.0
Shares 3 +  1.2 –  2.2 –  2.3
Investment fund shares –  2.2 –  1.3 +  0.7
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 24.1 +  0.8 – 21.8
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 20.1 –  2.2 – 18.9
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  4.0 –  1.8 –  5.6
3 Financial derivatives 9 + 10.5 +  2.4 +  1.4
4 Other investment 10 –  4.8 + 20.2 –  6.5
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 – 30.4 –  7.7 – 12.5
Enterprises and  households
12 + 14.1 +  4.4 –  3.4
General government +  7.9 –  2.0 –  8.3
Bundesbank +  3.5 + 25.6 + 17.7
5 Reserve assets –  0.3 +  0.4 +  0.2
IV Errors and omissions 13 +  3.1 +  9.5 – 10.9
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Stock market valuations – 
theoretical basics and enhancing the metrics, Monthly Re -
port, April 2016, pp 15-29.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
39

During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €19½ 
billion, after raising funds totalling €17 billion in 
the previous three- month period. These inflows 
were mainly channelled to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€10½ billion). 
Among the asset classes, mixed securities-  
based funds attracted the most inflows (€11 
billion). Equity funds and open- end real estate 
funds also placed new shares in the market 
(€5½ billion and €2 billion respectively). For -
eign funds distributed in the German market 
attracted inflows of €11 billion net in the third 
quarter of 2017. Domestic non- banks were the 
main buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth 
€28½ billion to their portfolios. Domestic credit 
institutions and foreign investors purchased 
mutual fund shares worth €1 billion and €½ 
billion respectively.
Direct investment
In contrast to cross- border portfolio invest -
ment, which saw net outflows to the tune of 
€58 billion in the third quarter of 2017, direct 
investment generated net capital imports of €1 
billion.Foreign investors stepped up their direct invest -
ment in Germany between July and September 
2017 by €22 billion, doing so by expanding 
their intra-  group lending (€16½ billion) and 
building up equity capital (€5½ billion). In re -
gional terms, German enterprises saw sizeable 
inflows of funds from the Netherlands (€6½ 
billion), Switzerland (€3 billion) and Ireland 
(€2½ billion). By contrast, investors from the 
United States withdrew €½ billion worth of 
funds from Germany.
Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises amounted to €21½ billion net in the third 
quarter of 2017. Domestic investors boosted 
their equity capital by a total of €17½ billion. 
On the one hand, this was achieved in the form 
of equity capital in the narrower sense (€8½ bil -
lion), but also through reinvested earnings (€9 
billion). Moreover, German enterprises ex -
panded their intra-  group lending (€3½ billion), 
first and foremost by granting trade credits. 
Countries receiving substantial direct invest -
ment from Germany in the third quarter of 2017 
included the Netherlands (€7 billion), the United 
States (€3½ billion) and Luxembourg (€3 bil -
lion). By contrast, France and Brazil saw net 
withdrawals of funds (€1½ billion in each case).Sales and 
 purchases of mutual fund shares
Direct invest -
ment sees 
 capital importsForeign direct investment in Germany
German direct 
investment abroadDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
40

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The sharp upturn in the German economy is 
continuing. According to the Federal Statistical 
Office’s flash estimate, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) in the third quarter of 2017 grew 
by a seasonally and calendar- adjusted 0.8% on 
the quarter on the back of very strong growth 
in the first half of the year.1 This means that 
aggregate output has been expanding consid -
erably faster than potential output since the 
beginning of the year. As a result, aggregate 
capacity utilisation is now probably being much 
more strongly utilised than on the longer- term 
average. Sentiment in trade and industry, which 
is at a record high, the excellent order situation 
in industry along with ongoing very positive 
consumer confidence suggest that the strong 
upturn in the German economy will also con -
tinue in the fourth quarter.
Buoyant industrial activity since the beginning 
of the year was the main driver of the strong 
upswing in the third quarter of 2017. Business- 
related services sectors, too, are likely to have 
shown marked growth in line with the brisk ac -
tivity in industry. In the construction sector, on 
the other hand, which was still a second major 
driver of growth in the first half of the year, a 
further increase in activity was probably not 
possible. Given the high level of production, 
however, outstanding sentiment and large 
stocks of orders in the sector, this should not 
be interpreted as the end of the current con -
struction boom.
On the demand side, GDP growth was broadly 
based. It was supported by both external and 
domestic stimuli, with the former coming more 
to the fore in the wake of buoyant global activ -
ity. Favourable sales opportunities in the export 
markets combined with rising capacity utilisa -tion contributed to a significant boost to invest -
ment in machinery and equipment along with 
exports. Following earlier large increases, private 
consumption is likely to have persisted at roughly 
the same level as in the previous quarter.
German exports rose significantly again in the 
third quarter of 2017. As in the previous quar -
ter, German enterprises’ export business – ac -
cording to the figures available up to August – 
were the beneficiary, in particular, of strong 
demand from the euro area. This is a reflection 
of the continuing economic upturn in the other 
euro area countries. By contrast, exports of 
goods to non- euro area countries increased 
only marginally. Even so, developments were 
quite mixed in this respect. For example, the 
marked depreciation of the pound sterling led 
to a substantial fall in exports of goods to the 
UK in the third quarter. Trade with Russia also Germany’s 
strong economic upturn continues in Q3
Industry is the 
main driver of growth
External 
impulses on the demand side more in the foregroundStrong export 
demand, 
 especially in 
the euro area
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017102104106108110112114
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1
1 Furthermore, the growth rate in the first quarter was re -
vised upwards by 0.2 percentage point to +0.9%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
41

suffered as a result of the depreciation of its 
national currency. While German exporters sold 
significantly fewer goods to the new industrial 
countries in Asia, exports to the United States, 
the south and east Asian emerging market 
economies and the OPEC countries were largely 
stagnating. Business with China was booming, 
however, and posted quite considerable 
growth. Significantly more goods were also 
being exported to Japan and to the countries 
of central and eastern Europe.
Against the backdrop of outstanding export ac -
tivity and the ongoing increase in capacity util -
isation, enterprises appear to have finally aban -doned their caution to invest in new machinery 
and equipment. Investment in machinery and 
equipment is likely to have undergone a signifi -
cant expansion in the third quarter of 2017 as 
well. This is suggested by the value of capital 
goods manufacturers’ domestic sales, which 
were on a clear upward trajectory. The strong 
increase in capital goods imports – the figures 
for which are available up to August – likewise 
points to a high propensity to invest. Enter -
prises were clearly holding back on expanding 
their motor vehicle fleets, however. This is indi -
cated by the number of commercial vehicle 
registrations, which fell significantly during the 
reporting period. It is difficult to ascertain how 
much this has to do with the discussion about 
imposing bans on older diesel cars in a number 
of German cities. This debate has not had any 
noticeable impact on motor vehicle production 
overall.
Construction investment in the third quarter of 
2017 was unable to match its strong upward 
momentum in the first half of the year. Never -
theless, construction investment is likely to 
have declined only marginally and still be at a 
very high level. Turnover in the main construc -
tion sector – figures for which are available up 
to August – indicates that enterprises have sig -
nificantly expanded their investment in non-  
residential construction. Housing construction 
activity and public construction investment, on 
the other hand, are likely to have experienced a 
perceptible decline.
Following the extremely strong growth in the 
second quarter, private consumption in the 
third quarter of 2017 probably persisted at 
roughly the same level as in the previous quar -
ter. Real retail sales (excluding motor vehicles) 
rose at a markedly slower pace than they did in 
the second quarter. In mail order business, in 
particular, there was a perceptible slowdown in 
sales growth in terms of value. Sales of furni -
ture and furnishings and household appliances 
even showed a significant decline. By contrast, 
more information and communications tech -
nology (ICT) equipment was being sold and Investment in 
machinery and equipment still on an upward trajectory
Construction 
investment at a high level
Private 
 consumption 
subdued in Q3100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017July-
Aug100110120130
July-
Aug
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
price-adjusted 1110120130140
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
42

trade in textiles and clothing was also flourish -
ing. Furthermore, car dealers probably recorded 
a significant increase in motor vehicle sales to 
households. This is suggested in any event by 
the quite considerably higher number of pri -
vate passenger car registrations. The significant 
discounts and premiums for trade- ins of older 
diesel vehicles in connection with the recent 
emissions scandal might have played a part in 
such high sales figures.
Imports grew significantly in the third quarter 
of 2017. This was due chiefly to brisk industrial 
and export activity, which was propelling de -
mand for imported intermediate goods in par -
ticular. The high level of capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing is also likely to have led to a 
marked increase in capital goods imports. 
Owing to declining import prices, however, 
growth in the value of imports was substan -
tially more muted overall. The regional break -
down – according to the figures available up to 
August – shows that considerably more prod -
ucts were imported, especially from other euro 
area countries. By contrast, import demand 
from non- euro area countries declined in terms 
of value. Consumer demand in Germany for 
goods from the United States was considerably 
weaker than in the previous quarter. Exports 
from China and Japan likewise fell substantially. 
Imports from the United Kingdom, on the 
other hand, showed a considerable increase, 
although the depreciation of the pound ster -
ling is likely to have played a part in this. Also in 
very great demand were products from central 
and eastern Europe, the new industrial coun -
tries in Asia as well as the south and east Asian 
emerging market economies. The value of im -
ports from the OPEC countries were also on an 
upward trajectory. This was probably due to 
the rebound in crude oil prices. Imports from 
Russia, on the other hand, showed a substan -
tial fall in terms of value, probably as a result of 
the sluggish movement in natural gas prices.Sectoral trends
Industrial activity remains very buoyant, and in -
dustrial output in the third quarter of 2017 
even outpaced its already dynamic growth in 
the first half of the year. Output rose steeply by 
a seasonally adjusted 1¾% on the quarter. Al -
though motor vehicle manufacturers recorded 
the strongest increase in output, overall growth 
was quite broadly based, which meant that 
output was stepped up considerably in other 
sectors, too. As a result, manufacturers of 
intermediate, capital and consumer goods ex -
panded their production on a similar scale.
According to the Ifo Institute, utilisation of tan -
gible fixed assets in manufacturing was also in -
creasing on the back of the buoyant industrial 
activity, reaching its highest level in almost ten 
years. Capacity utilisation exceeded its prior-  
quarter level in the intermediate and capital Further rise in 
import demand
Industrial activity very buoyant
Even heavier 
utilisation of industrial tangible  fixed assetsOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Industry
105110115120
100105110115120125130135140
Construction1Main 
construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
43

goods sectors, while it declined in the con -
sumer goods sector.
Construction activity experienced a lull in the 
third quarter of 2017. After a very strong ex -
pansion in construction output in the first half 
of the year, activity in the construction sector 
declined significantly in the third quarter of 
2017 in seasonally adjusted terms. Output in 
the finishing trades contracted somewhat more 
strongly than it did in the main construction 
sector where the no more than slight decline in 
civil engineering had a stabilising impact. Des -
pite the lower overall level of activity, however, 
it should not be assumed that the current con -
struction boom is coming to a sudden end. 
Rather  , the construction sector is likely to be 
increasingly reaching the limits of its capacity, 
making it more difficult to expand output at 
the previous pace. This is suggested by the 
continuing high level of production, the sub -
stantial backlog of orders in the main construc -
tion sector, the high degree of equipment util -
isation, the growing shortage of labour, and 
the assessment of the business situation in the 
main construction sector, which is at a record 
level.
Expansion in the services sector is likely to have 
been somewhat more subdued in the third 
quarter of 2017 than in the previous quarter. 
Price- adjusted wholesale sales probably de -
clined slightly following a substantial rise in the 
second quarter. In line with this, the assess -
ment of the business situation in this sector, 
which had reached a record level some time 
ago, declined somewhat, according to the Ifo 
Institute. Retail sales (excluding motor vehicles) 
and motor vehicle sales also grew rather slug -
gishly during the summer months. The number 
of newly registered passenger cars in the third 
quarter fell short of its high level in the previous 
quarter. However, robust growth in other ser -
vices, excluding trade, is likely to have con -
tinued in the reporting period, as enterprises 
are still assessing the business situation in Ger -
many very positively.Labour market
The reporting quarter saw the dynamic expan -
sion of the German economy bringing a further 
improvement to the existing very positive la -
bour market situation. Employment rose 
strongly in the third quarter, unemployment 
continued to decline from its low level, and 
enterprises  reported even more vacancies. The 
growth in employment was due primarily to an 
increasing number of jobs subject to social se -
curity contributions. By contrast, other forms of 
employment, such as exclusively low- paid part- 
time employment or self- employment, showed 
a slight decline. The outlook for the next few 
months remains favourable.
In the third quarter of 2017, the total seasonally 
adjusted number of persons in work in Ger -
many rose by 134,000, or 0.3%. This is roughly 
in line with the increase in the previous quarter. 
According to the initial figures of the Federal 
Employment Agency for July and August, the 
number of employees subject to social security 
contributions went up by as much as 0.5% 
compared with the second- quarter average.
The rise in regular jobs subject to social security 
contributions was broadly based. The largest 
increases in employment subject to social se -
curity contributions, in turn, were in business-  
related services (excluding temporary agency 
employment), the health and social services 
sector, as well as in the information and com -
munication sector. On the other hand, the 
more moderate growth in temporary agency 
employment continued following the introduc -
tion, on 1 April 2017, of new regulations con -
cerning the maximum period of labour leasing 
and the equal pay principle. In the manufactur -
ing and construction sectors, growth in em -
ployment subject to social security contribu -
tions was similarly far below average, despite 
the positive orders situation. Supply shortages 
may be restricting larger- scale expansions in 
this instance. In both sectors, labour shortages 
are now being cited as the major obstacle to Construction 
activity at a high level despite decline
Expansion in the 
services sector 
somewhat more 
subduedLabour market: situation and outlook still very favourable
Sharp rise in 
employment in Q3
Increase in 
employment subject to social security contri-butions broadly spread across sectorsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
44

an expansion in output.2 In the finance and in -
surance industries, employment has contracted 
in recent months.
The increase of 746,000 in the number of em -
ployees subject to social security contributions 
in August compared with same month of 2016 
was due in roughly equal part to German na -
tionals and migrants. In the case of German na -
tionals, these were, to a certain extent, persons 
switching from other forms of employment, 
such as self- employment or exclusively low-  
paid part- time employment. Given a trend de -
cline in the number of German nationals of 
working age, the crucial factor is likely to have 
been the very high demand for labour motivat -
ing German nationals, as potential members of 
the labour force, to take up employment. Al -
though no data are available at the current end 
about the development of age and gender-  
specific employment rates, the labour force 
participation of older persons is likely to have 
shown a considerable rise again after having 
been dampened for a time by the introduction 
of the option of retiring on a full pension at the 
age of 63. The labour force participation rate 
among women is also likely to have been going 
up, as in the previous years. The number of 
non- German nationals in jobs subject to social 
security contributions rose by 363,000 on the 
same month last year. The east European EU 
member states remained the most significant 
region of origin, even though their percentage 
share went down. Persons from the eight main 
countries of origin of asylum seekers also be -
came a more significant factor in employment 
subject to social security contributions.3
In the third quarter of 2017, registered un -
employment declined somewhat more slowly 
in seasonally adjusted terms than in the pre -Increase in 
employment subject to social security contri-butions driven in equal part by German nation-als and migrants
Further decline 
in unemploy-mentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Oct41.542.042.543.043.544.044.5
28.529.029.530.030.531.031.532.00+500+1,000
2.53.03.5
–5000+500OctSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctMillion
July-
AugMillion
Million400500600700Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change 1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change 1
2 See DIHK- Economic-  Survey Fall 2017.
3 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/ Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung (2017): Migrations- Monitor Arbeits -
markt – Eckwerte Deutschland (October), Nuremberg. The 
Middle Eastern countries of Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, as well as the African countries of Eritrea, 
Nigeria and Somalia, are classed as being among the most 
significant countries of origin of asylum seekers.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
45

ceding quarters. On an average of the report -
ing period, the official unemployment figure 
was 21,000 lower than in the second quarter. 
The unemployment rate remained unchanged 
on average in the third quarter due to round -
ing, but has since declined and stood at 5.6% 
in October. The positive underlying cyclical 
trend is also reflected by the fact that signifi -
cantly fewer German nationals as well as non- 
German nationals who are not refugees were 
registered as unemployed at the end of the 
period under review (-175,000 in October com -
pared with the same month last year). This 
was, however, somewhat obscured by more 
persons being registered as unemployed in the 
context of forced migration. The slower rise in 
the number of such persons during the past 
few months is probably due to the increased 
use of labour market policy tools of the Federal 
Employment Agency and integration measures 
of the German Federal Office for Migration and 
Refugees.The leading labour market indicators predict 
that the very favourable development will con -
tinue in terms of both employment and un -
employment. According to the Ifo employment 
barometer, the employment plans of trade and 
industry for the next three months are still at a 
very high level and the autumn survey by the 
Association of German Chambers of Com -
merce and Industry also paints a similar picture 
for the next 12 months. The IAB labour market 
barometer also indicates a further expansion in 
employment. The Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s BA-  X job index is hitting ever new highs. 
This is mainly due to the rising number of re -
ported vacancies for jobs subject to social se -
curity contributions, while the turnover in jobs 
tends to be stagnating. There was a particularly 
steep rise in the number of seasonally adjusted 
vacancies in the case of business- related service 
providers and in the production sector. At least 
in some instances, labour shortages are likely 
to be restricting employment growth. The un -
employment subcomponent of the IAB labour 
market barometer has also shown a significant 
improvement recently, suggesting a further de -
cline in the unemployment figure for the com -
ing months.
Wages and prices
Wage growth remained moderate in the third 
quarter of 2017, as in the preceding quarters. 
At only 2.0%, the rise in negotiated wage rates 
including additional benefits and one- off pay -
ments in the third quarter of 2017 was just as 
weak as in the second quarter. The latest col -
lective pay agreements likewise provide for no 
more than moderate wage increases. More -
over, low rates of growth in the second- stage 
of incremental wage increases as well as, in in -
dividual industries, months with a pay freeze 
based on agreements from the previous year 
are still having an impact. Extremely positive 
economic activity, staffing shortages in the la -
bour market and the effects of the increase in 
the minimum wage at the beginning of the 
year suggest that actual earnings have gone up Labour market 
outlook remains very good
Wage growth 
still moderate2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
H1Q3H1
Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
46

more sharply than negotiated rates of pay. 
Weak productivity growth in earlier years is 
likely to have contributed to the long- discernible 
dampened wage growth. However, over the 
past few years it has been chiefly the high level 
of net migration from other EU countries 
which, with a time lag, has been curbing the 
wage- boosting effect of the increasingly tight 
labour market situation in Germany, as it has 
expanded the supply of available labour. If such 
wage- dampening factors become less import -
ant, wages and salaries could show stronger 
growth in future.
The last remaining exceptions to the general 
statutory minimum wage will expire by the end 
of 2017. However, in line with the generally 
binding minimum wage in their sector or with 
the statutory provisions, low- skilled workers in 
the meat industry, agriculture and forestry, 
horticulture, large laundries4 and newspaper 
delivery firms were still being remunerated 
below the rate of €8.84 per hour during the 
reporting period. From 1  January 2018 on -
wards, all employees will then be entitled to 
the statutory minimum wage5. The impact on 
the rise in actual earnings is likely to be mar -
ginal due to the relatively small number of em -
ployees affected.
In the third quarter of 2017, consumer prices as 
measured by the Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices were going up more sharply again 
after showing a slower increase for a time in 
the second quarter on the back of lower en -
ergy prices. The increase in prices, which was a 
seasonally adjusted +0.5% on the quarter, was 
just as sharp as in the final quarter of 2016 and 
the first quarter of 2017. Energy prices showed 
a further decline owing to the appreciation of 
the euro, despite higher crude oil prices, but 
food prices went up markedly at the same 
time, with roughly one- third of the increase 
being due to considerable increases in the price 
of butter. Prices of industrial goods (excluding 
energy) likewise rose distinctly, meaning that 
the appreciation of the euro, which was re -
flected in lower import prices, had probably not worked its way through to the consumer 
level. Services became substantially more ex -
pensive overall. This was mainly on account of 
travel services, but the prices of other services 
(excluding rents) also showed a marked in -
crease, as in the previous quarter. The increase 
in rents, which had been somewhat higher Exceptions to 
the general statutory min-imum wage only until end of year
Consumer prices 
excluding 
energy and food 
up significantly 
in Q3Einfuhrpreise
Export pricesImport, export, producer and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201795100105110
100105110
95100105
0123
+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
%
Oct100105110
OctImport prices
4 The sectoral generally binding minimum wage of €8.75 
per hour at the large laundries expired on 30 September 
2017. In the agriculture, forestry and horticulture sectors, 
the sectoral generally binding minimum wage was raised 
as of 1 November 2017 from €8.60 to €9.10.
5 Exceptions to the general statutory minimum wage will 
continue to apply for certain types of traineeships, volun -
teers, persons under the age of 18 without vocational 
training as well as for the first six months of employment in 
the case of re- employment of the long- term unemployed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
47

than on the long- term average since the begin -
ning of the final quarter of 2016, slowed down 
again. Overall, annual price inflation went up 
from +1.6% in the previous quarter to +1.7%.6 
Excluding energy and food, the rate likewise 
went up by 0.1 percentage point to 1.5%, and 
was thus, as in the second quarter, well above 
its average since 1999. Admittedly, a part in 
this was played by the steep rise in the price of 
travel services, clothing and footwear, which 
generally fluctuate quite sharply (see pages 49 
to 51). Even if these volatile components are 
excluded, however, the rate went up slightly to 
+1.3% and was thus above its average since 
the introduction of the euro.
In October, prices were down slightly on the 
month in seasonally adjusted terms, although 
food became significantly more expensive and 
housing rents were raised slightly. In particular, 
there was a distinct decline in the prices of ser -
vices due to lower premiums for motor vehicle 
insurance and a perceptible fall in the price of 
package holidays, which was unprecedented 
to this extent in the same month of earlier 
years. Prices of industrial goods (excluding en -
ergy) were slightly lower on the whole due to 
clothing. There were no significant adjustments 
in the case of energy. The year- on- year figure 
decreased from +1.8% to +1.5% overall, partly 
because the prices of several components went 
up fairly sharply in October 2016.7 Excluding 
energy and food prices, the year- on- year figure 
showed an even more marked fall from +1.5% 
to +1.1%. However, if travel services and cloth -
ing and footwear are additionally excluded, the 
fall in the rate was noticeably smaller and re -
mained slightly above the long- term average, 
even though the reform of long-  term care at 
the beginning of the year was still having a 
dampening impact on prices.
It may be assumed that headline inflation will 
fluctuate sharply in the coming months, owing, 
above all, to base effects in the case of energy, 
food, travel and clothing. On the other hand, 
leaving aside these volatile components, the 
rate is likely to accelerate gradually. In industrial domestic sales, there was a further hike in the 
prices of industrial goods (excluding energy) 
despite the appreciation in the second quarter. 
Furthermore, especially in the case of services, 
growing wage pressure is likely to go on being 
passed through to prices.
Orders received and outlook
Buoyed by flourishing industrial activity, the 
German economy is likely to remain on a strong 
expansionary path in the final quarter of 2017, 
too. The recent very strong inflow of manufac -
turing orders, in particular, suggests that indus -
trial output will continue to make a significant 
contribution to aggregate economic activity. In 
line with this, the stocks of industrial orders still 
being processed have, according to the Ifo In -
stitute, reached their highest level for more 
than a decade. Furthermore, brisk domestic 
and external demand, as well as the ongoing 
increase in capacity utilisation, are likely to 
make industrial enterprises significantly more 
willing to invest in new machinery and equip -
ment. Nevertheless, a growing shortage of 
skilled labour might place greater constraints 
on further increases in output in future. This is 
indicated by the Ifo survey results on produc -
tion hold- ups in manufacturing. In the con -
struction industry, too, a dwindling supply of 
skilled workers is likely to prevent output from 
expanding sharply. For the time being, con -
struction activity is therefore no longer ex -
pected to supply such strong stimuli for overall 
economic growth as it did in the first half of 
the year. Ultimately, the excellent labour mar -
ket setting and the continuing favourable out -
look for incomes will ensure that private con -
sumption gives a boost to domestic activity.
Sentiment in the German economy continues 
to be ebullient. In manufacturing, according to 
Ifo Institute data, there was an improvement in 
the assessment of both the business situation Prices declining 
slightly in Octo-ber mainly due to volatile  components
Core inflation to 
accelerate in coming months; headline infla-tion volatileSharp upturn likely to 
 continue
Ebullient mood 
in German  economy
6 The CPI figure was unchanged at +1.7%.
7 The CPI figure was +1.6% compared with +1.8%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
48

The volatility of the traditional core inﬂ  ation rate 
in Germany
In the short term, infl  ation rates are often 
affected by very volatile components. This is 
why infl  ation measures which attempt to 
eliminate the infl  uence of these volatile 
components in order to identify the under-
lying infl  ation trend play an important role 
for a monetary policy geared towards 
medium- term price stability. These types of 
core rates exclude certain components of 
consumption when measuring prices. Both 
internationally and in the euro area, the 
focus is usually on core infl  ation rates calcu-
lated using the consumer price index ex-cluding energy and food. The fl  uctuations in the prices of these categories of goods 
are, for the most part, exceptionally strong 
and irregular because of the infl  uence of 
international crude oil prices or due to wea-ther effects, for example.
However, there are also other goods whose 
prices are often very volatile. This is shown, 
for example, by the fact that traditional 
core infl  ation has also been subject to sharp 
fl  uctuations in Germany of late. From mid-
2016 to June 2017, annual HICP (Harmon-
ised Index of Consumer Prices) infl  ation ex-cluding energy and food initially rose clearly 
by 0.5  percentage point to 1.5% and re-
mained at this level for a few months. It fell again markedly to 1.1% in October. Against 
this background, determining the infl  ation 
trend requires a more detailed examination 
of the causes of volatility in core infl  ation and not just an analysis of the traditional 
core infl  ation rates.A detailed examination of the individual 
HICP components shows that the latest de-
velopments in the traditional core infl  ation 
rate were essentially determined by two 
variables, namely travel services1 and cloth-
ing2. Both components recently recorded a 
signifi  cant decline in infl  ation following a marked increase previously. Such strong 
fl  uctuations occur on a regular basis in in-
fl  ation of these components, which likewise 
shows that the traditional core rates with 
their focus on energy and food do not ex-
clude all volatile components of consump-
tion – in many cases not even the most 
volatile.
Since travel services and clothing make up a 
relatively high share of the consumption ex-penditure of an average German household (just over 5% in each case), these price fl  uc-
1 Travel services (HICP weighting in Germany 2017: 
5.5%) are composed of package holidays (3.8%), pas-
senger transport by air (0.4%) and accommodation 
services (1.3%).
2 Clothing (HICP weighting in Germany 2017: 5.2%) is 
composed of clothing materials (0.1%), clothing 
(3.8%), other garments and accessories (0.1%), clean-
ing, repair and hire of clothing (0.1%) and footwear 
(1.1%).Underlying inflation in Germany
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 exE = 
HICP excluding energy; exEuF = HICP excluding energy and un-
processed  food;  exEF  =  HICP  excluding  energy  and  food; exEFTC  =  HICP  excluding  energy,  food,  travel  and  clothing; 
Trim10 = the 10% trimmed mean; Trim30 = the 30% trimmed 
mean.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.53.0
++++++Range of indicators
for underlying inflation(exE, exEuF, exEF, exEFTC,Trim10, Trim30, median)
 1
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5 Contribution of travel and clothing
to HICP excluding energy and foodPercentage
pointsYear-on-year percentage change
HICP exEFTCHICP exEFDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
49

tuations have a clear impact on the core in-
fl  ation rate. The high volatility of prices for 
travel services compared with the previous 
year can mainly be explained by package 
holidays, which represent most of the travel 
services in the HICP . When recording the prices for package holidays, different des-
tinations are generally taken into account – in line with the travel habits of the German 
consumer. By way of exception to the standard price collection method,
3 the 
composition of this component varies over 
the course of the year, as the consumer is, for example, more likely to travel to Greece 
in certain months, whilst at other times of 
the year Spanish destinations are more at-
tractive. This means, for example, that year- on- year rates for package holidays are more 
likely to be shaped by price developments in Spain in certain months, while Greek 
prices likewise have an effect during other 
months of the year. If infl  ation in Spain 
should essentially differ from that in Greece, 
the change in the composition of the bas-
ket of goods can be enough in itself to re-sult in signifi  cant and irregular jumps in the annual infl  ation fi  gure in certain months. A 
detailed breakdown of the movements in the HICP sub- index for package holidays 
into changes in the prices of individual des-tinations and changes in the composition of 
destinations in the basket of goods is not possible, as unfortunately no offi   cial data 
are available on price developments in the 
individual destination areas. For some time 
now, this has made it diffi   cult not only to 
analyse prices but also to forecast infl  ation 
in the short term. It would therefore be 
helpful if the statistical database for record-
ing package holiday prices could be ex-panded in such a way that more detailed 
information could be provided.
Overall, there may be monthly fl  uctuations 
of more than 10 percentage points4 in the 
annual infl  ation rate for package holidays. 
Not even the infl  ation rates for unprocessed food display such a high level of volatility. In the case of clothing and shoes, it is mainly 
the sales taking place at different times 
throughout the year which cause far greater fl  uctuations in the infl  ation rate than when 
there were still just two designated sales 
periods per year.
3 It is generally assumed that a basket of goods re-
mains fi  xed over the course of the year when measur-
ing prices. Alongside package holidays, exceptions 
here also include some food products and articles of 
clothing which are not available throughout the year. 
See G Elbel, Behandlung saisonaler Erzeugnisse in der 
deutschen Verbraucherpreisstatistik, Wirtschaft und 
Statistik 11/ 2010, pp 1022-1029.
4 Since the timing of the Easter and Whitsun holiday 
varies each year, the annual infl  ation rate, which is cal-
culated using unadjusted fi  gures, may fl  uctuate even 
more strongly in the months concerned. It is particu-
larly diffi   cult to isolate the effects of the moving public 
holidays on the package holiday price index as it is pre-cisely in these months that the summer season begins.HICP excluding energy, food, clothing and travel
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 20170.30.60.91.21.51.8Year-on-year percentage change
GermanyEuro area excluding Germany
HICP package holidays compared with other components
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201710505101520
––++++Year-on-year percentage change
Package holidays (HICP share 2017: 3.8%)
Unprocessed food (5.3%)
Clothing (5.2%)
HICP excluding energy and food (72.9%)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
50

and business expectations. In addition, the 
positive short-  term expectations about output 
and exports are evidence of the existing pro -
nounced optimism among industrial enter -
prises. Sentiment in the main construction sec -
tor also continued to become brighter, climb -
ing to a new record high. In the retail trade, 
too, there was a marked improvement in the 
assessment of the business situation and busi -
ness expectations towards the end of the 
period under review. In the wholesale trade, 
however, sentiment became somewhat gloom -
ier. The business climate in the services sector, 
excluding trade, remained optimistic. The most 
recent autumn survey by the German Cham -
bers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), which 
covers a longer time horizon of 12 months, 
also indicates that firms are looking to the 
future   with confidence, with industrial enter -
prises, in particular, aiming to boost investment 
and employment.German industrial enterprises were receiving 
considerably more orders in the third quarter 
than before, which suggests that industrial ac -
tivity will remain buoyant up to the end of 
2017. Excluding large- scale orders, which are 
often processed only over a relatively long 
period of time, the increase was, in fact, some -
what stronger and broadly based. The automo -
tive sector, manufacturers of electrical equip -
ment, machinery and basic metals and fabri -
cated metal products benefited in particular 
from the strong surge in demand. In regional 
terms, the strongest impulses came from Ger -
many and from non- euro area countries. By 
contrast, relatively few new orders were re -
ceived from the rest of the euro area. The ex -
cellent order situation is also reflected in the 
latest survey indicators. According to the Ifo 
Institute, the stocks of orders that have still not 
been processed rose steeply to reach their 
highest level for almost 11 years. The reach of 
the orders, too, was still at an exceptionally 
high level.Industry’s order 
books well- filledDue to the high volatility of annual infl  ation 
rates for travel services and clothing, the 
traditional measure of core infl  ation in Ger-
many also exhibits a fairly large range of 
monthly fl  uctuation considering it is a measure of the infl  ation trend; this can 
amount to more than 0.3 percentage point 
even when excluding the Easter and Whit-
sun effects.5 The same applies to other euro 
area countries, albeit to a lesser extent, as 
package holidays, for example, have a 
smaller weighting there and show less vola-tility.
6
In order to be able to make a better assess-
ment of the underlying infl  ation trend in 
Germany, it is therefore useful to factor out 
clothing and travel components from the 
traditional core infl  ation rate. Annual HICP 
infl  ation excluding energy, food, clothing and travel services rose relatively continu-
ously from 0.7% to 1.3% in the period from 
the beginning of 2013 to the beginning of 
2016, and since then has tended to move sideways. By contrast, the corresponding 
infl  ation rate in the rest of the euro area has 
fl  uctuated around 0.8% since the begin-ning of 2014. In any case, it would seem appropriate to look at several indicators
7 
when determining infl  ation trends, rather 
than relying solely on any single measure of 
core infl  ation. For Germany, a selection of 
such indicators shows that underlying price 
pressures have gradually been increasing 
for some time now.
5 For example, HICP infl  ation excluding energy and 
food fell from 1.1% to 0.8% in February 2016. At the 
same time, the annual infl  ation rate for package holi-days declined from 0.7% to -5.7%.
6 Weighting of package holidays in the HICP for the 
euro area excluding Germany in 2017: 0.9%. Standard 
deviation of annual HICP infl  ation rates for package 
holidays since 2010: 2.1 (Germany: 4.3).7 For more information on this, see the comments on consumer prices in the euro area on p 17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
51

Following a slight decline in the third quarter, a 
moderate increase in construction output is 
likely in the final quarter of 2017. In July and 
August –  statistical data are available up to 
then – the intake of orders in the main con -
struction sector was significantly smaller than 
in the second quarter. This would be the second 
decline in succession, given that the volume of 
new orders in the second quarter was already 
clearly down on the very strong final quarter of 
2016 and the first quarter of 2017. However, 
this does not mean that output will be cut back 
owing to a lack of demand, as Ifo Institute data 
indicate that the reach of new orders is still at 
a record high and there was a significant in -
crease in the number of construction permits. 
Moreover, business expectations became dis -
tinctly brighter. In fact, supply- side constraints 
might increasingly limit further expansions in 
output. The percentage of enterprises stating 
that production is being impeded by labour 
shortages is at its highest level since the statis -
tical records began and the utilisation of equip -
ment in the construction sector has stabilised 
at a very high level. This suggests that capacity 
limits have largely been reached in the con -
struction sector and that output therefore can -
not continue to expand at the same pace as in 
the first half of the year.
After a temporary lull in the third quarter, pri -
vate consumption is expected to pick up again 
as the year draws to a close. The labour market 
is still in excellent shape and the consumer cli -
mate index compiled by the market research 
institution Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung  
(GfK) points to consumer sentiment being at a 
very high level. Moreover, according to ifo Insti -
tute data, business expectations in the retail 
trade are clearly pointing upwards again fol -
lowing a rather weak performance in the third 
quarter.Expansion in 
construction output increas-ingly limited by supply- side con-straints
Private con-
sumption set to pick up again towards end of yearDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017100110120
–100+10+20
130
100110120
100110
July-
Aug
100110120130140
–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1
Main construction orders%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
52

Public finances*
General government budget
German public finances remain in very good 
shape. In view of this, the surplus is likely to hit 
the 1% mark once again this year (2016: 0.8% 
of gross domestic product (GDP)). Repayments 
of the nuclear fuel tax, which was declared un -
constitutional in June, are placing a strain on 
public coffers.1 However, economic activity is 
significantly boosting public finances, and con -
tinued favourable financing conditions are also 
providing relief. In addition, the tax and social 
contributions ratio is rising distinctly, chiefly as 
a result of exceptionally high growth in profit- 
related taxes, making it possible to offset the 
equally considerable increase in structural pri -
mary expenditure2 on, most notably, long- term 
care, healthcare and pensions. The debt ratio 
fell to 66.0% in mid-2017 (end-2016: 68.1%). 
Given the surpluses in the central, state and 
local government budgets also expected in the 
second half of 2017 and the sharp nominal 
GDP growth, the ratio is set to fall further by 
the end of the year.3
As things currently stand, the setting for Ger -
many’s public finances will remain highly fa -
vourable in the medium term, too. The strain 
being placed on public coffers by nuclear fuel 
tax payments, which have now been refunded 
in full, will cease after this year, and the ex -
pected continuing upswing will have a positive 
impact. The surplus could thus – disregarding 
the detrimental impact of any new measures – 
increase further and markedly above 1% of 
GDP in the years to come. In structural terms 
(ie excluding cyclical and temporary effects), a 
relatively stable surplus amounting to around 
1% of GDP would be achieved. However, as 
time progresses, it is to be assumed that at 
least some of the financial leeway at the dis -
posal of central, state and local government 
under the budgetary rules will be utilised, and 
that social contribution rates could be lowered 
markedly. It is therefore to be expected that the structural surpluses will shrink and public fi -
nances will follow an expansionary path. Re -
gardless of this, the debt ratio is likely to fall 
below the 60% mark in 2019.
Generally, moderate structural surpluses for 
Germany seem appropriate. It is advisable to 
continue to rapidly reduce the debt ratio, not 
least given the challenges posed by demo -
graphic change. In this manner, the ratio could 
be reduced to well below the 60% threshold 
before the baby boomer generation leaves the 
labour force. Overall, this would markedly en -
hance the resilience of public finances as well 
as make it easier for younger people and future 
generations to shoulder foreseeable increases 
in spending on pensions, long- term care and 
healthcare. Moreover, moderate structural sur -
pluses in central and state governments’ fiscal 
plans create a budgetary buffer to cushion the 
impact of any unexpected negative budgetary 
developments within the debt brake rules. This 
avoids the need for procyclical consolidation in 
an economic downturn.
Also with the aim of achieving moderate struc -
tural surpluses, a certain amount of fiscal lee -Surplus of 
around 1% again this year …
… and debt 
ratio in con-tinued decline
In principle, 
positive outlook with highly favourable underlying  conditionsModerate struc-tural surpluses 
and debt ratio 
of well below 
60% appropriate
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting 
on the budgets of central, state and local government and 
of the social security funds pursuant to available data is 
based on the figures as defined in the government finance 
statistics (which are generally in line with the budget ac -
counts).
1 By comparison, the temporary burdens associated with 
fresh calls on state government guarantees issued for 
HSH Nordbank have thus far been significantly lower. Risks 
still exist in connection with the guarantees that have not 
yet been called upon (€6½ billion of an original amount of 
€10 billion remaining as at mid-2017).
2 Total expenditure less interest expenditure, cyclical im -
pact and relevant temporary factors.
3 Developments in the portfolio reduction and scaling- back 
of corresponding liabilities at government-  owned bad 
banks are rather volatile due, inter alia, to increases and 
reductions in cash collateral in connection with derivatives 
transactions. In particular, the reduction of gross debt at 
FMS Wertmanagement (recorded in the government sec -
tor) could be delayed by its repurchase of liabilities belong -
ing to the DEPFA Group (not classified as part of the gov -
ernment sector) under the DEPFA resolution process.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
53

way opens up given the very favourable 
medium- term conditions. Even now, the Federal 
Employment Agency is already clearly benefit -
ing from the continued healthy labour market 
situation. With an unchanged contribution rate, 
high surpluses and a major expansion of the al -
ready relatively large reserves can be expected. 
Against this background, a markedly lower con -
tribution rate would be plausible, which could 
take pressure off employees and enterprises dir -
ectly. The reserves of the statutory pension in -
surance scheme and the health insurance insti -
tutions are likewise fairly high and, in the pen -
sion insurance scheme’s case, the statutory 
upper limit for the reserves would be exceeded 
by quite a margin, even in the budget plan, in 
the absence of a contribution rate decrease. 
This means that cuts in social contributions are 
also on the agenda, even though contribution 
rate increases are to be expected once again in 
the longer term. Should a new Federal Govern -
ment envisage extra spending by the social se -
curity funds, it should be established whether it 
is on insurance- related benefits, for which social 
contributions are a justifiable source of finan -
cing. As a general rule, to keep fiscal policy 
transparent and open to scrutiny, defining 
spending categories that are deemed non-  
insurance- related and pegging the level of tax-  
funded central government grants to associated 
funding requirements would be welcome 
moves. Furthermore, the healthy state of the 
social security funds’ finances at present should 
not obscure the fact that additional spending 
which may appear manageable today could, in 
the face of demographic change, result in a 
considerable mortgage on the future.
In the absence of new measures, further im -
provement in the structural budgetary situation 
is to be expected at the central, state and local 
government level. To this extent, certain budget -
ary burdens would be compatible with the ob -
jective of a moderate structural surplus. How -
ever, the favourable medium-  term outlook is 
based on the scenario of continued stable eco -
nomic development. Furthermore, the revenue 
from profit- related taxes has been decoupled from the macroeconomic reference variables for 
some time, with the former accelerating away 
from the latter. In view of strong fluctuations in 
the past, there is a risk of this situation reversing. 
It should also be noted that the overall positive 
budgetary situation is related to a large extent to 
lower interest expenditure. Looking at the longer 
term, it should be kept in mind that budgetary 
policy will have to readjust to less favourable fi -
nancing conditions and additional burdens aris -
ing from demographic change.
Regardless of the current positive situation, 
policymakers must not forget to consistently 
exploit efficiency reserves and to consider the 
possibility of budget shifts in order to fund the 
political priorities currently being debated in 
areas such as education, investment, and na -
tional and international security. Investment 
needs have to be addressed consistently. How -
ever, the focus should not, as a general rule, be 
on a certain financing volume but rather on a 
needs- based infrastructure in which funds are 
used effectively. As regards the envisaged in -
come tax cut, it would be worth considering an 
extensive approach to reform that limits ex -
emptions in the tax system as a whole. It would 
then be possible, in principle, to finance more 
extensive tax rate cuts. The discussed phasing- 
out of the solidarity surcharge could be incorp -
orated into an income tax rate reform of this 
kind. In any event, it does not appear straight -
forward to keep the current solidarity surcharge 
in place in its present form as of 2020. This 
add- on to income taxes imposed by central 
government requires the existence of particular 
financing needs, while not least the special-  
purpose grants to the east German federal 
states will be phased out when the reform of 
federal financial relations then enters into 
force.4Possibility of 
lowering social contributions
Define non- 
insurance- related benefits and fund them using tax  revenue
Keep an eye 
on long- term burdens
Central, state 
and local  government finances per-forming well owing to lower interest expend-iture and higher tax ratioNew spending 
priorities and 
comprehensive 
tax reform  possible
4 As a general rule, differences in budgetary tightness be -
tween central government and state government are to be 
accommodated by adjusting the distribution of turnover 
tax receipts. Under the reform of the state government fi -
nancial equalisation system, central government trans -
ferred turnover tax revenue to state government. In light of 
this, too, there appears to be no reason to assume that 
central government still has special financing needs.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
54

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue5 was up by 6½% on the year in the 
third quarter of 2017 (see the chart opposite and 
the table on page 56). This increase was broad-  
based and also boosted by one- off factors: 
intra- year shifts in non- assessed taxes on earn -
ings and the tobacco tax have resulted in weaker 
developments in the first half of the year being 
followed by strong growth.6 By contrast, rev -
enue growth was slowed by further – smaller – 
payments to nuclear power plant operators.7 
The increase in wage tax receipts was 6%. The 
tax cut8 at the start of the year had a dampening 
effect on the year- on- year figure here. It was not 
least owing to the aforementioned rise in tax 
payments on dividends that revenue from profit-  
related taxes climbed by 19%, though growth in 
revenue from the high- yielding assessed income 
and corporation taxes was also dynamic. At 5%, 
the pick- up in turnover tax –  fluctuations in 
which are volatile during the course of the 
year  – was significant. Revenue from other 
consumption- related taxes went up by an even 
greater amount, primarily due to the aforemen -
tioned growth in tobacco tax revenue.
The latest official tax estimate projects tax rev -
enue growth (including local government 
taxes) of 4% for 2017 as a whole. This is slightly 
stronger than would be expected based on fa -
vourable developments in the macroeconomic 
reference variables for tax revenue9 alone. Al -
though the nuclear fuel tax repayment is curb -
ing growth considerably10 and revenue short -
falls resulting from tax cuts are outweighing 
the arithmetical revenue increase stemming 
from fiscal drag,11 growth in profit- related taxes 
remains strong.Dynamic growth 
in Q3
Significant rev-enue rise in year as a whole des-pite nuclear fuel tax repayment and tax cutsTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
5 Including transfers to the EU budget – which are de -
ducted from German tax revenue – but excluding receipts 
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for 
the quarter under review.
6 In the case of non- assessed taxes on earnings, the main 
component of which is investment income tax payments 
on dividends, fluctuations are probably attributable to divi -
dend payments being made later this year. Tobacco tax rev -
enue rose, comparatively speaking, to a far less significant 
extent and from a low level last year. This low level was 
related to the entry into force of an EU regulation that pre -
scribes, inter alia, images of diseases caused by smoking on 
packaging.
7 Following a ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court 
published on 7 June 2017 (2 BvL 6/ 13 of 13 April 2017), 
central government was required to repay all nuclear fuel 
tax payments to the operators of nuclear power plants. 
Some €6½ billion was paid out in June. This was followed 
in August by a further €1 billion of interest, which was also 
recorded in the government finance statistics as part of the 
nuclear fuel tax repayment.
8 The basic income tax allowance and child tax allowance 
were raised and the tax brackets “shifted to the right” (spe -
cified tax rates only apply to higher taxable income). The 
simultaneous raising of child benefit, which is deducted 
from revenue, likewise reduces wage tax receipts in the 
government finance statistics.
9 This estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur -
rent macroeconomic projection. In 2017, real GDP growth 
is expected to be 2.0% and nominal growth 3.5% (May: 
1.5% and 3.0% respectively). GDP growth for 2018 is fore -
cast to be 1.9% in real terms and 3.6% in nominal terms 
(May: 1.6% and 3.1% respectively). For 2019, GDP growth 
is estimated to be 1.7% in real terms and 3.4% in nominal 
terms (May: 1.4% and 3.2% respectively). In the medium 
term, nominal growth of around 3% per annum is still fore -
cast.
10 In addition, revenue shortfalls are also expected in con -
nection with several other court rulings (relating to profit- 
related taxes, in particular), some of which have made 
themselves felt in previous years or are expected to do so 
in the years to come. In the government finance statistics, 
such refunds reduce revenue at the point in time the re -
fund is paid. By contrast, they are recorded in the national 
accounts as government spending (capital transfers) at the 
point in time an absolute ruling is made.
11 This refers to the net positive revenue effect arising from 
income tax bracket creep (real and price- related) and the 
dampening impact of specific excise duties being largely 
independent of prices.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
55

Revenue is also expected to rise by 4% in both 
2018 and 2019. The revenue shortfalls stem -
ming from legislative changes12 will more or 
less offset fiscal drag on balance. The fact that 
the bulk of the tax refunds to be paid out as a 
result of various court rulings will come to an 
end during this period will have an accelerating 
effect on this. Annual average growth of just 
under 4% is then projected for the medium 
term up until 2022, arising primarily from the 
macroeconomic assumptions and fiscal drag. 
The tax ratio (as defined in the government fi -
nance statistics) is therefore projected to in -
crease significantly to 23.3% by the end of the 
forecast period in 2022 (2016: 22.4%). In par -
ticular, the sharp increase in profit- related taxes 
in the current year, as well as fiscal drag, which 
will not be offset in the medium term, will 
make themselves felt here.
The May 2017 tax revenue forecast has been 
revised upwards for the current year (+€2 bil -
lion). Of somewhat greater significance here than the nuclear fuel tax repayment (the ruling 
on which had not yet been made known at 
that time) and opposing adjustments owing to 
the effects of previous court rulings, are the 
more favourable macroeconomic assumptions 
and the additional intra-  year growth in profit-  
related taxes. In the years to come, the net 
negative corrections arising from adjustments 
to tax repayments and legislative changes will 
play a significantly less important role than the 
more favourable macroeconomic develop -
ments and the higher 2017 starting level for 
profit- related taxes. All in all, the upward revi -
sions stand at €7 billion for 2018 and at €6 bil -
lion for each of the following years up to 2021. 
In the case of profit- related taxes, there is a risk 
of a setback given the very high level of rev -
enue. However, this growth rate, which has 
been fairly high for some time now, could also 
reflect, for instance, greater efforts to limit tax Similar increases 
in years to come – under current tax legislationRevenue expect -
ation raised slightly for 2017 and significantly for years there-afterTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2017 1,2Q3
2016 2017 2016 2017
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 472.5 492.3 + 19.8 +  4.2 +  4.0 155.5 165.9 + 10.4 +  6.7
of which
Wage tax 132.6 140.8 +  8.3 +  6.2 +  5.9 44.7 47.3 +  2.6 +  5.8
Profi  t-related taxes 3 80.9 89.6 +  8.7 + 10.8 +  8.6 23.5 28.0 +  4.5 + 19.1
Assessed income tax 39.4 44.6 +  5.1 + 13.1 + 10.2 11.9 12.7 +  0.8 +  6.9
Corporation tax 21.3 22.4 +  1.1 +  5.2 +  3.9 5.5 6.0 +  0.5 +  8.8
Investment income 
tax4 20.1 22.6 +  2.5 + 12.2 + 10.5 6.0 9.2 +  3.2 + 52.6
Turnover taxes 5 161.0 168.2 +  7.2 +  4.5 +  4.4 53.9 56.5 +  2.6 +  4.8
Other consumption-  
related  taxes662.7 64.6 +  1.9 +  3.1 +  2.5 21.4 22.6 +  1.3 +  5.9
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2017. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 With-holding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on 
energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, spirits, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting 
and lottery, beer, fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
12 The Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting issues 
projections on the basis of current tax legislation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
56

evasion and avoidance. As regards the macro -
economic assumptions, there are risks arising 
from international uncertainty, on the one 
hand, but also, in particular, domestic upside 
risks, on the other.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a deficit of €5 
billion in the third quarter of 2017 compared 
with €3½ billion a year earlier. Revenue rose 
markedly by 4% (€3½ billion). Going up by 
7½% (€5½ billion), tax revenue grew even 
more steeply. The repayment of nuclear fuel tax 
collected in the period from 2011 to 2016 
ordered by the Federal Constitutional Court in 
early June and immediately enforced was fol -
lowed by a compensation payment for interest 
accrued (€1 billion), placing a strain on tax rev -
enue. By contrast, relief was provided in the 
form of a €1½ billion reduction in deductions 
for transfers to the EU budget. The sharp de -
cline in other revenue was caused, in particular, 
by last year’s one- off repayment of €1½ billion 
from the flood relief fund. Overall expenditure 
rose fairly sharply once again (+5½%, or €5 bil -
lion). The main driving forces were higher 
transfers (+€2½ billion), primarily to the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme but also to state 
government (as a result of central govern -
ment’s higher effective share of spending on 
accommodation costs at the local government 
level for recipients of unemployment benefit II). 
Owing to the large number of asylum seekers 
who have now been granted refugee status, 
unemployment benefit II transfers were also up 
(+5½%, or €½ billion). Interest expenditure re -
mained virtually unchanged, as a burden of al -
most €1 billion from declining premiums13 was 
offset, not least, by persistent refinancing ad -
vantages. Increasing by €2 billion, investment 
expenditure went up significantly. The most im -
portant single factor here was a one- off capital 
injection for Deutsche Bahn (€1 billion).
After three quarters, the central government 
budget is now balanced following a surplus of €7½ billion a year earlier. If no unpleasant sur -
prises occur, a distinct surplus can be expected 
again for the year as a whole.14 This expect -
ation is supported by the results of the latest 
tax estimate, which was raised again despite 
burdens of €7½ billion stemming from the re -
payment of nuclear fuel tax (+€½ billion com -
pared with the situation in May, or +€7½ bil -
lion compared with the budget estimate). The 
refugee reserve, which had already increased 
to just over €18½ billion at budget outturn for 
2016, is thus likely to rise significantly once 
more rather than being tapped. As the reserve 
has not yet been needed to finance refugee ex -
penses and the influx of refugees has stabilised 
since 2016, it seems appropriate to release the 
reserve at the end of 2017 to pay down debt.15
The draft budget for 2018, adopted by the Fed -
eral Cabinet at the end of June, will be revised 
by the as yet unformed new government. As 
no Budget Act is set to have been adopted by 
the start of 2018 – as has also been the case at 
the beginning of previous legislative periods – 
the relatively stringent cost- curbing regulations 
for provisional budgets will be applicable. The 
previously planned withdrawal of €8 billion 
from the reserve appears to be superfluous as 
the tax revenue expectations of the Working 
Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting have since 
been raised by €7 billion and the other very 
positive developments overall in the current 
year are set to continue, at least in part. This 
means that there should be no trouble achiev -
ing the planned global spending cut of €4 bil -
lion as well when the budget is implemented. 
However, if the future government stands by 
the decision to forego new net borrowing (en -
suring a “black zero” or balanced budget) and 
does not liquidate the extensive refugee re -Increased deficit 
in Q3 despite marked revenue growthIn spite of 
nuclear fuel tax 
repayments, 
 surplus now likely for 2017, too; dissolving 
of reserves 
appropriate
Fiscal plans to 
be revised by future govern-
ment; leeway 
available, 
 especially in the 
medium term
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Distortive accounting of 
premiums and discounts in the Federal budget, Monthly 
Report, July 2017, pp 43-44.
14 The slightly negative result in the final quarter of 2016 
was the result of one- off burdens amounting to a total of 
around €7 billion from the transfer of turnover tax revenue 
to the state governments and the one- off expansion of the 
fund to promote municipal investment.
15 For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi -
nances, Monthly Report, May 2017, p 65.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
57

serve to finance new projects, the current fiscal 
room for manoeuvre will remain relatively 
limited. Only in the medium term is this leeway 
likely to expand notably. Therefore, not least in 
view of the considerable surpluses to be ex -
pected for state and local governments overall, 
additional transfers to their budgets are not an 
urgent necessity.16
Central government’s off- budget entities 
covered by the Federal Ministry of Finance’s 
quarterly overviews (excluding, in particular, 
bad banks and other entities keeping commer -
cial accounts) achieved a balanced result in the 
third quarter following a deficit of €1½ billion a 
year earlier on account of the flood relief fund 
making repayments to the central government 
budget. In the reporting quarter, the off- budget 
entities to be included in the debt brake (the 
energy and climate fund, the flood relief fund 
and the fund to promote municipal invest -
ment)17 together also recorded only a moder -
ate deficit of just under €½ billion. This bal -ances the result of the first three quarters and, 
for 2017 as a whole, the deficit forecast by cen -
tral government (just over €3 billion) may be 
significantly undershot. For the off- budget en -
tities included here taken as a whole, an im -
provement is on the cards in relation to 2016 
(surplus of €½ billion). While last year’s central 
government expansion of the fund to promote 
municipal investment will not be repeated, the 
precautionary fund for final payments for 
inflation- indexed Federal securities is expected 
to record a much better result as no repay -
ments are to be made from this fund this year 
and inflation- linked transfers from central gov -
ernment are higher. Essentially, the perceptible 
relief afforded by the absence of repayments 
from the flood relief fund and the similarly ex -
tensive forwarding of the previous year’s bank 
levies to the European Single Resolution Fund, 
which was then new, are thus set to make an 
impact.18
Off- budget 
entities: improved result in Q3 and higher surplus for year as a wholeCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4105051015
––+++
–10–50+5+10+15
201720162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201520172016€ billion
16 During the previous legislative period, permanent trans -
fers were approved (in particular, continuous additional 
funds for local governments from 2018 and for the new 
federal financial equalisation scheme from 2020), as was 
the decision to pass on funds for several years primarily to 
offset refugee- related additional expenditure and to pro -
mote investment by financially weak local governments.
17 At the end of the third quarter, ie more than two years 
after the fund was established, only €½ billion of the ori -
ginally available total of €3½ billion (which has since been 
increased by a further €3½ billion) had been paid out. This 
may be attributable to insufficient planning capacity in the 
financially weak beneficiary local governments. Moreover, 
it may be the case that the scope of action for central gov -
ernment investment subsidies, restricted by Germany’s 
Basic Law (Grundgesetz), did not reflect the actual acute 
needs of the local governments.
18 The payment of €24 billion from nuclear power plant 
operators received by a central government off- budget en -
tity this year for the assumption of the long- term storage 
costs of nuclear waste is not included in the Federal Minis -
try of Finance’s reporting group. In the national accounts, 
this compensation payment does not affect the general 
government fiscal balance as it is considered to be an ad -
vance payment for future expenditure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
58

State government budgets19
The state governments ran a cash surplus of 
€7½ billion in the third quarter of 2017, which 
was a very clear improvement on the year (def -
icit of just under €½ billion). Following more 
subdued developments in the previous quarter, 
revenue rose substantially by just over 9% (just 
under €8 billion) compared with the previous 
year. Alongside the dynamic growth in tax rev -
enue (+9%, or €5½ billion), this was also due 
to the ongoing rise in revenue received from 
public administrations (+5%, or €1 billion), 
which included central government funds to be 
forwarded to local government. In addition, a 
repayment from BayernLB to the tune of €1 bil -
lion made itself felt as a special factor. By con -
trast, overall expenditure stagnated. Personnel 
expenditure increased (by 4½%, or €1½ billion) 
and current payments to local government saw 
a distinct rise (+4%, or €1 billion). However, fol -
lowing an exceptionally strong increase in the 
previous year related to support for refugees, 
other operating expenditure declined once 
again (-1½%). Finally, other expenditure, which 
is not broken down further in the monthly stat -
istics, fell particularly sharply.20
After three quarters, the surplus of the state 
government core budgets already amounts to 
just under €15½ billion. A certain deficit might 
again be recorded in the final quarter (whereas 
in the fourth quarter of 2016, a positive one- off 
effect still occurred due to transfers of central 
government tax revenue). For the year as a 
whole, however, an even better result is now 
expected in comparison to 2016 (€6 billion).21 
The Federal Ministry of Finance’s July forecast 
for general government envisaged a surplus of 
€6 billion for the state government core 
budgets. Ongoing substantial surpluses were 
expected here for the medium term, fostered 
not least by the new financial equalisation 
scheme which will enter into force from 2020 
onwards. According to the latest tax estimate, 
state government tax revenue is set to rise 
somewhat more sharply again during this 
period (by 4% on an annual average before de -duction of related additional payments as part 
of the local government financial equalisation 
schemes). The more positive development in 
the non- tax areas is also likely to continue, thus 
improving the underlying outlook for state gov -
ernment further still overall.
Against this background, it should be possible 
to mitigate the continued problems encoun -
tered by the local governments in some federal 
states. In Hesse, for example, local government Marked surplus 
in Q3 from sub-stantial revenue growth and stagnating expenditure
Surplus in the 
current year 
higher than 
forecast and 
very favourable outlookState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4202468
–++++
0246810121416
2017
20162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from 
start of year
20152017
2016€ billion
19 The short articles in the Bundesbank’s October 2017 
Monthly Report contain a more detailed analysis of the de -
velopment of local government finances in the second 
quarter of 2017. These are the most recent data available. 
The data on state government budgets are based on the 
monthly cash statistics on the core budgets.
20 A significant factor here was the change in the payment 
of transfers made by North Rhine-  Westphalia to its higher 
education establishments, which took place in the second 
quarter. Following additional costs of around €2 billion in 
the preceding quarter, relief amounting to €1 billion was 
consequently supplied in the reporting quarter.
21 Closing entries such as special transfers to off- budget 
entities placed an additional strain of around €3 billion on 
the balance compared with the monthly data used here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
59

cash advances are to be virtually fully paid off 
from mid-2018 with the assistance of the state 
government. In return, a distinct tightening of 
budgetary surveillance is envisaged. This ap -
proach could resolve the problems overall. In 
any event, it would be essential for the budget 
supervisory authorities of the individual federal 
states to tackle the racking up of cash advances 
in a decisive manner in future.22
Additionally, funds are available for future-  
oriented tasks. A needs-  based expansion of 
support services and learning opportunities in 
day care facilities for small children and schools 
is under discussion which aims at improving parents’ employment, promoting general edu -
cation and facilitating the integration of refu -
gees, for example. If the state governments 
were to grant further legal claims, the local 
governments that were mandated with the 
provision of additional services would be en -
titled to receive a cost reimbursement. It would 
also be necessary to establish how improve -
ments to the education system could be made 
elsewhere. Furthermore, the state governments 
should also be in a position to withstand a cer -
tain amount of tax cuts.
Social security funds23
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the third quarter of 2017, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of just 
under €2½ billion. The deficit – which is usual 
for this time of year  – was down by almost 
€1½ billion in year- on- year terms. Revenue 
continued to rise steeply (by 4½%). Alongside 
pay rises, ongoing favourable employment de -
velopments, in particular, made an impact on 
contribution receipts. Furthermore, a tempor -
ary reduction in the central government grant 
came to an end. Expenditure growth was much 
more subdued at 2½%. The main reason for 
the weakened growth over the course of the 
year was the fact that the mid-2017 pension 
increase (+1.9% in western Germany and 
+3.6% in eastern Germany) was lower than last 
year.24
On an annual average for 2017, pensions have 
increased at a similar pace to last year, at 3½%. Important for 
state govern-ments to offset local govern-ments’ budget -
ary imbalances
Funds available 
for future- oriented tasks such as educa-tion, plus poten-tial for tax cutsDeficit in Q3 much lower than a year 
 earlierFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly results.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q443210123
––––+++
–5–4–3–2–10Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
20162015
20172015 2016 20170123456
2015 2016 20170123456Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
22 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Local government finances: 
Development and selected aspects, Monthly Report, Octo -
ber 2016, pp 13-36.
23 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the second 
quarter of 2017 was analysed in the short articles of the 
September 2017 Monthly Report. These are the most re -
cent data available.
24 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, 
Monthly Report, May 2017, p 68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
60

On account of the somewhat weaker growth 
in the number of pensions, however, overall, 
pension expenditure is expected to rise slightly 
more slowly than in 2016 (+4%). On the rev -
enue side, the increase is likely to be somewhat 
higher. This is largely attributable to the re -
moval of the reduction factor (just over €1 bil -
lion) in the central government grant, but con -
tribution receipts could also increase a little 
more strongly. For 2017 as a whole, the result 
of the statutory pension insurance scheme is 
likely to improve considerably compared with 
2016 (deficit of just over €2 billion). The reserve 
is expected to change only slightly and should 
remain distinctly above the upper bound of the 
fluctuation band, or 1.5 times monthly expend -
iture.
The finances of the statutory pension insurance 
scheme are currently at an interim peak. Con -
sidering the very positive developments ex -
pected on the labour market and an environ -
ment of comparatively moderate growth in the 
number of pensions, the financial situation 
could even continue to improve somewhat in 
the coming year. As things stand, therefore, 
and assuming the contribution rate remains 
unchanged, the reserve is set to distinctly ex -
ceed the upper limit at the end of 2018, too. In 
this case, the statutory framework stipulates a 
contribution rate reduction for 2018. First, this 
could take pressure off employees and enter -
prises and, second, pension recipients could 
profit from this further down the line when the 
pension adjustment formula is applied, yielding 
a somewhat higher pension increase. However, 
as time passes and more people enter retire -
ment with an increased life expectancy, fund -
ing pressures on the statutory pension insur -
ance scheme are set to mount again. If a new 
series of substantial benefit expansions were to 
be implemented in the current positive environ -
ment, the revenue- side pressure on the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme would rise add -
itionally, thereby increasing demographic-  
related adjustment needs further still.Federal Employment Agency
In the third quarter of 2017, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency posted a surplus of €2 billion 
in the core budget,25 which constituted a year- 
on- year improvement of almost €½ billion. 
Contribution receipts continued to increase 
considerably (by almost 4%). By contrast, rev -
enue shortfalls were recorded for insolvency 
benefit contributions (the level of which was Much better 
result expected for year as a whole, too
Interim peak in 
statutory pen-sion insurance scheme makes rule- based con-tribution rate reduction  possible
Continued improvement of financial  situation in Q3Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
2016
2015
20172015 2016 2017–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2015 2016 2017963036912
–––++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
25 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund, but including 
surplus- reducing transfers to this fund.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
61

cut at the beginning of the year).26 Total rev -
enue increased by 3%. By contrast, expenditure 
decreased by 1%. In view of what was still a 
very favourable labour market situation with an 
even lower number of benefit recipients, the 
decline in unemployment benefit continued 
(-2%). Expenditure on active labour market pol -
icy measures, on the other hand, rose – from 
an already significantly elevated level – yet fur -
ther (+2½%) compared to the previous year.
Favourable developments are expected to con -
tinue for the year as a whole. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s finances are benefiting 
from the positive labour market situation on 
both the revenue and expenditure sides. 
Against this backdrop, a major acceleration of 
expenditure growth on active labour market 
policy measures does not seem appropriate. In 
spite of special transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund during the first half of the year27 
(just over €½ billion), the surplus appears to be 
higher on the year (2016: €5½ billion) for 2017 
as a whole. This is, once again, significantly 
above the budgeted amount (€1½ billion). 
Thus the free reserves for operational activities will see a further substantial increase (end-
2016: €11½ billion).28
According to current forecasts, the positive la -
bour market trend is set to continue for the 
next few years. Further- rising surpluses and a 
steep increase in free reserves are therefore on 
the horizon, in line with current spending pol -
icy, providing scope for a significant reduction 
in the contribution rate. A lower rate would still 
enable surpluses to be generated, which is ap -
propriate during an upswing, and free reserves 
could be built up further. This would even make 
it possible to accommodate a sharper down -
turn without drawing on central government 
loans.Increased sur-
plus expected again for year as a wholeContinued 
favourable 
labour market 
conditions in the medium term advocate 
marked contri-
bution rate 
reduction
26 Following a further reduction, revenue from insolvency 
benefit contributions cumulated for the first nine months 
of 2017 (2016: €1 billion) still exceeded insolvency benefit 
payments by almost €0.2 billion (2016: €½ billion). The re -
serves available for insolvency benefit payments totalled 
just over €1½ billion at end-2016.
27 These reserves were linked to low interest rates and re -
sultant additional capital requirements to cover future pen -
sion entitlements, particularly for civil servants of the Fed -
eral Employment Agency.
28 The winter compensation reserve, insolvency benefit 
and pension reserve are not included in this figure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
62

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
 3 General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV Banks
 1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
 3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
 4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
 10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
 11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
 12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
 13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
 3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
 5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
 4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
 5 Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX Financial accounts
 1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
 3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X Public finances in Germany
 1 General government: deficit/surplus  and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
 2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
 3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59 •
 4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
3•

 5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
 6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
 7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
 9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
 10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
 11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
 12 Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
 13 General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
 14 Central, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64 •
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65 •
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66 •
 3 Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67 •
 4 Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68 •
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68 •
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69 •
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70 •
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71 •
 9 Negotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71 •
 10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72 •
 11 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74 •
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75 •
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76 •
 4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77 •
 5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77 •
 6 Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77 •
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78 •
 8 External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  79 •
 9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80 •
 10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81 •
 11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81 •
 12 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2017
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2016         Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 5.0 2.8 1.1 − 3.2 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.4 5.5 5.1 5.2 3.3 1.2 − 3.2 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.3 5.6 5.2 5.0 3.2 1.1 − 3.1 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.2 4.8 5.0 3.5 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 3.7 1.4 − 2.1 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.8 5.1 5.1 5.1 4.0 1.5 − 2.0 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July 8.6 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.9 1.3 − 2.3 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.9 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.4 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.0 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.7 4.3 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.4 2.2 − 1.4 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.7 4.7 4.9 4.8 4.7 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017         Jan 8.3 4.6 4.7 4.7 4.5 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.3 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.3 2.2 − 1.0 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 9.0 5.0 5.2 4.9 4.8 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr 9.1 5.0 4.8 5.0 4.5 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         May 9.2 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.3 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 9.5 5.3 4.9 4.7 4.2 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         July 9.0 4.9 4.5 4.8 3.9 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
         Aug 9.5 5.4 5.0 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0         Sep 9.7 5.3 5.1 ... 3.9 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2016         Jan + 11,149 + 13,622 − 26,621 − 57,813 + 91,747 + 13,720 − 73,119 − 1,155 1.0860 93.0 88.4
         Feb + 16,855 + 28,021 + 12,281 + 41,080 + 40,966 + 12,915 − 83,740 + 1,061 1.1093 94.2 89.2         Mar + 38,405 + 38,714 + 35,470 + 31,751 − 10,505 − 421 + 13,582 + 1,063 1.1100 93.6 88.8
         Apr + 34,868 + 35,894 + 30,063 − 12,331 + 133,964 − 22,481 − 67,471 − 1,617 1.1339 94.4 89.5
         May + 18,369 + 32,761 + 22,831 + 23,295 − 1,260 − 14,350 + 12,036 + 3,110 1.1311 94.6 89.9         June + 36,583 + 39,381 + 22,068 + 3,962 − 1,828 − 10,342 + 29,584 + 692 1.1229 94.4 89.7
         July + 32,779 + 33,951 + 22,644 + 16,776 + 63,238 + 13,108 − 69,599 − 878 1.1069 94.6 89.8
         Aug + 23,197 + 25,467 + 33,793 + 35,568 + 50,127 + 6,367 − 60,082 + 1,813 1.1212 94.9 90.1         Sep + 35,272 + 33,730 + 58,532 + 70,442 + 19,020 + 4,104 − 41,824 + 6,789 1.1212 95.1 90.1
         Oct + 33,265 + 28,548 + 22,714 + 22,862 + 47,758 + 6,297 − 50,253 − 3,951 1.1026 95.1 90.3
         Nov + 36,039 + 34,309 + 5,706 − 287 − 24,823 + 2,899 + 25,459 + 2,457 1.0799 94.6 89.6         Dec + 43,379 + 33,282 + 65,909 + 41,249 + 23,024 + 6,688 − 11,125 + 6,073 1.0543 93.7 88.9
2017         Jan − 2,747 + 7,076 + 9,107 + 6,725 + 8,441 + 6,056 − 7,037 − 5,077 1.0614 93.9 89.1
         Feb + 22,425 + 25,409 + 19,764 + 26,217 + 52,458 + 7,818 − 68,764 + 2,036 1.0643 93.4 88.8         Mar + 44,285 + 37,944 + 33,549 − 45,664 + 45,680 + 7,951 + 25,029 + 554 1.0685 94.0 89.2
         Apr + 18,219 + 24,657 + 10,677 + 39,034 + 24,090 + 2,157 − 50,092 − 4,513 1.0723 93.7 89.0
         May + 13,297 + 29,263 + 7,881 − 1,176 + 5,207 + 4,040 − 1,561 + 1,372 1.1058 95.6 90.5         June + 31,400 + 34,260 + 30,109 − 57,383 + 34,662 − 7,472 + 58,866 + 1,436 1.1229 96.3 91.3
         July + 37,086 + 30,098 + 40,697 + 8,724 + 13,815 − 5,287 + 28,613 − 5,168 1.1511 97.6 p 92.4
         Aug + 29,613 + 22,520 + 41,064 − 6,548 + 95,239 − 7,903 − 39,062 − 662 1.1807 99.0 p 93.7         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1915 99.0 p 93.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1756 98.6 p 93.2
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp
81−82   2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
  
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2014 1.3 1.3 1.9 2.9 − 0.6 0.9 0.7 8.3 0.1 1.92015 2.1 1.4 1.7 1.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 25.6 1.0 2.82016 1.8 1.5 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.2 − 0.2 5.1 0.9 2.1
2016         Q2 1.8 1.6 3.3 0.9 1.8 1.8 0.0 5.4 1.3 2.6
         Q3 1.7 1.6 1.7 2.0 2.2 0.6 2.1 2.7 0.7 0.5         Q4 1.9 1.5 1.3 3.1 2.0 0.9 − 1.3 9.9 0.5 2.8
2017         Q1 2.0 1.8 3.4 4.6 3.9 1.5 0.5 5.2 2.0 4.0
         Q2 2.3 1.5 1.0 5.7 2.3 1.1 0.7 5.8 1.2 4.0         Q3 2.5 ... 2.3 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2014 0.8 1.0 1.4 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.92015 2.1 − 0.0 0.8 0.1 − 1.2 1.8 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.62016 1.5 4.3 1.0 1.8 2.3 0.3 2.6 0.7 1.7 4.9
2016         Q2 1.1 3.5 0.6 − 1.2 3.6 0.5 5.3 0.7 0.2 4.4
         Q3 1.0 4.8 0.6 2.9 2.6 − 0.6 2.0 − 0.8 1.6 1.4         Q4 2.3 4.5 1.4 7.6 3.2 0.5 4.0 3.2 3.6 9.8
2017         Q1 1.3 1.6 1.0 10.4 2.3 0.9 9.7 − 6.0 1.6 8.6
         Q2 2.7 3.5 3.1 11.3 4.2 1.7 3.2 − 1.1 2.9 9.3         Q3
e 3.6 ... p 4.1 4.4 5.2 2.8 3.6 p − 4.1 4.1 11.4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.22015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.52016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2016         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.8 67.8 − 76.0 71.8
         Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.6 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
2017         Q1 82.5 80.7 85.9 74.4 81.0 84.6 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
         Q2 82.6 81.4 86.0 76.4 82.1 84.3 68.1 − 76.0 74.8         Q3 83.2 82.0 86.7 73.9 82.6 84.7 72.0 − 77.0 74.5         Q4 83.8 82.9 87.2 74.8 83.6 85.4 71.2 − 77.6 74.2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.82015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.92016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 7.9 11.7 9.6
2017         May 9.2 7.3 3.7 6.7 8.8 9.5 21.6 6.2 11.3 8.9
         June 9.1 7.2 3.7 6.4 8.7 9.6 21.2 6.1 11.1 8.8
         July 9.0 7.3 3.6 5.9 8.7 9.7 20.9 6.2 11.3 8.5
         Aug 9.0 7.3 3.7 5.4 8.7 9.7 20.6 6.1 11.1 8.2         Sep 8.9 7.1 3.7 ... 8.7 9.7 ... 6.1 11.1 7.9
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.0 ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017         May 1.4 1.9 1.4 3.5 0.9 0.9 1.5 0.0 1.6 2.7
         June 1.3 1.5 1.5 3.1 0.9 0.8 0.9 − 0.6 1.2 3.1
         July 1.3 1.8 1.5 3.9 0.6 0.8 0.9 − 0.2 1.2 2.6
         Aug 1.5 2.0 1.8 4.2 0.8 1.0 0.6 0.4 1.4 3.2         Sep 1.5 2.0 1.8 3.9 0.8 1.1 1.0 0.2 1.3 3.0
         Oct 1.4 1.8 1.5 4.0 0.5 1.2 0.5 0.5
e 1.1 2.7
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 3.6 − 3.6 − 3.0 − 1.22015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.6 0.1 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.22016 − 1.5 − 2.5 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.4 0.5 − 0.7 − 2.5 0.0
 
General government debt 8
 
2014 91.8 106.8 74.6 10.7 60.2 95.0 179.0 104.5 131.8 40.92015 89.9 106.0 70.9 10.0 63.6 95.8 176.8 76.9 131.5 36.92016 88.9 105.7 68.1 9.4 63.1 96.5 180.8 72.8 132.0 40.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statis tical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
    
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.5 5.8 8.2 1.4 0.8 0.9 2.8 3.0 1.4 − 1.5 20142.0 2.9 7.1 2.3 1.1 1.8 3.9 2.3 3.4 1.7 20152.3 3.1 5.5 2.2 1.4 1.5 3.3 3.1 3.3 2.8 2016
1.7 3.4 4.9 2.3 1.9 1.2 3.8 3.2 3.6 2.8 2016          Q2
1.8 5.0 4.6 2.4 1.0 1.7 2.7 3.4 3.3 2.9          Q33.6 4.2 5.9 2.4 1.1 1.9 3.2 3.5 2.5 3.0          Q4
4.2 3.9 6.2 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.0 5.1 2.8 3.6 2017          Q1
4.1 2.3 6.3 3.3 2.7 2.8 3.7 4.4 3.2 3.6          Q23.1 ... ... 3.0 2.6 ... 3.3 ... ... ...          Q3
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
0.3 4.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 1.0 1.6 3.6 1.7 1.3 − 0.8 20144.6 1.2 6.3 − 3.4 2.2 2.1 7.3 5.1 3.4 3.4 20152.8 0.2 − 3.8 2.2 2.1 2.4 4.7 7.8 1.8 7.9 2016
− 0.3 1.0 − 4.6 3.4 1.7 2.1 7.3 6.7 1.3 8.7 2016          Q2
3.0 − 0.7 − 3.3 3.4 1.0 1.6 2.9 7.9 0.9 6.1          Q33.1 − 1.6 − 1.9 5.6 3.6 1.6 4.1 9.3 1.8 7.0          Q4
5.9 − 4.4 6.3 2.2 3.0 3.4 7.7 6.1 1.9 8.7 2017          Q1
6.7 0.0 4.3 1.5 4.3 2.4 1.8 7.0 2.2 5.0          Q28.7 ...
p 2.7 p 1.3 ... 6.2 3.4 p 7.5 2.7 ...          Q3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 201474.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7 2016          Q3
76.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6          Q4
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2017          Q1
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6          Q277.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5          Q377.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1          Q4
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
10.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 2016
7.0 6.0 4.1 5.1 5.4 9.2 8.3 6.7 17.3 11.3 2017          May
7.0 6.0 4.0 4.9 5.3 9.1 7.9 6.6 17.0 10.9          June
7.6 6.1 4.1 4.8 5.4 8.9 7.7 6.5 16.9 10.7          July
7.5 6.0 4.1 4.7 5.5 8.8 7.4 6.5 16.8 10.6          Aug 7.7 6.0 4.1 4.7 5.6 8.6 7.2 6.4 16.7 10.3          Sep 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Oct 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
3.2 1.9 1.1 0.7 2.1 1.7 1.1 1.5 2.0 0.9 2017          May
3.5 1.5 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.6 0.9          June
4.1 1.8 1.2 1.5 2.0 1.0 1.5 1.2 1.7 − 0.1          July
4.6 2.3 1.2 1.5 2.1 1.3 1.6 1.4 2.0 0.5          Aug 4.6 2.0 1.2 1.4 2.5 1.6 1.8 1.4 1.8 0.1          Sep 
4.2 2.0 1.5 1.3 2.3 1.9 1.8 1.3 1.7 0.4          Oct 
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 0.6 1.3 − 1.8 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.3 − 6.0 − 8.8 2014− 0.2 1.4 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 1.2 2015
0.3 1.6 1.1 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.5 2016
 
General government debt 8
 
40.5 22.7 63.8 68.0 83.8 130.6 53.5 80.3 100.4 107.5 201442.6 22.0 60.3 64.6 84.3 128.8 52.3 82.6 99.4 107.5 201540.1 20.8 57.6 61.8 83.6 130.1 51.8 78.5 99.0 107.1 2016
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat). Germany: current data according to
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central the Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculat ions. 
Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: latest data publication

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *(a) Euro area 
 
 
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Feb 87.9 45.1 − 0.5 42.8 51.6 − 81.6 32.3 113.9 − 13.8 11.2 − 1.2 − 24.0 0.2
         Mar 64.6 22.2 − 5.6 42.4 43.1 26.4 − 86.1 − 112.4 − 10.3 − 6.5 − 0.9 3.9 − 6.8
         Apr 96.8 47.7 27.7 49.1 43.9 − 61.4 119.0 180.5 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 5.4
         May 70.8 20.7 12.9 50.2 56.4 − 0.7 62.0 62.7 4.2 − 5.0 − 0.5 0.4 9.3         June 55.6 5.1 − 7.0 50.5 62.1 31.3 − 23.2 − 54.4 − 7.3 − 20.8 − 0.8 − 10.3 24.6
         July 54.5 29.5 14.7 25.0 24.1 − 85.0 56.9 141.9 − 23.9 − 7.1 − 0.5 − 23.8 7.5
         Aug 17.3 16.9 27.1 0.4 9.0 − 39.7 7.8 47.5 2.4 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 8.2         Sep 41.8 26.6 − 7.3 15.2 19.4 − 17.0 − 69.0 − 52.0 − 22.8 − 12.2 − 0.5 − 19.6 9.5
         Oct 84.9 37.3 5.6 47.6 45.1 − 45.5 153.8 199.3 2.7 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 2.6 11.5
         Nov 106.5 56.1 16.0 50.3 62.3 7.4 − 21.2 − 28.6 − 0.8 − 7.6 − 0.7 − 1.1 8.6         Dec − 59.0 − 51.3 − 8.3 − 7.7 − 0.9 35.8 − 155.0 − 190.8 − 8.9 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 13.8 6.2
2017         Jan 131.2 43.6 31.3 87.6 69.7 − 12.8 233.5 246.4 − 19.9 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 6.2
         Feb 45.8 30.6 4.0 15.2 35.3 − 45.6 53.4 99.0 15.3 − 6.1 − 0.5 − 3.4 25.2         Mar 151.6 92.8 25.3 58.8 62.6 − 8.8 − 51.7 − 43.0 − 12.7 1.8 − 0.5 − 22.1 8.1
         Apr 54.9 24.7 20.2 30.1 27.6 − 39.4 77.6 117.0 − 21.6 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 8.4
         May 50.6 26.0 16.3 24.6 35.1 − 1.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 18.3 − 5.9 − 2.4 16.9 9.7         June 24.0 29.5 1.2 − 5.5 − 5.5 56.3 − 109.7 − 166.0 − 3.4 − 12.3 − 0.1 − 6.7 15.7
         July 9.9 1.8 14.8 8.1 10.5 7.3 106.8 99.5 − 2.4 − 8.3 − 0.9 − 2.0 8.7
         Aug 11.8 − 19.7 − 15.6 31.6 37.6 − 26.5 − 2.6 23.9 8.4 − 5.6 − 0.8 − 3.6 18.3         Sep 60.2 47.1 − 13.7 13.1 18.8 9.1 − 36.6 − 45.7 − 18.7 − 8.0 − 0.9 − 27.3 17.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Feb 17.2 10.9 − 4.2 6.3 6.3 − 29.3 7.2 36.5 − 10.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 8.0 0.8
         Mar 14.0 4.4 0.6 9.6 9.9 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.3 1.5
         Apr 25.7 12.3 0.7 13.4 8.8 − 40.1 13.6 53.7 0.6 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.6 3.3
         May 24.8 16.2 4.9 8.6 11.9 1.5 1.1 − 0.4 7.5 0.8 − 1.0 4.7 3.0         June 4.7 1.7 0.5 2.9 8.6 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.5 6.2
         July 30.2 13.3 1.6 16.9 13.8 − 18.4 7.1 25.5 − 6.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.4 1.1
         Aug 11.1 8.9 1.5 2.2 4.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.8 3.9 0.6         Sep 24.6 13.2 3.4 11.4 12.6 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 0.9
         Oct 21.5 11.8 2.6 9.6 6.5 − 3.2 42.4 45.7 7.1 2.2 − 0.8 5.8 − 0.2
         Nov 28.1 18.4 4.4 9.7 14.4 − 22.4 − 25.7 − 3.3 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.6 0.8         Dec − 10.1 − 8.1 0.4 − 2.1 8.4 19.6 − 9.5 − 29.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 2.7
2017         Jan 23.6 15.0 2.3 8.6 8.5 − 24.4 31.8 56.2 9.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 15.9 − 2.3
         Feb 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8         Mar 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
         Apr 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 19.0 − 7.3 11.6 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
         May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4         June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
         July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
         Aug 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7         Sep 17.9 14.4 − 1.8 3.4 7.9 − 22.3 9.3 31.6 − 6.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p
30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 14.1 0.3 − 33.9 15.2 21.7 1.2 20.5 − 11.7 5.2 44.5 − 1.3 7.0 2016          Feb 
31.8 31.7 − 37.7 55.9 42.6 3.7 38.9 11.0 2.3 − 6.2 − 13.0 1.7          Mar 
− 35.9 − 29.4 − 100.7 75.3 92.7 4.6 88.2 − 17.2 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 2.7          Apr 
20.1 12.0 − 33.8 35.2 47.5 2.3 45.3 − 20.2 7.9 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 2.0          May60.5 14.8 − 18.9 31.3 34.6 8.4 26.2 − 1.9 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.6 5.9          June
− 29.0 − 74.1 − 96.6 73.6 67.1 10.1 57.0 6.1 0.5 − 22.7 15.6 5.0          July
− 54.7 40.8 − − 10.9 − 8.9 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.6 − 2.5          Aug 
2.7 42.5 − 2.4 18.3 23.7 2.2 21.5 1.4 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.8 − 5.9          Sep 
− 3.0 9.0 − 30.7 14.4 50.2 3.2 47.0 − 29.6 − 6.2 − 16.9 18.0 2.1          Oct 
5.1 21.8 − 87.8 83.1 95.3 1.3 94.0 − 10.2 − 1.9 − 1.8 7.0 1.2          Nov 
− 48.2 − 17.5 − 51.4 71.9 90.0 16.2 73.8 − 24.4 6.4 4.0 − 6.0 − 7.4          Dec 
62.7 47.7 − 27.9 6.3 − 6.6 − 11.9 5.3 3.0 9.9 − 17.4 11.6 − 0.9 2017          Jan 
− 18.4 − 26.4 − 29.7 30.8 30.8 3.0 27.8 − 2.1 2.1 − 8.6 − 4.2 6.5          Feb 
24.2 24.5 − 106.8 92.4 92.7 4.3 88.5 − 5.6 5.3 13.9 12.0 − 0.6          Mar 
− 5.3 − 10.6 − 53.0 72.4 101.1 6.8 94.3 − 31.2 2.5 − 5.0 − 4.3 − 16.9          Apr 
13.5 − 14.7 − 31.8 29.9 41.9 0.5 41.5 − 21.2 9.2 − 11.7 − 4.7 5.2          May20.6 17.3 − 45.8 73.1 80.8 9.5 71.3 − 10.3 2.6 − 16.6 − 20.9 2.0          June
− 7.1 − 12.1 − 38.8 26.1 29.6 5.6 24.0 − 6.0 2.4 − 24.1 11.4 − 0.6          July
− 18.3 − 64.3 − 59.6 50.4 36.9 − 2.2 39.1 7.5 6.0 2.6 11.9 − 9.0          Aug 
41.9 32.2 − 13.9 19.2 45.0 0.4 44.7 − 22.8 − 3.1 8.4 − 4.2 8.2          Sep 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
7.1 − 24.0 0.6 0.4 15.2 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0 2016          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.7 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.8 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4          June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6          July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4          Aug 8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5          Sep 
− 8.8 18.6 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8          Oct 
6.9 − 48.2 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7          Nov 
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 12.6 − 27.2 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2017          Jan 
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0          Feb 
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0          Mar 
− 6.7 − 8.9 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8          Apr 
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8          May7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6          June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6          July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5          Aug 
10.1 − 13.8 3.5 − 0.3 5.6 5.6 0.7 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.0          Sep 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2015         Aug 26,196.6 16,494.0 12,735.6 10,646.0 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,247.5 4,455.1
         Sep 26,145.1 16,526.0 12,714.3 10,639.8 1,303.0 771.4 3,811.8 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,164.7 4,454.4
         Oct 26,337.3 16,576.0 12,732.6 10,661.8 1,288.0 782.8 3,843.4 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,251.2 4,510.1
         Nov 26,653.5 16,691.8 12,803.5 10,716.5 1,295.5 791.5 3,888.3 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,314.1 4,647.6         Dec 25,850.7 16,541.4 12,703.0 10,627.4 1,296.3 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.2 2,728.2 5,034.5 4,274.8
2016         Jan 26,414.5 16,689.5 12,731.3 10,656.8 1,307.0 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,149.6 4,575.4
         Feb 26,749.2 16,774.6 12,771.6 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.0 1,118.6 2,884.4 5,228.2 4,746.4         Mar 26,406.9 16,825.5 12,776.4 10,709.9 1,312.1 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,030.7 4,550.7
         Apr 26,557.7 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,173.9 4,474.7
         May 26,807.0 16,993.9 12,842.6 10,733.4 1,341.4 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.1         June 27,072.9 17,041.4 12,829.3 10,732.4 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.4
         July 27,135.0 17,093.7 12,852.6 10,737.6 1,359.7 755.3 4,241.1 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.7
         Aug 27,037.8 17,105.7 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.1 778.2 4,239.1 1,102.9 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.7         Sep 26,973.2 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.3
         Oct 27,050.9 17,202.6 12,923.2 10,785.2 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.4 1,101.0 3,178.4 5,422.4 4,425.8
         Nov 27,162.0 17,295.8 12,983.8 10,830.5 1,383.3 770.0 4,312.0 1,088.9 3,223.1 5,452.3 4,414.0         Dec 26,678.3 17,234.9 12,925.7 10,772.3 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.2 1,079.4 3,229.7 5,208.1 4,235.3
2017         Jan 26,758.5 17,317.9 12,957.0 10,777.1 1,393.4 786.4 4,360.9 1,097.4 3,263.6 5,377.4 4,063.3
         Feb 27,020.5 17,378.7 12,994.7 10,807.3 1,398.4 789.0 4,384.0 1,076.2 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,144.0         Mar 26,971.6 17,511.2 13,077.2 10,863.6 1,423.7 789.9 4,434.0 1,072.8 3,361.2 5,418.0 4,042.5
         Apr 27,060.7 17,556.3 13,092.0 10,859.1 1,429.8 803.0 4,464.3 1,075.4 3,388.9 5,450.4 4,054.1
         May 26,977.3 17,596.0 13,108.9 10,859.4 1,451.1 798.3 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.7 5,359.1 4,022.1         June 26,653.4 17,571.3 13,093.3 10,854.9 1,441.7 796.7 4,478.0 1,063.0 3,415.0 5,193.2 3,888.9
         July 26,612.1 17,568.6 13,082.4 10,829.4 1,460.1 792.9 4,486.2 1,060.3 3,425.9 5,226.7 3,816.8
         Aug 26,644.9 17,574.1 13,050.9 10,817.1 1,444.2 789.6 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,197.5 3,873.3         Sep 26,531.3 17,625.0 13,098.4 10,874.2 1,433.6 790.6 4,526.7 1,045.9 3,480.8 5,169.3 3,737.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2015         Aug 6,026.9 3,813.3 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 817.2 364.9 452.3 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,042.0 3,824.3 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 828.1 364.5 463.6 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.8 3,832.3 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.7 368.4 469.2 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.8 3,865.0 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.5 363.9 481.6 1,236.6 1,003.2         Dec 5,925.1 3,840.1 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.5 358.3 478.2 1,166.4 918.6
2016         Jan 6,057.8 3,858.2 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.4 362.0 491.4 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.3 3,874.9 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.9 362.0 498.9 1,209.7 1,070.8         Mar 6,060.6 3,885.5 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.9 361.6 508.3 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,050.2 3,908.3 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 882.1 366.1 515.9 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,091.2 3,934.7 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.7 362.8 528.9 1,187.1 969.4         June 6,221.2 3,939.7 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.2 357.3 540.0 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.6 3,968.5 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 914.2 360.3 553.8 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2         Sep 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
         Nov 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8         Dec 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2017         Jan 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
         Feb 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0         Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2         Sep 6,076.4 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p
12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,029.4 11,375.8 10,678.2 10,788.2 5,137.0 981.5 353.8 2,114.8 2,122.1 79.1 2015          Aug 
1,026.5 11,410.6 10,694.5 10,796.3 5,162.5 977.4 350.6 2,110.9 2,116.6 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,498.5 10,739.4 10,848.4 5,244.5 972.9 349.1 2,092.0 2,112.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,524.1 10,774.1 10,869.8 5,288.4 970.8 343.9 2,081.4 2,109.6 75.7          Nov 1,048.9 11,486.5 10,813.7 10,922.5 5,325.8 981.5 343.8 2,083.3 2,112.9 75.2          Dec 
1,037.7 11,611.6 10,852.3 10,953.0 5,365.0 973.3 344.1 2,074.6 2,121.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.9 11,620.9 10,871.7 10,975.9 5,385.0 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,124.1 73.1          Feb 1,042.5 11,686.3 10,916.6 11,007.0 5,418.7 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,126.7 72.3          Mar 
1,047.1 11,715.5 10,978.0 11,072.8 5,504.2 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,126.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.3 11,766.7 11,005.8 11,092.4 5,545.0 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0          May1,057.7 11,829.0 11,001.2 11,089.1 5,565.0 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,849.4 11,053.6 11,133.5 5,614.9 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,783.3 11,037.6 11,120.7 5,611.2 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1          Aug 1,066.5 11,788.8 11,032.3 11,130.4 5,636.9 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep 
1,069.7 11,797.2 11,047.7 11,134.5 5,680.4 936.8 307.6 2,018.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct 
1,071.1 11,882.7 11,108.2 11,212.7 5,780.1 926.7 303.3 2,014.2 2,121.9 66.6          Nov 1,087.3 11,890.7 11,172.7 11,282.5 5,869.9 910.5 294.0 2,014.1 2,128.5 65.6          Dec 
1,075.4 11,946.4 11,152.8 11,267.6 5,867.2 912.9 286.6 1,997.7 2,138.2 65.0 2017          Jan 
1,078.4 11,954.2 11,171.6 11,291.2 5,891.9 917.9 284.5 1,992.1 2,140.2 64.6          Feb 1,082.7 12,063.9 11,241.1 11,383.8 5,987.6 909.3 285.3 1,992.4 2,145.1 64.1          Mar 
1,089.4 12,101.8 11,284.6 11,417.8 6,064.0 885.2 278.6 1,978.7 2,147.6 63.7          Apr 
1,089.9 12,113.8 11,302.4 11,407.0 6,086.2 859.0 272.9 1,970.1 2,156.7 62.0          May1,099.4 12,176.3 11,346.8 11,446.4 6,153.5 852.4 265.7 1,953.4 2,159.5 61.9          June
1,105.0 12,168.3 11,351.3 11,435.1 6,159.1 847.8 262.5 1,942.6 2,164.7 58.4          July
1,102.8 12,190.9 11,386.9 11,469.4 6,188.0 856.8 260.3 1,935.9 2,170.7 57.7          Aug 1,103.2 12,238.5 11,398.6 11,486.5 6,237.4 842.5 254.5 1,927.1 2,168.0 56.9          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7 2015          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb 247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar 
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr 
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug 250.1 3,616.2 3,486.3 3,345.7 1,944.9 162.3 39.6 617.8 537.5 43.5          Sep 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eu rosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“ ).5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2015         Aug 251.6 335.9 155.2 100.4 13.3 38.8 23.4 4.8 305.4 300.3 464.3 2,379.6 1,675.5
         Sep 280.6 333.7 153.5 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 304.5 296.9 459.3 2,344.0 1,660.4
         Oct 315.5 334.6 157.4 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 297.6 288.1 481.2 2,337.6 1,640.5
         Nov 298.5 355.7 168.0 108.4 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 301.4 296.2 497.1 2,367.3 1,646.3         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 272.8 270.9 475.1 2,319.4 1,634.3
2016         Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 294.5 292.9 485.5 2,301.4 1,615.0
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 484.2 2,288.0 1,597.6         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 471.7 2,271.4 1,590.3
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 489.1 2,275.8 1,586.3
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 489.2 2,284.5 1,575.9         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 479.7 2,281.8 1,569.3
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 494.8 2,258.2 1,543.7
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,253.2 1,534.5         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,227.1 1,517.1
         Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.3 19.9 44.5 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 511.8 2,226.0 1,503.3
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.9 264.2 518.8 2,244.1 1,506.1         Dec 253.1 355.1 169.8 93.9 21.5 43.3 21.4 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,230.4 1,502.6
2017         Jan 316.8 362.0 170.7 99.5 21.3 43.4 21.7 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.3 2,209.7 1,487.5
         Feb 299.0 364.1 176.2 96.2 20.2 44.1 21.9 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,221.0 1,493.4         Mar 323.1 357.0 166.6 96.5 21.5 44.6 22.3 5.4 255.6 254.9 532.1 2,194.0 1,480.5
         Apr 317.8 366.2 177.7 92.4 23.7 44.7 22.2 5.5 250.4 249.7 527.8 2,164.8 1,466.1
         May 331.3 375.5 182.9 94.5 25.3 45.2 22.9 4.7 238.4 237.7 523.0 2,171.8 1,490.1         June 351.9 378.0 182.5 95.7 26.6 45.8 22.7 4.7 221.7 221.0 501.9 2,154.6 1,478.3
         July 344.8 388.4 192.2 95.3 26.7 46.2 23.1 4.8 197.4 196.8 513.3 2,136.7 1,473.8
         Aug 326.5 395.1 198.3 94.9 27.8 46.2 23.2 4.7 199.6 198.9 525.2 2,119.1 1,465.2         Sep 362.9 389.1 194.4 91.9 28.1 47.3 22.8 4.7 208.1 207.4 520.9 2,100.2 1,450.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2015         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016         Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017         Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6         Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8         Sep 60.0 210.5 63.2 78.4 24.3 40.9 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 528.8 264.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
35.8 47.5 2,296.3 3,875.9 2,530.1 − 65.9 4,301.9 − 6,416.1 10,032.4 10,672.4 7,063.8 116.3 2015          Aug 
32.7 46.5 2,264.8 3,799.5 2,534.0 − 52.8 4,319.4 − 6,438.2 10,040.3 10,667.2 7,032.2 117.3          Sep 
32.6 47.2 2,257.9 3,852.5 2,560.1 − 75.9 4,356.8 − 6,525.3 10,113.8 10,775.7 7,031.7 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,286.9 3,906.0 2,565.3 − 77.1 4,534.8 − 6,592.2 10,180.4 10,841.2 7,053.7 121.9          Nov 22.9 47.8 2,248.7 3,652.9 2,549.2 − 50.1 4,095.9 − 6,631.5 10,228.1 10,840.6 7,000.7 123.0          Dec 
28.9 50.6 2,221.8 3,800.6 2,573.0 − 77.2 4,387.6 − 6,665.8 10,264.0 10,908.3 6,988.6 123.6 2016          Jan 
33.4 54.2 2,200.4 3,912.4 2,609.9 − 98.7 4,554.5 − 6,688.2 10,278.2 10,942.3 7,013.7 122.8          Feb 37.2 51.9 2,182.3 3,725.0 2,592.4 − 94.7 4,379.8 − 6,721.4 10,322.5 10,968.2 6,969.1 121.3          Mar 
41.7 50.0 2,184.2 3,912.6 2,604.3 − 99.6 4,285.0 − 6,815.2 10,399.0 11,070.4 6,977.2 122.7          Apr 
39.9 49.2 2,195.4 4,018.6 2,600.8 − 84.1 4,363.2 − 6,867.4 10,440.7 11,110.5 6,980.5 126.6          May49.8 47.2 2,184.8 3,941.2 2,664.9 − 62.9 4,560.3 − 6,901.2 10,471.8 11,131.4 7,014.0 127.7          June
54.6 47.8 2,155.8 4,072.1 2,678.7 − 105.5 4,521.0 − 6,967.5 10,542.8 11,225.3 6,991.1 131.5          July
53.9 46.2 2,153.1 4,114.1 2,676.2 − 85.2 4,435.5 − 6,961.8 10,533.2 11,214.1 6,980.4 131.4          Aug 48.7 46.1 2,132.3 4,069.2 2,698.3 − 45.3 4,388.4 − 6,984.5 10,550.7 11,216.1 6,969.1 131.3          Sep 
53.5 43.6 2,129.0 4,278.8 2,683.3 − 28.9 4,246.4 − 7,043.4 10,567.8 11,249.8 6,948.0 131.8          Oct 
54.7 42.8 2,146.5 4,318.1 2,662.6 − 55.5 4,255.3 − 7,145.6 10,659.5 11,345.6 6,939.4 136.4          Nov 48.1 42.0 2,140.3 4,039.3 2,658.0 − 42.7 4,033.6 − 7,238.3 10,732.2 11,397.8 6,926.4 135.4          Dec 
44.2 45.8 2,119.7 4,244.7 2,645.8 − 15.0 3,877.1 − 7,228.0 10,732.5 11,420.3 6,877.1 139.1 2017          Jan 
49.4 47.2 2,124.4 4,375.4 2,697.0 − 20.6 3,953.2 − 7,262.2 10,767.5 11,454.5 6,927.7 140.1          Feb 48.5 47.2 2,098.3 4,315.5 2,677.4 − 3.7 3,854.2 − 7,352.7 10,856.9 11,557.9 6,882.3 140.0          Mar 
35.1 43.8 2,085.9 4,399.0 2,663.4 − 0.2 3,864.3 − 7,449.3 10,923.2 11,604.6 6,841.8 142.1          Apr 
42.2 42.8 2,086.9 4,332.7 2,659.9 1.8 3,845.9 − 7,480.0 10,935.4 11,619.2 6,828.7 145.0          May42.3 42.1 2,070.2 4,134.4 2,628.3 7.4 3,729.4 − 7,556.9 11,003.5 11,657.2 6,764.2 145.5          June
40.8 41.2 2,054.8 4,180.5 2,615.6 13.2 3,682.1 − 7,580.4 11,024.5 11,688.8 6,722.4 148.0          July
35.3 40.2 2,043.6 4,176.9 2,646.6 − 1.6 3,685.3 − 7,613.9 11,071.1 11,746.8 6,734.8 148.5          Aug 42.8 40.6 2,016.8 4,150.8 2,650.0 23.7 3,535.9 − 7,660.5 11,092.3 11,762.3 6,702.7 149.4          Sep 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 − 2015          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 −          Nov 23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec 
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2017          Jan 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 −          Feb 19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar 
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr 
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug 19.0 15.4 494.4 927.9 594.3 − 983.0 1,387.3 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.4 2,892.7 1,791.6 −          Sep 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central government s’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturiti es of over 2
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2015         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.0 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016         Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2017         Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1 787.5 479.2 0.0 1 110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2 550.9
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1 905.3 550.0 0.0 1 118.4 182.0 378.8 1 081.1 2 749.4         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1 995.0 593.7 0.0 1 126.0 163.6 397.4 1 178.7 2 898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2 076.1 595.3 0.0 1 136.3 229.8 379.4 1 169.2 2 900.8
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2 150.2 611.4 0.0 1 142.5 181.8 385.1 1 242.7 2 996.7
         Oct 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2 239.2 648.1 0.0 1 142.8 218.3 383.9 1 253.3 3 044.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016         Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchang e swap operations.
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circu lation. In ac-
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem fo r the issue of
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulatio n are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3 2015          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
− 12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
− 8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
− 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep 
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4 2015          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
− 3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
− 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
− 1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep 
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct 
allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit i nstitutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2017 Mar                  3 3,820.3 382.1 323.8 77.8 246.1 34.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              10 3,839.9 382.1 325.3 77.8 247.6 34.6 19.7 19.7 −
                              17 3,856.9 382.1 324.6 77.9 246.8 33.0 18.7 18.7 −
                              24 3,877.0 382.1 326.4 77.8 248.5 32.8 19.5 19.5 −
                              31 4,100.7 404.2 323.4 77.6 245.8 33.9 20.2 20.2 −
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 404.2 323.1 77.7 245.4 31.6 18.6 18.6 −
                              14 4,130.0 404.2 321.8 77.7 244.2 31.6 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 4,139.4 404.2 321.6 77.7 243.9 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              28 4,148.0 404.2 319.6 77.5 242.1 34.6 17.2 17.2 −
         May                 5 4,156.8 404.1 319.7 77.4 242.4 34.6 16.8 16.8 −
                              12 4,170.6 404.1 320.9 77.4 243.5 32.3 17.0 17.0 −
                              19 4,185.7 404.1 320.6 77.4 243.2 32.7 17.4 17.4 −
                              26 4,195.7 404.1 321.2 77.4 243.7 30.3 15.9 15.9 −
         June                 2 4,204.5 404.1 321.2 77.4 243.8 30.2 16.3 16.3 −
                                9 4,218.1 404.1 321.5 77.4 244.1 29.9 16.7 16.7 −
                              16 4,232.9 404.1 322.9 77.6 245.3 28.7 18.3 18.3 −
                              23 4,246.2 404.1 321.6 77.6 244.0 30.7 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 4,209.5 379.1 304.8 74.4 230.4 31.2 18.0 18.0 −
         July                 7 4,214.7 379.1 303.5 74.6 228.9 30.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              14 4,229.3 379.1 302.9 74.2 228.7 31.6 17.2 17.2 −
                              21 4,235.8 379.1 300.7 74.3 226.4 33.4 15.9 15.9 −
                              28 4,248.3 379.1 302.0 74.3 227.7 33.9 16.7 16.7 −
2017 Aug                  4 4,246.5 379.1 299.2 74.4 224.8 36.9 16.4 16.4 −
                              11 4,256.0 379.1 301.2 74.5 226.8 35.3 15.9 15.9 −
                              18 4,265.7 379.1 300.1 74.5 225.6 35.2 16.5 16.5 −
                              25 4,278.9 379.1 299.2 74.5 224.7 35.6 16.2 16.2 −
         Sep                  1 4,283.7 379.1 298.8 74.5 224.3 34.2 16.4 16.4 −
                                8 4,299.8 379.1 302.0 74.5 227.4 33.7 15.1 15.1 −
                              15 4,308.9 379.1 302.9 74.5 228.4 31.0 16.6 16.6 −
                              22 4,328.2 379.1 302.5 74.5 228.0 33.4 16.8 16.8 −
                              29 4,318.6 379.0 296.9 73.0 223.8 30.8 17.7 17.7 −
         Oct                  6 4,337.7 379.0 295.9 73.0 222.8 33.4 16.9 16.9 −
                              13 4,371.6 379.0 297.2 73.0 224.2 32.1 16.7 16.7 −
                              20 4,363.4 379.0 297.4 73.0 224.4 32.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              27 4,371.2 379.0 295.5 72.9 222.5 34.6 15.5 15.5 −
         Nov                  3 4,373.2 379.0 296.4 72.9 223.5 33.9 15.0 15.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016         Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0. 0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0. 0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0. 0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0. 0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0. 7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0. 2−−−
         Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0. 3−−−
         Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
         Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 1 376.5 128.8 55.0 21.1 33.9 0.1 0.4 0.4 −         Dec 1 392.7 119.3 56.5 21.5 35.0 1.8 0.4 0.4 −
2017         Jan 1 449.7 119.3 56.4 21.5 34.9 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
         Feb 1 484.8 119.3 56.2 21.2 35.0 0.1 1.5 1.5 −         Mar 1 558.0 126.2 55.7 21.1 34.7 2.7 1.7 1.7 −
         Apr 1 582.8 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
         May 1 608.2 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.0 2.0 −         June 1 616.4 118.2 53.1 20.0 33.0 1.3 2.1 2.1 −
         July 1 621.0 118.2 53.5 20.0 33.6 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
         Aug 1 625.1 118.2 52.6 19.9 32.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 −         Sep 1 663.9 118.2 51.7 19.6 32.2 1.4 3.1 3.1 −
         Oct 1 644.4 118.2 52.9 19.5 33.4 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The bal ance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrume nts are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
579.3 25.3 553.8 − − 0.2 − 83.5 2 136.5 1 825.9 310.6 26.4 235.2 2017 Mar                  3
578.1 23.9 553.8 − − 0.5 − 82.7 2 153.8 1 844.2 309.6 26.4 237.1                               10
580.5 26.5 553.8 − − 0.2 − 86.3 2 172.9 1 862.9 309.9 26.4 232.4                               17
586.8 32.7 553.8 − − 0.3 − 82.5 2 188.5 1 878.7 309.8 26.4 232.0                               24
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.3 − 69.8 2 192.8 1 887.1 305.7 26.4 245.9                               31
782.5 13.2 769.2 − − 0.1 − 81.4 2 211.3 1 906.3 305.0 26.4 237.4          Apr                  7
783.1 13.2 769.2 − − 0.7 − 80.7 2 225.9 1 921.4 304.5 26.4 236.5                               14
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.2 − 82.0 2 236.2 1 933.0 303.2 26.4 234.5                               21
782.1 14.4 767.3 − − 0.4 − 78.2 2 247.4 1 946.9 300.5 26.4 238.4                               28
782.0 14.4 767.3 − − 0.3 − 78.6 2 257.5 1 959.9 297.6 26.4 237.1          May                  5
781.2 13.7 767.3 − − 0.2 − 79.6 2 271.4 1 974.7 296.8 26.4 237.6                               12
781.5 14.0 767.3 − − 0.2 − 78.6 2 285.2 1 989.0 296.2 26.4 239.3                               19
783.5 15.9 767.3 − − 0.2 − 75.9 2 299.1 2 002.4 296.7 26.4 239.3                               26
780.1 12.1 767.8 − − 0.3 − 74.5 2 311.0 2 015.2 295.8 26.4 240.7          June                  2
780.0 12.1 767.8 − − 0.1 − 73.7 2 325.6 2 029.8 295.9 26.4 240.3                                 9
779.1 11.0 767.8 − − 0.3 − 75.5 2 338.7 2 045.0 293.7 26.4 239.2                               16
779.6 11.5 767.8 − − 0.3 − 73.1 2 352.1 2 058.4 293.7 26.4 240.1                               23
779.3 11.6 767.3 − − 0.3 − 70.9 2 358.6 2 064.4 294.2 25.8 241.9                               30
775.7 8.3 767.3 − − 0.1 − 69.5 2 374.4 2 081.3 293.1 25.7 239.0          July                  7
774.6 7.1 767.3 − − 0.2 − 69.0 2 390.4 2 097.5 292.9 25.7 238.8                               14
774.3 6.8 767.3 − − 0.2 − 67.7 2 400.0 2 108.3 291.7 25.7 239.0                               21
776.3 7.4 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.3 2 411.3 2 119.2 292.1 25.7 240.0                               28
773.1 4.3 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.6 2 414.8 2 128.2 286.6 25.7 237.5 2017 Aug                  4
773.5 4.6 768.7 − − 0.2 − 61.4 2 426.0 2 139.7 286.3 25.7 237.8                               11
773.7 4.8 768.7 − − 0.2 − 62.2 2 435.4 2 149.3 286.1 25.7 237.7                               18
776.3 7.3 768.7 − − 0.3 − 60.4 2 446.2 2 160.1 286.1 25.7 240.2                               25
774.7 5.9 768.6 − − 0.2 − 59.2 2 456.1 2 170.4 285.8 25.7 239.4          Sep                  1
772.8 4.3 768.4 − − 0.1 − 61.0 2 471.7 2 185.9 285.8 25.7 238.6                                 8
772.5 4.0 768.4 − − 0.1 − 61.5 2 484.1 2 200.0 284.2 25.7 235.3                               15
773.6 5.1 768.4 − − 0.1 − 59.4 2 498.5 2 214.1 284.3 25.7 239.1                               22
768.5 4.2 764.1 − − 0.2 − 53.3 2 504.4 2 221.3 283.1 25.7 242.3                               29
767.5 3.2 764.1 − − 0.2 − 54.9 2 521.9 2 238.9 283.0 25.7 242.5          Oct                  6
785.5 21.3 764.1 − − 0.1 − 55.0 2 537.6 2 254.4 283.2 25.7 242.7                               13
768.2 3.8 764.1 − − 0.3 − 56.7 2 547.4 2 265.1 282.3 25.7 238.9                               20
769.4 5.3 763.7 − − 0.3 − 55.4 2 560.0 2 278.4 281.6 25.7 236.2                               27
766.9 3.0 763.7 − − 0.2 − 52.6 2 568.1 2 287.7 280.4 25.7 235.7          Nov                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7 2015          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0          Aug 55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1          Sep 
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2          Oct 
55.2 1.0 53.9 − − 0.3 − 4.8 345.4 345.4 − 4.4 782.3          Nov 65.5 1.8 63.5 − − 0.1 − 3.0 357.7 357.7 − 4.4 784.1          Dec 
64.0 0.6 63.4 − − 0.0 − 4.1 375.7 375.7 − 4.4 823.9 2017          Jan 
63.9 0.7 63.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 392.6 392.6 − 4.4 842.4          Feb 95.6 0.4 95.0 − − 0.2 − 3.9 408.8 408.8 − 4.4 859.0          Mar 
95.7 0.6 95.0 − − 0.1 − 4.2 421.4 421.4 − 4.4 872.8          Apr 
95.3 0.3 95.0 − − 0.0 − 4.0 434.3 434.3 − 4.4 886.4          May96.4 1.2 95.0 − − 0.1 − 3.9 445.8 445.8 − 4.4 891.3          June
95.5 0.5 94.9 − − 0.1 − 4.4 457.2 457.2 − 4.4 884.8          July
95.2 0.2 94.9 − − 0.1 − 4.4 467.1 467.1 − 4.4 880.4          Aug 95.1 0.2 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.7 478.3 478.3 − 4.4 908.1          Sep 
95.2 0.3 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.8 490.5 490.5 − 4.4 877.5          Oct 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2017 Mar                  3 3,820.3 1,113.5 1,468.1 966.3 501.8 − − 0.0 11.5 − 254.5 140.4 114.0
                              10 3,839.9 1,113.8 1,491.9 966.3 525.5 − − 0.0 15.4 − 257.1 142.5 114.6
                              17 3,856.9 1,112.9 1,475.6 984.4 491.3 − − 0.0 15.3 − 297.9 178.4 119.4
                              24 3,877.0 1,111.2 1,455.1 946.2 508.9 − − 0.0 14.1 − 340.9 221.5 119.4
                              31 4,100.7 1,114.5 1,632.5 1,048.5 584.0 − − 0.0 15.1 − 304.8 178.9 125.9
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 1,119.2 1,721.1 1,132.9 588.2 − − 0.0 13.7 − 279.2 153.9 125.3
                              14 4,130.0 1,127.5 1,708.3 1,144.5 563.8 − − 0.0 13.2 − 298.1 164.7 133.4
                              21 4,139.4 1,121.6 1,682.0 1,123.0 559.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 344.2 209.5 134.7
                              28 4,148.0 1,125.3 1,709.1 1,132.6 576.4 − − 0.0 12.9 − 306.2 172.0 134.3
         May                 5 4,156.8 1,125.1 1,773.1 1,172.7 600.4 − − 0.0 12.4 − 256.0 114.2 141.8
                              12 4,170.6 1,124.7 1,766.3 1,165.6 600.7 − − 0.0 10.8 − 283.1 140.8 142.2
                              19 4,185.7 1,123.2 1,760.3 1,169.5 590.7 − − 0.0 9.6 − 314.5 177.1 137.4
                              26 4,195.7 1,124.1 1,748.4 1,159.5 588.9 − − 0.1 10.3 − 353.1 209.3 143.9
         June                 2 4,204.5 1,131.3 1,796.2 1,194.2 602.0 − − 0.0 11.3 − 299.9 157.7 142.2
                                9 4,218.1 1,130.5 1,800.6 1,199.2 601.3 − − 0.1 9.1 − 310.2 172.5 137.7
                              16 4,232.9 1,131.7 1,776.2 1,168.4 607.8 − − 0.0 7.4 − 351.7 209.7 142.1
                              23 4,246.2 1,131.3 1,735.3 1,158.1 577.2 − − 0.0 7.7 − 400.8 259.1 141.7
                              30 4,209.5 1,136.9 1,723.1 1,106.1 617.0 − − 0.1 9.2 − 347.6 210.1 137.5
         July                 7 4,214.7 1,140.0 1,787.3 1,166.6 620.7 − − 0.0 9.8 − 340.1 209.1 131.0
                              14 4,229.3 1,141.2 1,792.1 1,197.8 594.2 − − 0.1 9.8 − 360.2 230.7 129.6
                              21 4,235.8 1,140.4 1,764.1 1,186.9 577.2 − − 0.0 9.2 − 380.8 254.1 126.7
                              28 4,248.3 1,142.3 1,784.2 1,200.7 583.5 − − 0.1 9.6 − 369.8 239.3 130.5
2017 Aug                  4 4,246.5 1,144.7 1,867.3 1,245.9 621.3 − − 0.0 10.4 − 273.7 147.1 126.6
                              11 4,256.0 1,145.9 1,870.4 1,240.9 629.4 − − 0.0 9.7 − 285.5 158.3 127.2
                              18 4,265.7 1,144.1 1,836.3 1,238.6 597.7 − − 0.0 9.0 − 321.6 194.8 126.8
                              25 4,278.9 1,139.9 1,824.0 1,230.8 593.2 − − 0.0 8.0 − 352.3 225.4 126.9
         Sep                  1 4,283.7 1,142.1 1,891.7 1,263.4 628.3 − − 0.0 8.4 − 286.7 158.8 128.0
                                8 4,299.8 1,142.7 1,900.0 1,264.2 635.8 − − 0.0 14.5 − 292.4 162.5 129.9
                              15 4,308.9 1,142.0 1,888.0 1,238.9 649.0 − − 0.0 6.7 − 324.3 198.1 126.2
                              22 4,328.2 1,140.2 1,865.2 1,217.6 647.6 − − 0.0 10.7 − 362.3 236.2 126.1
                              29 4,318.6 1,143.5 1,824.3 1,175.2 649.0 − − 0.1 9.7 − 351.9 229.6 122.3
         Oct                  6 4,337.7 1,144.9 1,920.2 1,257.3 662.9 − − 0.0 9.2 − 321.4 200.2 121.2
                              13 4,371.6 1,145.2 1,942.5 1,283.7 658.8 − − 0.0 8.1 − 333.7 210.4 123.3
                              20 4,363.4 1,143.0 1,913.7 1,261.7 652.0 − − 0.0 6.8 − 357.1 233.5 123.6
                              27 4,371.2 1,145.3 1,950.4 1,312.1 638.3 − − 0.0 8.3 − 327.6 205.1 122.5
         Nov                  3 4,373.2 1,147.3 1,982.6 1,312.0 670.6 − − 0.0 6.4 − 279.8 158.6 121.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016         Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
         Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9         Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
         Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
         Nov 1 376.5 259.5 428.0 293.1 134.9 − − − 0.3 − 116.6 40.0 76.6         Dec 1 392.7 264.9 411.4 284.9 126.4 − − − 0.5 − 105.8 32.5 73.4
2017         Jan 1 449.7 260.9 499.0 348.3 150.7 − − − 2.2 − 92.9 17.1 75.8
         Feb 1 484.8 261.3 507.1 347.0 160.1 − − − 1.7 − 97.3 12.4 84.9         Mar 1 558.0 262.1 543.2 353.8 189.3 − − − 1.7 − 115.4 26.8 88.6
         Apr 1 582.8 264.7 591.2 402.7 188.5 − − − 4.1 − 88.9 20.0 68.9
         May 1 608.2 264.9 607.1 433.6 173.5 − − − 2.5 − 102.9 27.8 75.1         June 1 616.4 267.4 586.1 418.6 167.5 − − − 3.4 − 112.9 40.0 72.9
         July 1 621.0 268.8 597.0 422.3 174.7 − − 0.0 3.8 − 112.2 40.8 71.4
         Aug 1 625.1 268.4 585.6 422.9 162.7 − − 0.0 4.1 − 114.7 47.0 67.7         Sep 1 663.9 269.0 613.2 411.1 202.1 − − 0.0 3.8 − 121.5 59.3 62.2
         Oct 1 644.4 269.8 624.6 478.1 146.5 − − 0.0 3.6 − 100.7 45.1 55.6
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circu lation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this a djustment is
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
168.4 7.7 10.6 10.6 − 59.3 231.8 − 394.4 100.6 2017 Mar                  3
157.0 6.0 12.8 12.8 − 59.3 231.7 − 394.4 100.6                               10
152.9 3.5 12.4 12.4 − 59.3 232.1 − 394.4 100.6                               17
153.5 5.0 12.0 12.0 − 59.3 231.0 − 394.4 100.6                               24
218.8 3.0 10.4 10.4 − 59.0 229.4 − 412.0 101.1                               31
168.5 3.9 11.6 11.6 − 59.0 226.6 − 412.0 101.4          Apr                  7
170.5 2.9 11.2 11.2 − 59.0 225.8 − 412.0 101.4                               14
169.1 3.0 10.5 10.5 − 59.0 225.7 − 412.0 101.4                               21
180.7 5.0 10.1 10.1 − 59.0 225.5 − 412.0 102.3                               28
175.2 4.1 11.4 11.4 − 59.0 226.3 − 412.0 102.3          May                  5
170.5 3.7 11.1 11.1 − 59.0 227.2 − 412.0 102.2                               12
162.0 3.7 11.6 11.6 − 59.0 227.4 − 412.0 102.3                               19
145.5 2.9 11.1 11.1 − 59.0 226.9 − 412.0 102.3                               26
150.7 2.8 10.7 10.7 − 59.0 228.3 − 412.0 102.3          June                  2
152.7 2.8 10.8 10.8 − 59.0 228.1 − 412.0 102.3                                 9
149.0 3.0 11.0 11.0 − 59.0 229.5 − 412.0 102.3                               16
152.1 3.0 12.5 12.5 − 59.0 230.1 − 412.0 102.3                               23
222.5 4.1 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 224.4 − 371.9 102.3                               30
168.8 5.0 10.3 10.3 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3          July                  7
156.4 5.0 11.2 11.2 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3                               14
170.7 5.5 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 223.5 − 371.9 102.3                               21
169.3 6.2 12.7 12.7 − 56.7 223.2 − 371.9 102.3                               28
175.8 8.9 10.5 10.5 − 56.7 224.2 − 371.9 102.3 2017 Aug                  4
171.3 8.7 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 222.7 − 371.9 102.3                               11
182.2 7.5 10.9 10.9 − 56.7 223.3 − 371.9 102.3                               18
181.3 7.4 10.9 10.9 − 56.7 224.2 − 371.9 102.3                               25
182.1 6.8 10.1 10.1 − 56.7 224.8 − 371.9 102.3          Sep                  1
175.2 8.5 11.0 11.0 − 56.7 224.7 − 371.9 102.3                                 8
175.5 7.7 9.8 9.8 − 56.7 224.1 − 371.9 102.3                               15
173.6 8.7 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 225.9 − 371.9 102.3                               22
231.1 5.9 10.4 10.4 − 55.6 218.9 − 364.9 102.3                               29
177.8 9.0 10.8 10.8 − 55.6 221.5 − 364.9 102.3          Oct                  6
176.5 8.6 11.4 11.4 − 55.6 222.7 − 364.9 102.3                               13
175.1 8.9 12.4 12.4 − 55.6 223.5 − 364.9 102.3                               20
171.6 9.5 11.3 11.3 − 55.6 224.3 − 364.9 102.3                               27
186.8 9.8 10.9 10.9 − 55.6 226.5 − 364.9 102.3          Nov                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0 2015          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0          Aug 70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0          Sep 
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0          Oct 
74.7 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.4 323.9 128.0 5.0          Nov 
117.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 15.4 24.7 327.3 119.7 5.0          Dec 
100.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.4 25.2 328.3 119.7 5.0 2017          Jan 
121.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.4 24.5 330.1 119.7 5.6          Feb 131.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.3 25.1 331.9 126.0 5.6          Mar 
125.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.3 335.2 126.0 5.6          Apr 
119.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.8 338.1 126.0 5.6          May140.4 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.7 26.2 342.8 115.8 5.6          June
130.0 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 14.7 26.4 345.0 115.8 5.6          July
139.9 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.7 26.6 348.6 115.8 5.6          Aug 140.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 14.4 27.1 352.1 114.6 5.6          Sep 
127.4 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.4 27.3 354.2 114.6 5.6          Oct 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of e uro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem cla im/ liability
the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.32009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2015         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016         Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4         Dec 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017         Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6         Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
         Apr 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
         May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6         June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
         July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
         Aug 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3         Sep 7,811.0 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.4 269.0 415.4 288.4 126.9 3,799.4 3,385.0 2,889.9 2,589.5
 Changes 3
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.72012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.82013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.62014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2016         Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.5 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.0 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7
         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.2 1.5 8.4 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.6 10.0         June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.5 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8         Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
         Oct − 0.5 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 25.9 0.1 72.2 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.6 11.3 15.8 15.2         Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2017         Jan 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5         Mar − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
         Apr 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
         May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9         June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
         July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
         Aug − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3         Sep 8.1 0.9 22.5 21.9 26.1 − 4.2 0.6 1.5 − 1.0 7.4 7.2 12.4 13.9
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1          Dec 
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan 
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb 294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar 
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5          Apr 
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5          May299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1          June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9          July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9          Aug 300.4 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.4 283.2 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.3          Sep 
Changes 3
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.7 90.5 2016          Jan 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.1 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 
0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 0.9 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5          June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.7 11.9 − 11.1          July
1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.3 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3          Sep 
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.7 44.1 − 56.4          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.7 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.4 − 11.4 − 38.8          Dec 
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2017          Jan 
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6          Feb 
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5          Mar 
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4          Apr 
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0          May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2          June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3          July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0          Aug 
− 1.6 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.8 0.2 0.5 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 10.7 11.3 − 33.3          Sep 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.42009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2015         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016         Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4         Dec 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017         Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7         Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
         Apr 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
         May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2         June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
         July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
         Aug 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5         Sep 7,811.0 1,256.1 1,071.8 184.3 3,494.7 3,370.9 1,886.8 902.3 284.2 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
 Changes 4
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.52012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.42013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.32014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2016         Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.9 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.6 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3
         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.2 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2         June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.5 − 15.0 − 7.1 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3         Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
         Oct − 0.5 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 25.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1         Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2017         Jan 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5         Mar − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
         Apr 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
         May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6         June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
         July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
         Aug − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7         Sep 8.1 3.1 − 3.7 6.9 8.6 2.6 6.3 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3          Dec 
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan 
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb 48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6          Mar 
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4          Apr 
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4          May59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5          June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9          July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7          Aug 61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 9.2 8.5 2.6 2.4 1,015.0 41.9 669.5 612.7 758.1          Sep 
Changes 4
− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan 
− 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.6 11.7 13.1 65.8          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.3 7.2 − 48.8          Apr 
− 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.8 − 0.7 1.0 4.3 12.3          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7          June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5          Sep 
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.5          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 6.2 − 27.0          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2017          Jan 
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7          Feb 3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7          May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0          June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6          July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0          Aug 
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 0.5 − 0.8 0.0 − 8.4 − 0.1 26.4 5.0 − 25.8          Sep 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2017         Apr 1,696 7,999.0 442.7 2,488.5 1,995.4 490.0 4,063.3 366.4 2,959.3 0.7 731.1 113.7 890.8
         May 1,692 7,993.3 466.1 2,452.9 1,956.5 493.1 4,064.6 359.2 2,967.5 0.6 730.4 113.6 896.0         June 1,689 7,897.2 465.0 2,434.6 1,942.6 488.4 4,053.0 351.9 2,965.4 0.6 727.7 113.1 831.6
         July 1,673 7,865.5 464.7 2,416.5 1,927.6 485.1 4,053.9 350.4 2,972.5 0.6 723.4 113.2 817.2
         Aug 1,668 7,854.3 470.1 2,384.7 1,903.7 477.3 4,052.8 345.5 2,977.9 0.5 722.1 113.6 833.0         Sep 1,651 7,857.6 462.5 2,423.1 1,948.3 471.5 4,060.9 352.8 2,982.9 0.6 717.2 113.0 798.0
Commercial banks 6
2017         Aug 265 3,155.3 311.4 991.9 913.6 77.3 1,201.4 188.8 787.8 0.4 221.2 51.3 599.4
         Sep 265 3,163.2 299.9 1,035.8 959.2 75.6 1,207.4 195.6 790.7 0.5 217.4 51.1 569.0
   Big banks 7
2017         Aug 4 1,781.8 162.3 516.2 484.3 31.8 497.7 107.5 287.3 0.1 101.7 45.5 560.2
         Sep 4 1,749.2 145.9 527.1 496.4 30.6 500.9 111.3 289.1 0.1 99.2 44.8 530.5
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2017         Aug 154 985.8 81.4 245.2 201.7 42.5 624.0 58.3 454.6 0.2 109.0 4.5 30.7
         Sep 154 985.1 74.0 250.4 207.5 42.2 625.6 60.2 455.9 0.2 107.7 5.0 30.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2017         Aug 107 387.7 67.7 230.6 227.6 3.0 79.7 23.0 45.8 0.0 10.5 1.3 8.5
         Sep 107 428.9 80.0 258.3 255.4 2.8 80.8 24.1 45.7 0.1 10.6 1.3 8.5
Landesbanken
2017         Aug 9 913.4 60.5 266.8 200.3 65.4 475.0 49.9 348.8 0.1 74.6 10.5 100.6
         Sep 8 899.0 52.1 265.7 200.8 64.2 473.4 51.0 347.2 0.1 73.2 10.1 97.8
Savings banks
2017         Aug 393 1,182.0 32.9 177.6 62.3 115.2 940.7 46.7 738.0 0.0 155.8 14.2 16.6
         Sep 393 1,183.0 32.9 174.9 60.9 113.9 944.7 47.9 740.4 0.0 156.2 14.2 16.4
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2017         Aug 947 872.5 15.5 166.6 59.9 106.2 655.3 31.2 516.9 0.0 107.0 16.4 18.8
         Sep 931 875.9 15.8 166.0 60.3 105.3 658.5 32.2 518.5 0.0 107.7 16.5 19.1
Mortgage banks
2017         Aug 14 255.9 2.6 41.0 29.7 11.3 204.9 2.7 169.2 − 33.0 0.1 7.3
         Sep 14 255.0 1.9 40.3 29.1 11.1 205.2 3.1 169.5 − 32.7 0.1 7.5
Building and loan associations
2017         Aug 20 228.8 0.9 58.3 41.7 16.6 164.4 1.3 138.3 . 24.9 0.3 4.8
         Sep 20 229.9 1.3 58.6 41.9 16.7 165.0 1.2 138.9 . 24.8 0.3 4.8
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2017         Aug 20 1,246.4 46.3 682.5 596.1 85.4 411.1 24.9 278.9 0.0 105.7 20.8 85.6
         Sep 20 1,251.6 58.6 681.9 596.2 84.8 406.8 21.9 277.7 − 105.1 20.8 83.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2017         Aug 142 1,086.4 115.7 402.0 361.9 39.1 473.5 67.3 299.3 0.3 103.9 4.6 90.5
         Sep 142 1,126.3 122.2 437.8 398.6 38.2 473.5 68.5 300.2 0.4 102.1 4.5 88.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2017         Aug 35 698.6 48.0 171.5 134.3 36.1 393.8 44.3 253.5 0.3 93.3 3.3 82.0
         Sep 35 697.4 42.2 179.4 143.2 35.4 392.7 44.4 254.5 0.3 91.6 3.3 79.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commerci al Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the C redit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung de r Kreditinstitute)
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statis tical Supplement
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I. 1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,826.3 570.1 1,256.1 3,632.2 1,976.6 311.4 693.7 84.6 594.0 543.8 56.5 1,137.0 503.1 900.4 2017          Apr 
1,811.9 606.0 1,205.9 3,637.8 1,986.3 307.4 694.9 83.3 593.5 543.7 55.6 1,140.2 505.2 898.2          May1,774.3 588.8 1,185.5 3,630.1 1,992.9 295.3 694.3 54.7 592.4 542.9 55.1 1,139.6 509.6 843.7          June
1,754.1 566.0 1,188.0 3,644.0 2,003.7 300.8 694.0 79.8 591.2 545.0 54.3 1,124.7 510.5 832.4          July
1,713.2 510.4 1,202.8 3,662.5 2,017.4 305.8 695.7 83.6 590.0 544.6 53.6 1,120.5 512.0 846.1          Aug 1,763.0 550.7 1,212.3 3,659.8 2,025.2 296.3 695.5 71.5 589.4 544.6 53.5 1,116.1 511.2 807.5          Sep 
Commercial banks 6
812.8 361.4 451.4 1,453.4 892.7 184.1 250.8 62.3 101.9 93.1 23.8 161.7 177.2 550.3 2017          Aug 
858.0 397.0 460.9 1,450.5 901.3 172.8 250.8 53.8 101.5 92.9 24.0 161.0 177.6 516.1          Sep 
Big banks 7
414.2 157.4 256.8 637.1 361.5 118.8 89.2 62.3 61.7 60.4 5.9 130.9 103.9 495.8 2017          Aug 
409.4 152.4 257.0 633.3 367.7 109.5 88.5 53.8 61.5 60.2 6.2 129.8 103.9 472.7          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
190.9 56.9 134.0 655.0 421.5 41.7 135.9 0.0 39.6 32.4 16.4 30.4 64.8 44.6 2017          Aug 
198.9 59.8 139.0 656.8 423.8 41.4 136.0 − 39.4 32.4 16.3 30.9 65.2 33.3          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
207.7 147.1 60.6 161.3 109.8 23.5 25.8 − 0.5 0.3 1.6 0.3 8.5 9.9 2017          Aug 
249.7 184.8 64.9 160.3 109.8 22.0 26.4 − 0.5 0.3 1.6 0.3 8.4 10.1          Sep 
Landesbanken
257.8 60.0 197.8 298.8 125.7 61.4 98.5 17.1 12.5 12.1 0.6 202.1 52.2 102.5 2017          Aug 
254.4 59.3 195.1 296.7 122.7 62.1 98.9 15.1 12.5 12.1 0.6 198.3 50.9 98.6          Sep 
Savings banks
130.8 5.9 124.9 888.6 547.4 14.6 14.8 − 290.4 264.9 21.4 14.1 108.2 40.2 2017          Aug 
131.4 7.4 124.0 888.5 547.4 14.8 14.9 − 290.2 265.0 21.2 14.3 108.3 40.5          Sep 
 
Credit cooperatives
 
113.0 2.1 110.9 647.9 410.6 31.8 14.7 − 184.7 174.0 6.1 7.8 74.0 29.9 2017          Aug 
113.8 3.4 110.4 649.1 411.4 32.4 14.6 − 184.8 174.2 6.0 7.9 74.1 31.0          Sep 
Mortgage banks
50.4 4.2 46.2 97.0 4.1 5.4 87.5 − − − . 90.4 9.6 8.5 2017          Aug 
51.9 3.5 48.4 96.3 3.4 5.8 87.1 − − − . 88.3 9.6 8.9          Sep 
Building and loan associations
26.9 4.5 22.4 175.0 3.4 1.5 169.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.9 11.0 13.0 2017          Aug 
27.3 4.9 22.4 175.5 3.5 1.5 170.0 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.9 11.0 13.3          Sep 
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
321.5 72.2 249.3 101.9 33.5 7.0 59.8 4.2 − − . 641.5 79.7 101.8 2017          Aug 
326.3 75.3 251.1 103.1 35.5 6.8 59.2 2.7 − − . 643.3 79.7 99.1          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
379.0 216.2 162.8 541.5 373.7 59.6 78.0 7.7 21.1 20.6 9.1 23.1 49.7 93.1 2017          Aug 
417.9 255.0 162.9 543.8 380.5 54.7 78.5 8.2 21.0 20.5 9.0 22.4 49.7 92.6          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
171.3 69.1 102.1 380.2 263.9 36.1 52.2 7.7 20.6 20.3 7.5 22.8 41.2 83.2 2017          Aug 
168.2 70.2 98.0 383.5 270.6 32.8 52.2 8.2 20.5 20.2 7.5 22.0 41.2 82.5          Sep 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerisc he Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking  categories. 
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.72008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2016         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
         July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
         Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5         Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
         Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
         Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6         Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017         Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
         Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1         Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.4 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
         Apr 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
         May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6         June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
         July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
         Aug 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5         Sep 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
Changes *
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.92012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2016         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
         July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6         Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
         Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
         Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0         Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
2017         Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
         Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2         Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         Apr + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
         May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7         June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
         July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Aug + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6         Sep + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.4 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0 2016          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6          July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7          Aug − 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6          Sep 
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6          Oct 
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6          Nov − 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8          Dec 
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2017          Jan 
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5          Feb − 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4          Mar 
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3          Apr 
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4          May− 19.7 88.4 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8          June
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9          July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0          Aug − 19.5 88.0 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0          Sep 
Changes *
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 2016          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 −          Nov − + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2          Dec 
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2017          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          May− − 0.4 + 0.0 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6          June
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2          July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.2 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1          Sep 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.92008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2016         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
         July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
         Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0         Sep 0.3 1,046.8 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.4 1.0 751.0 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.3
         Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
         Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3         Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017         Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
         Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3         Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 1.9 230.0 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
         Apr 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
         May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8         June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
         July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
         Aug 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6         Sep 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
Changes *
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.32009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.62012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2016         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
         July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3         Sep − 0.0 − 44.3 − 42.2 − 42.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 5.3 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.5
         Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
         Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1         Dec + 0.0 − 20.7 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 9.1 − 13.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 1.2
2017         Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8         Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
         Apr + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
         May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6         June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
         July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5         Sep + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8 2016          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7          July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7          Aug 13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7          Sep 
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7          Oct 
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7          Nov 13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7          Dec 
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2017          Jan 
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7          Feb 12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 124.0 72.2 51.8 0.7          Mar 
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7          Apr 
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6          May12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6          June
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6          July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5          Aug 12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5          Sep 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 2016          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0          Nov − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0          Dec 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2017          Jan 
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 15.9 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 −          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          May− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0          July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 1.0 + 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.32008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2016         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.8 217.8 216.8 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.3 2,472.8
         July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
         Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1         Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
         Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
         Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5         Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017         Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
         Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5         Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
         Apr 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
         May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8         June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.5 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
         July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
         Aug 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2         Sep 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.4 2,608.7
Changes *
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.42009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.42012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2016         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.2
         July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2         Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
         Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
         Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0         Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
2017         Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
         Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2         Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
         Apr + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
         May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8         June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
         July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
         Aug + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0         Sep + 7.4 + 8.9 + 3.4 + 6.4 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0 2016          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May2,256.9 258.7 1,998.2 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8          July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8          Aug 2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8          Sep 
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8          Oct 
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8          Nov 2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8          Dec 
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2017          Jan 
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7          Feb 2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7          Mar 
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7          Apr 
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7          May2,346.1 267.4 2,078.7 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6          June
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6          July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6          Aug 2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6          Sep 
Changes *
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0 2016          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May+ 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Aug + 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0          Nov + 3.4 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2017          Jan 
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0          May+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.4 − − 0.1          June
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0          Aug + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0          Sep 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2015 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016         Sep 2,497.2 1,248.2 1,264.5 1,007.6 256.9 1,341.1 350.5 130.3 103.0 63.2 126.9 51.2 57.4 136.4
         Dec 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017         Mar 2,533.8 1,267.0 1,283.2 1,022.4 260.8 1,364.4 356.6 129.4 105.2 66.9 131.5 50.5 55.9 141.0
         June 2,559.7 1,280.1 1,297.8 1,033.7 264.1 1,377.8 360.9 131.5 108.3 65.7 130.8 51.0 54.7 141.5         Sep 2,589.5 1,296.7 1,315.7 1,046.9 268.8 1,392.7 366.5 131.8 109.7 67.1 133.3 50.9 53.0 146.0
 Short-term lending
2015 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.12016         Sep 213.8 − 7.6 − 7.6 181.6 4.1 34.3 4.6 13.0 42.6 4.1 4.7 28.5
         Dec 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2017         Mar 211.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 181.3 3.7 33.6 4.5 13.6 44.8 3.8 4.2 28.6
         June 213.6 − 6.7 − 6.7 183.3 3.5 34.7 4.7 13.7 43.3 4.0 4.6 28.1         Sep 213.5 − 6.5 − 6.5 183.5 3.6 33.8 4.0 14.0 45.2 3.9 4.3 28.1
 Medium-term lending
2015 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.12016         Sep 261.0 − 34.8 − 34.8 183.4 13.4 24.3 5.7 10.5 16.5 4.6 11.0 41.1
         Dec 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2017         Mar 264.4 − 34.0 − 34.0 186.8 13.4 23.3 4.9 11.4 17.9 4.4 10.8 43.0
         June 267.4 − 33.8 − 33.8 188.7 13.3 23.3 5.0 10.9 18.2 4.4 10.7 44.3         Sep 269.6 − 33.9 − 33.9 190.2 13.6 23.1 5.1 11.2 18.2 4.4 10.4 45.6
 Long-term lending
2015 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.32016         Sep 2,022.5 1,248.2 1,222.1 1,007.6 214.5 976.1 332.9 71.7 92.7 39.7 67.8 42.4 41.6 66.9
         Dec 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2017         Mar 2,057.6 1,267.0 1,242.4 1,022.4 220.0 996.2 339.6 72.5 95.8 41.9 68.7 42.3 40.9 69.4
         June 2,078.7 1,280.1 1,257.3 1,033.7 223.6 1,005.8 344.0 73.5 98.6 41.1 69.3 42.6 39.4 69.2         Sep 2,106.3 1,296.7 1,275.3 1,046.9 228.3 1,018.9 349.3 74.9 100.5 41.9 69.9 42.6 38.3 72.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2016         Q3 + 24.5 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 10.9 + 5.1 + 10.2 + 4.2 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.6 + 2.7
         Q4 + 14.4 + 9.1 + 12.4 + 8.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.2
2017         Q1 + 21.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 0.7 + 16.8 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 3.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.2
         Q2 + 23.3 + 12.7 + 13.8 + 11.2 + 2.6 + 11.1 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.4         Q3 + 29.5 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 14.5 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.0
 Short-term lending
2016         Q3 − 2.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9
2017         Q1 + 6.3 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4         Q3 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0
 Medium-term lending
2016         Q3 + 3.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
         Q4 + 2.4 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7
2017         Q1 + 0.2 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.1
         Q2 + 3.0 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3         Q3 + 2.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
 Long-term lending
2016         Q3 + 24.2 + 12.4 + 16.2 + 10.9 + 5.3 + 10.7 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.8
         Q4 + 19.6 + 9.1 + 13.3 + 8.4 + 4.9 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.6
2017         Q1 + 15.1 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8
         Q2 + 18.2 + 12.7 + 14.0 + 11.2 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.5         Q3 + 27.2 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 12.8 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5 2015
672.7 201.4 34.8 180.8 401.1 46.8 1,142.0 910.5 231.5 162.3 9.8 14.2 3.5 2016          Sep 
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6          Dec 
684.0 206.2 38.8 179.7 403.8 46.3 1,154.8 922.9 231.9 165.5 9.2 14.6 3.7 2017          Mar 
694.3 209.8 39.6 183.6 408.2 48.5 1,167.3 933.2 234.2 168.0 8.9 14.5 3.8          June700.9 211.2 41.1 185.7 410.4 48.3 1,182.2 945.4 236.7 170.4 8.9 14.6 3.7          Sep 
Short-term lending
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0 201549.9 8.5 5.9 11.1 24.7 5.7 31.6 3.4 28.2 1.7 9.8 0.5 0.0 2016          Sep 
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0          Dec 
48.2 8.4 6.6 9.1 24.5 5.7 29.8 3.2 26.7 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2017          Mar 
50.1 9.0 6.5 9.7 24.5 5.7 29.7 3.1 26.6 1.8 8.9 0.5 0.0          June50.2 9.6 6.7 10.0 23.7 5.5 29.4 2.9 26.5 1.7 8.9 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0 201569.7 10.7 7.3 18.9 33.0 3.7 77.1 21.4 55.7 50.3 − 0.5 0.0 2016          Sep 
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
71.1 11.3 8.6 17.8 32.7 3.6 77.1 20.6 56.5 51.7 − 0.5 0.0 2017          Mar 
72.1 11.5 8.8 18.6 32.8 3.6 78.1 20.5 57.7 52.9 − 0.5 0.0          June72.2 11.9 9.1 18.3 32.9 3.6 78.9 20.2 58.6 54.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
Long-term lending
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5 2015553.1 182.1 21.6 150.8 343.4 37.4 1,033.3 885.7 147.6 110.2 − 13.1 3.5 2016          Sep 
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5          Dec 
564.7 186.5 23.6 152.7 346.5 37.1 1,047.9 899.2 148.8 112.1 − 13.4 3.7 2017          Mar 
572.2 189.2 24.3 155.3 350.8 39.2 1,059.4 909.6 149.9 113.3 − 13.5 3.7          June578.5 189.8 25.3 157.4 353.8 39.3 1,073.8 922.3 151.6 114.8 − 13.6 3.7          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.4 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 14.1 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 2016          Q3
+ 7.1 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
+ 6.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 10.5 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1          Q2+ 8.9 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 12.1 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2016          Q3
− 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2016          Q3
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 7.4 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.2 + 0.1 2016          Q3
+ 6.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 6.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 7.4 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 9.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 8.6 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.6 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.72015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.52016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2016         Oct 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 229.9 658.8 45.8 613.1 586.6 51.3 28.6 18.7 1.1
         Nov 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 233.6 658.8 46.5 612.4 586.2 50.9 28.6 18.6 0.8         Dec 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017         Jan 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 241.0 654.9 46.8 608.0 588.5 49.5 30.6 18.1 2.5
         Feb 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 237.3 654.1 46.5 607.6 588.5 49.0 30.5 17.6 1.5         Mar 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 237.8 653.1 47.8 605.3 586.7 48.2 30.4 17.2 0.9
         Apr 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 229.2 652.6 50.3 602.3 586.2 47.8 30.3 17.3 0.8
         May 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 229.3 654.1 52.3 601.8 585.7 47.0 30.4 17.1 0.4         June 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 226.4 643.4 53.5 589.9 584.7 46.6 29.8 16.9 0.9
         July 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 223.2 642.8 54.1 588.6 583.5 46.0 29.9 16.7 0.7
         Aug 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 220.0 644.4 55.2 589.2 582.4 45.4 30.0 16.7 0.7         Sep 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 218.7 643.2 55.3 587.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 15.8 1.8
Changes*
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.22016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2016         Oct + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 9.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.3         Dec − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.6
         Apr + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 8.5 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4         June + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.2 − 2.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 4.2 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.52016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2016         Oct 199.1 58.8 132.1 78.9 53.2 14.9 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 −
         Nov 207.0 61.7 137.0 82.6 54.4 16.2 38.3 3.9 4.4 27.2 2.6 −         Dec 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017         Jan 202.2 55.1 138.7 84.7 54.1 16.4 37.7 3.8 4.5 26.7 2.5 −
         Feb 205.7 61.4 136.0 81.8 54.2 15.8 38.4 3.7 4.6 26.8 2.5 −         Mar 204.0 58.9 136.8 81.4 55.4 16.5 38.9 3.7 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
         Apr 203.1 59.1 135.6 77.9 57.7 18.7 39.0 3.6 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
         May 209.7 61.1 140.3 80.4 59.9 20.4 39.5 3.7 4.6 26.4 2.5 −         June 209.9 58.1 143.5 81.8 61.8 21.8 40.0 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
         July 207.2 55.6 143.2 80.4 62.8 22.4 40.4 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
         Aug 213.6 61.2 144.2 79.9 64.3 23.4 40.8 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.5 −         Sep 210.5 58.8 143.4 77.5 66.0 24.1 41.9 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.3 −
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.12016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2016         Oct − 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 7.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −         Dec − 7.2 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
2017         Jan + 2.4 − 2.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Feb + 3.5 + 6.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar − 1.7 − 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 6.7 + 1.9 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −         June − 0.1 − 3.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
         July − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Aug + 6.4 + 5.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −         Sep − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 2.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.22015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2016         Oct 3,095.6 1,709.2 756.7 151.1 605.6 30.9 574.8 582.7 47.0 1.4 16.0 1.1
         Nov 3,121.9 1,737.6 755.5 151.1 604.4 30.3 574.1 582.3 46.5 1.5 15.9 0.8         Dec 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2017         Jan 3,144.2 1,757.4 757.1 156.3 600.8 30.4 570.3 584.7 45.0 3.8 15.6 2.5
         Feb 3,139.8 1,755.2 755.4 155.5 599.9 30.6 569.2 584.8 44.4 3.7 15.1 1.5         Mar 3,138.8 1,758.1 754.1 156.3 597.8 31.3 566.4 583.0 43.6 3.7 14.8 0.9
         Apr 3,157.2 1,785.2 746.3 151.4 594.9 31.6 563.3 582.6 43.1 3.7 14.8 0.8
         May 3,158.7 1,791.1 743.1 148.9 594.2 31.9 562.4 582.0 42.4 4.0 14.6 0.4         June 3,160.3 1,811.1 726.2 144.6 581.6 31.7 549.9 581.0 41.9 3.9 14.5 0.9
         July 3,154.3 1,810.5 722.7 142.8 580.0 31.8 548.2 579.8 41.3 4.1 14.3 0.7
         Aug 3,162.8 1,823.0 720.2 140.1 580.1 31.8 548.3 578.7 40.9 4.1 14.2 0.7         Sep 3,170.2 1,832.9 718.5 141.2 577.2 31.2 546.0 578.1 40.8 4.1 13.5 1.8
Changes*
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.22016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.9
2016         Oct + 14.5 + 20.8 − 5.1 − 6.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 26.4 + 28.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec + 5.0 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 17.2 + 17.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 4.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar − 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Apr + 18.4 + 27.0 − 7.8 − 5.0 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 1.4 + 5.9 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4         June + 11.0 + 19.9 − 7.5 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 5.9 − 0.7 − 3.4 − 1.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 8.6 + 12.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 8.1 + 9.9 − 1.1 + 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2016         Oct 1,040.1 523.5 496.0 96.5 399.5 17.2 382.2 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.1 1.1
         Nov 1,043.0 527.1 495.6 96.6 399.0 17.0 382.0 6.9 13.3 1.3 13.0 0.8         Dec 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2017         Jan 1,048.4 532.9 495.6 102.1 393.6 17.6 376.0 6.9 13.0 2.9 12.8 2.5
         Feb 1,033.8 520.4 493.6 100.5 393.1 18.0 375.1 6.8 13.0 2.8 12.4 1.5         Mar 1,034.5 522.7 492.1 101.3 390.8 18.4 372.4 6.8 12.9 2.8 12.1 0.9
         Apr 1,035.4 530.1 485.4 97.5 387.9 18.6 369.2 6.9 13.0 2.8 12.1 0.8
         May 1,033.4 531.1 482.6 95.8 386.8 18.8 368.1 6.8 12.9 2.9 12.0 0.4         June 1,032.3 545.0 467.6 92.9 374.7 18.8 355.9 6.8 12.9 2.8 11.9 0.9
         July 1,022.6 537.7 465.4 91.5 373.9 19.1 354.8 6.8 12.8 2.8 11.8 0.7
         Aug 1,026.6 543.9 463.2 89.1 374.1 19.2 354.8 6.8 12.7 2.8 11.7 0.7         Sep 1,028.0 546.3 462.0 90.9 371.1 18.7 352.4 6.9 12.9 2.8 11.0 1.8
Changes*
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.22016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.9
2016         Oct + 5.0 + 10.6 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 3.0 + 3.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec − 10.6 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 3.2 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 16.0 + 14.6 + 1.6 + 3.8 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.7
         Feb − 14.2 − 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar + 0.7 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Apr + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.6 − 3.8 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         May − 2.0 + 1.0 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.4         June + 8.3 + 14.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 9.7 − 7.4 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 4.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 2.1 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.82015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.62016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017         Apr 2,121.9 1,255.1 1,220.2 211.6 856.4 152.2 35.0 260.9 246.1 24.8 180.6 40.7
         May 2,125.3 1,260.1 1,223.9 213.8 857.9 152.2 36.2 260.5 245.5 24.4 180.6 40.5         June 2,128.0 1,266.1 1,230.1 211.0 866.2 152.9 36.0 258.6 244.3 24.1 180.2 39.9
         July 2,131.7 1,272.8 1,237.7 216.2 868.7 152.8 35.1 257.4 242.8 23.5 179.5 39.7
         Aug 2,136.3 1,279.2 1,243.6 219.1 871.3 153.3 35.5 257.0 242.2 23.8 181.5 36.9         Sep 2,142.2 1,286.6 1,250.8 216.0 880.5 154.3 35.8 256.5 241.8 23.7 181.4 36.7
Changes*
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.72016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2017         Apr + 17.5 + 19.8 + 20.0 + 3.4 + 14.5 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.3
         May + 3.4 + 4.9 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2         June + 2.7 + 6.0 + 6.3 − 2.7 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.4
         July + 3.7 + 6.7 + 7.6 + 5.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2
         Aug + 4.4 + 6.4 + 5.9 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1         Sep + 6.0 + 7.5 + 7.1 − 3.0 + 9.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are no t specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.12015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.52016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017         Apr 203.1 7.6 3.7 1.5 2.3 0.1 13.5 49.2 12.3 19.2 16.6 1.1 12.8
         May 209.7 7.8 3.7 1.6 2.4 0.1 13.5 48.3 11.2 18.8 17.1 1.1 12.7         June 209.9 7.9 3.5 2.0 2.3 0.1 13.2 50.7 11.5 20.6 17.4 1.1 12.6
         July 207.2 7.9 3.8 1.6 2.4 0.1 13.2 49.9 11.3 19.6 17.8 1.2 12.6
         Aug 213.6 7.9 3.9 1.4 2.6 0.1 13.2 49.9 11.1 19.8 17.9 1.2 12.7         Sep 210.5 8.0 4.1 1.3 2.6 0.1 13.2 49.8 11.7 19.2 17.7 1.2 12.7
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.62016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2017         Apr − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1         June − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1
         July − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug + 6.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1         Sep − 3.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Ent erprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 201413.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
14.8 53.9 207.0 13.0 194.0 575.8 567.4 8.3 30.1 0.9 2.7 − 2017          Apr 
14.9 53.1 207.4 13.1 194.3 575.3 567.0 8.3 29.5 1.1 2.6 −          May14.3 51.7 206.9 12.9 194.0 574.2 566.0 8.2 29.0 1.1 2.5 −          June
14.6 51.3 206.1 12.7 193.4 573.1 565.0 8.1 28.5 1.3 2.5 −          July
14.8 51.0 206.0 12.5 193.5 571.8 563.8 8.0 28.2 1.3 2.5 −          Aug 14.7 50.3 206.2 12.5 193.7 571.2 563.1 8.0 27.9 1.3 2.5 −          Sep 
Changes*
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016
− 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2017          Apr 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          May− 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
+ 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          July
+ 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Aug − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 201452.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
51.7 27.5 7.8 10.8 5.7 0.4 94.5 15.6 49.4 28.1 1.5 − 2017          Apr 
57.0 31.6 8.4 11.3 5.8 0.2 96.5 14.5 51.5 29.1 1.4 −          May54.4 28.8 8.3 11.5 5.8 0.0 96.9 14.2 50.8 30.5 1.4 −          June
51.4 26.0 8.1 11.6 5.7 0.0 97.9 14.5 51.1 31.0 1.3 −          July
57.7 31.2 8.8 11.9 5.8 0.0 98.2 15.1 50.0 31.9 1.2 −          Aug 55.5 28.0 9.0 12.7 5.8 0.0 97.1 15.0 48.0 33.0 1.2 −          Sep 
Changes*
+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 2017          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 2.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 −          May− 2.6 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 −          June
− 2.9 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 −          July
+ 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 −          Aug − 2.5 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 −          Sep 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.82015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.72016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017         May 593.5 585.7 536.9 349.1 48.9 35.3 7.8 6.8 0.1 55.6 47.0 33.6 8.6
         June 592.4 584.7 536.2 347.5 48.5 34.9 7.7 6.7 0.1 55.1 46.6 33.3 8.5
         July 591.2 583.5 538.3 353.8 45.2 34.1 7.7 6.7 0.1 54.3 46.0 32.8 8.3
         Aug 590.0 582.4 538.0 352.6 44.4 33.2 7.6 6.7 0.1 53.6 45.4 32.5 8.2         Sep 589.4 581.8 538.0 350.7 43.9 32.6 7.6 6.6 0.1 53.5 45.3 32.5 8.2
Changes*
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.12016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2017         May − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1
         June − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1
         July − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 + 6.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2
         Aug − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1         Sep − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.22015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.52016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017         May 1,107.3 173.0 26.7 391.2 84.0 103.3 4.8 39.0 6.6 965.1 0.5 0.2 32.8 0.5
         June 1,107.1 172.3 25.8 390.3 85.9 105.3 4.8 39.8 6.3 962.0 0.3 0.2 32.5 0.5
         July 1,092.4 169.3 26.1 378.5 79.9 99.9 5.0 39.4 6.3 953.1 0.4 0.2 32.2 0.5
         Aug 1,088.4 166.5 27.8 375.5 79.0 100.5 5.1 37.9 6.5 950.0 0.4 0.2 32.2 0.5         Sep 1,084.0 161.5 28.2 378.8 84.4 106.0 5.0 37.0 6.5 941.0 0.3 0.2 32.1 0.5
Changes*
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.72016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2017         May + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 4.2 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         June − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 −
         July − 14.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 11.8 − 6.0 − 5.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 8.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Aug − 4.1 − 2.8 + 1.7 − 2.9 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −         Sep − 3.6 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 3.3 + 5.5 + 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017         July 20 229.3 42.9 0.0 17.1 12.9 101.7 24.7 24.9 2.6 24.9 165.3 9.9 2.9 11.0 6.9
         Aug 20 228.8 42.6 0.0 16.6 12.8 102.1 24.6 24.9 2.6 24.3 165.4 9.6 2.9 11.0 6.7         Sep 20 229.9 43.2 0.0 16.7 12.7 102.9 24.6 24.8 2.5 24.7 165.8 9.7 2.9 11.0 6.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         July 12 161.0 27.4 − 7.9 9.7 78.8 21.8 11.4 1.7 22.2 107.9 9.6 2.9 7.4 4.4
         Aug 12 160.4 27.1 − 7.5 9.6 79.1 21.7 11.3 1.7 21.8 107.8 9.4 2.9 7.4 4.3         Sep 12 161.4 27.7 − 7.4 9.5 79.8 21.7 11.3 1.7 22.2 108.1 9.4 2.9 7.4 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         July 8 68.3 15.5 0.0 9.3 3.2 22.9 2.9 13.5 0.9 2.7 57.4 0.3 − 3.6 2.5
         Aug 8 68.3 15.5 0.0 9.1 3.2 23.0 2.9 13.5 0.9 2.5 57.5 0.3 − 3.6 2.4         Sep 8 68.5 15.5 0.0 9.3 3.2 23.1 2.9 13.5 0.9 2.5 57.7 0.3 − 3.6 2.4
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017         July 2.1 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.3 3.5 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.6 17.3 8.0 0.6 0.0
         Aug 2.1 0.0 0.6 4.0 2.3 3.5 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.6 17.3 8.0 0.7 0.0         Sep 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.1 1.7 3.0 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 17.0 7.8 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         July 1.3 0.0 0.4 3.0 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.2 12.5 4.8 0.4 0.0
         Aug 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.5 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.3 12.4 4.7 0.5 0.0         Sep 1.4 0.0 0.4 2.2 1.1 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.2 12.3 4.6 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         July 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.2 0.1 0.0
         Aug 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.3 4.9 3.3 0.1 0.0         Sep 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.2 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in thesubsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  
7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.92015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.02016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2016         Nov 50 185 1,928.8 592.4 578.4 205.9 372.5 14.0 622.8 516.4 14.1 502.3 106.4 713.7 495.0
         Dec 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017         Jan 51 192 1,877.2 603.8 590.4 215.5 375.0 13.4 586.0 492.4 14.1 478.4 93.6 687.4 461.8
         Feb 51 193 1,920.0 617.9 604.9 227.3 377.5 13.1 600.4 505.3 13.8 491.4 95.1 701.7 467.6         Mar 51 193 1,918.1 616.1 602.7 228.2 374.5 13.4 609.0 513.0 14.1 499.0 95.9 693.0 452.2
         Apr 51 192 1,931.5 631.8 618.6 224.4 394.2 13.3 597.8 503.9 13.7 490.3 93.9 701.8 460.3
         May 51 192 1,894.2 629.7 616.8 215.1 401.8 12.8 565.5 478.3 13.2 465.1 87.2 699.0 459.0         June 51 192 1,828.5 589.4 576.9 212.5 364.4 12.5 565.1 475.9 13.3 462.5 89.2 674.1 434.1
         July 51 192 1,787.7 564.8 552.6 199.5 353.1 12.1 546.9 463.7 13.3 450.4 83.1 676.1 438.4
         Aug 51 191 1,752.1 537.7 526.1 171.1 355.0 11.6 545.3 461.7 13.2 448.5 83.7 669.1 432.2
Changes *
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.22016
+ 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2016         Dec + 1 + 6 − 55.9 − 10.2 − 9.9 − 1.0 − 8.9 − 0.3 − 44.3 − 28.4 + 0.4 − 28.8 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 11.1
2017         Jan − + 1 + 5.1 + 24.7 + 25.0 + 10.5 + 14.5 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 7.9 − 0.4 + 8.3 + 3.5 − 20.0 − 20.0
         Feb − + 1 + 41.4 + 9.6 + 10.1 + 11.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 − 0.2 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 13.0 + 2.9         Mar − − − 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 10.6 + 0.3 + 10.3 + 1.2 − 7.9 − 13.7
         Apr − − 1 + 14.9 + 22.0 + 22.0 − 3.8 + 25.8 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 10.3 + 11.7
         May − − − 35.2 + 6.6 + 6.8 − 9.3 + 16.1 − 0.2 − 22.3 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 16.4 − 5.4 − 0.8 + 4.0         June − − − 64.4 − 34.7 − 34.4 − 2.5 − 31.9 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.6 − 23.6 − 21.9
         July − − − 39.1 − 16.8 − 16.7 − 13.0 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 9.6 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 4.5 − 5.1 + 3.7 + 8.9
         Aug − − 1 − 34.9 − 24.2 − 23.7 − 28.4 + 4.7 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.2 − 6.3 − 4.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2016         Nov 19 52 323.1 83.1 73.2 19.9 53.3 10.0 154.6 123.1 23.1 100.0 31.5 85.4 −
         Dec 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017         Jan 20 53 314.1 81.3 71.7 22.0 49.7 9.6 161.5 130.5 22.9 107.6 31.0 71.3 −
         Feb 20 53 315.4 80.7 71.2 30.9 40.4 9.5 162.0 130.8 23.1 107.7 31.2 72.7 −         Mar 20 53 309.8 79.8 70.7 31.1 39.7 9.1 162.7 131.5 23.0 108.5 31.2 67.2 −
         Apr 20 53 303.2 73.1 64.1 24.8 39.3 9.0 160.8 130.9 22.8 108.0 29.9 69.3 −
         May 20 53 295.9 72.1 64.6 26.7 38.0 7.5 157.0 128.3 23.0 105.3 28.7 66.8 −         June 20 51 285.2 72.4 65.2 27.0 38.2 7.2 155.5 126.6 22.9 103.7 28.9 57.2 −
         July 20 53 280.7 79.2 72.5 26.6 45.9 6.8 147.0 119.2 22.7 96.5 27.8 54.5 −
         Aug 20 52 279.0 74.8 67.8 28.8 39.0 6.9 153.1 125.7 23.0 102.7 27.5 51.1 −
Changes *
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2016         Dec + 1 + 1 − 3.4 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 6.6 + 7.0 − 0.5 + 7.4 − 0.4 − 8.4 −
2017         Jan − − − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 5.6 −
         Feb − − + 0.0 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 8.9 − 10.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 −         Mar − − − 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 5.5 −
         Apr − − − 4.9 − 5.7 − 5.7 − 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.1 −
         May − − − 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.5 −         June − − 2 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 9.6 −
         July − + 2 − 2.0 + 8.3 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 8.9 − 0.2 − 7.6 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 1.1 − 2.7 −
         Aug − − 1 − 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.2 + 2.3 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2017
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 20141,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 2016
1,165.0 791.8 410.5 381.3 373.2 19.1 15.5 3.6 354.1 104.2 50.3 609.4 495.3 2016          Nov 
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0          Dec 
1,161.3 804.3 417.6 386.7 357.0 15.2 11.7 3.5 341.8 111.2 50.9 553.9 456.6 2017          Jan 
1,190.7 816.8 423.2 393.6 373.9 16.5 13.2 3.4 357.4 114.0 51.2 564.0 462.0          Feb 1,197.9 825.3 436.0 389.3 372.6 15.2 11.8 3.4 357.4 106.9 51.6 561.7 448.3          Mar 
1,210.4 846.5 422.0 424.5 363.9 15.3 12.0 3.3 348.7 104.7 51.3 565.0 455.4          Apr 
1,178.6 830.8 406.4 424.4 347.8 15.5 12.3 3.2 332.2 100.5 50.7 564.3 458.6          May1,151.2 801.4 424.5 377.0 349.7 14.9 11.6 3.3 334.9 93.4 50.3 533.6 429.5          June
1,105.0 780.2 399.6 380.6 324.7 14.4 11.6 2.8 310.4 97.0 49.8 536.0 434.9          July
1,075.3 739.6 372.0 367.5 335.7 13.8 11.1 2.8 321.8 98.3 49.7 528.9 431.3          Aug 
Changes *
− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016
− 30.5 + 7.1 + 14.4 − 7.3 − 37.6 − 3.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 34.0 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 24.3 − 15.8 2016          Dec 
+ 30.0 + 8.5 − 7.3 + 15.8 + 21.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 21.7 + 11.7 − 0.3 − 31.2 − 20.5 2017          Jan 
+ 24.8 + 8.0 + 5.6 + 2.4 + 16.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 15.4 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.3          Feb + 9.9 + 11.1 + 12.8 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.4 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 11.9          Mar 
+ 19.0 + 27.4 − 14.1 + 41.5 − 8.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 8.6 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 11.1          Apr 
− 22.7 − 6.8 − 15.5 + 8.7 − 15.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 16.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 8.7          May− 21.7 − 23.8 + 18.1 − 41.8 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 2.8 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 30.6 − 25.8          June
− 38.5 − 13.8 − 24.8 + 11.1 − 24.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 24.3 + 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 10.2          July
− 26.8 − 37.9 − 27.6 − 10.2 + 11.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 1.7          Aug 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016
250.1 139.7 77.1 62.6 110.4 10.2 5.2 4.9 100.3 12.6 23.8 36.6 − 2016          Nov 
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 −          Dec 
240.0 131.4 70.5 61.0 108.5 12.2 6.8 5.4 96.3 13.5 24.0 36.7 − 2017          Jan 
239.3 129.5 70.4 59.1 109.8 13.0 7.6 5.4 96.8 13.9 24.1 38.2 −          Feb 237.1 126.8 68.1 58.6 110.3 13.8 8.4 5.4 96.5 13.8 23.7 35.2 −          Mar 
229.6 116.9 57.7 59.1 112.7 12.9 7.2 5.7 99.8 13.8 23.6 36.2 −          Apr 
224.9 114.1 55.8 58.3 110.8 13.4 7.7 5.7 97.4 13.7 23.5 33.7 −          May216.3 105.1 53.8 51.3 111.2 13.4 7.6 5.8 97.8 13.1 23.0 32.8 −          June
213.2 104.2 55.0 49.2 109.0 13.9 8.0 5.9 95.1 13.0 23.0 31.5 −          July
211.8 103.9 56.6 47.3 108.0 13.4 7.7 5.7 94.6 13.0 23.1 31.1 −          Aug 
Changes *
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016
− 3.7 − 5.8 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 2016          Dec 
− 5.8 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 2017          Jan 
− 1.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 −          Feb − 1.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 −          Mar 
− 6.3 − 9.1 − 10.4 + 1.3 + 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 −          Apr 
− 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8 −          May− 7.7 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.6 −          June
− 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 −          July
− 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2017
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.02012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.02013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017         Sep 12,270.1 122.7 122.3 1,253.3 1,131.0 0.0
         Oct . . . . . .         Nov  
p 12,326.7 123.3 122.9 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base  2 in per cent Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 12012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 12013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017         Sep 3,433,275 28.0 34,333 34,173 422,740 388,567 0
         Oct . . . . . . .         Nov  
p 3,457,522 28.0 34,575 34,417 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,170
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,3242012 
3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017         Sep 6,446 5,640 3,180 11,009 6,136 148 1,613
         Oct . . . . . . .         Nov 6,227 5,666 3,352 11,088 6,210 138 1,737
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  
1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,1532012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,4532013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017         Sep 2,298,713 1,467 431,190 583,225 118,682
         Oct . . . . .         Nov 2,324,355 1,102 428,683 581,652 121,741
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2017
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2017 Oct                  4 3,248 3,248 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct                11 21,343 21,343 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct                18 3,821 3,821 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct                25 5,311 5,311 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov                  1 2,995 2,995 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov                  8 2,703 2,703 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov                15 2,844 2,844 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2017 Aug                31 2,899 2,899 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep                28 2,531 2,531 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct                26 2,498 2,498 2 ... − − − 98
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2017         Apr − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.12
         May − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.13         June − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.20 − 0.15
         July − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.15
         Aug − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.16         Sep − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.17
         Oct − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.18
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 metho d and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method.  
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ depositswith an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         Sep 0.40 75,235 1.52 219,354 0.12 83,015 1.65 18,371
         Oct 0.40 75,245 1.51 218,836 0.13 80,349 1.60 18,507
         Nov 0.39 74,620 1.49 218,016 0.10 82,888 1.56 19,037         Dec 0.38 74,227 1.48 220,035 0.10 81,192 1.54 19,097
2017         Jan 0.37 73,435 1.46 219,585 0.10 82,672 1.53 19,293
         Feb 0.35 73,708 1.45 219,045 0.10 83,514 1.52 19,144         Mar 0.34 73,460 1.44 218,575 0.09 84,520 1.49 19,649
         Apr 0.33 72,221 1.42 218,122 0.09 82,082 1.44 20,074
         May 0.33 71,503 1.41 217,847 0.08 82,646 1.41 20,471         June 0.33 69,952 1.40 217,154 0.08 80,018 1.35 20,770
         July 0.32 69,365 1.39 216,115 0.08 78,396 1.31 21,529
         Aug 0.31 69,014 1.37 215,909 0.09 78,517 1.30 22,146         Sep 0.31 67,904 1.36 215,809 0.08 77,508 1.25 22,249
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016         Sep 2.49 4,645 2.22 27,195 3.07 1,079,270 7.29 52,985 4.15 83,297 4.24 310,507
         Oct 2.49 4,711 2.19 27,068 3.04 1,083,120 7.26 52,115 4.12 83,574 4.21 310,941
         Nov 2.42 4,538 2.13 27,004 3.02 1,087,318 7.17 51,035 4.09 83,826 4.19 311,454         Dec 2.42 4,380 2.11 26,777 2.99 1,090,316 7.18 51,459 4.07 83,809 4.16 310,013
2017         Jan 2.43 4,463 2.10 26,399 2.96 1,090,663 7.21 51,134 4.04 83,791 4.13 310,789
         Feb 2.41 4,314 2.09 26,272 2.94 1,093,062 7.24 50,975 4.02 83,726 4.11 311,206         Mar 2.47 4,342 2.07 26,205 2.91 1,097,148 7.32 51,515 4.01 84,063 4.09 311,220
         Apr 2.45 4,296 2.05 26,173 2.88 1,102,315 7.10 50,383 3.99 84,268 4.08 310,696
         May 2.44 4,356 2.04 26,187 2.85 1,106,601 7.13 50,320 3.96 84,963 4.06 312,176         June 2.44 4,253 2.03 26,205 2.83 1,113,177 7.17 51,412 3.95 85,256 4.04 311,592
         July 2.46 4,128 2.01 26,016 2.80 1,118,677 7.15 50,266 3.93 85,648 4.03 312,427
         Aug 2.45 4,083 2.00 25,936 2.77 1,123,854 7.17 49,529 3.92 86,101 4.01 313,807         Sep 2.42 3,979 2.00 25,995 2.75 1,129,576 7.13 50,535 3.91 86,330 4.00 313,232
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         Sep 2.58 132,381 2.06 134,447 2.52 612,812
         Oct 2.53 132,273 2.04 134,868 2.50 615,105
         Nov 2.54 131,980 2.02 136,298 2.48 620,104         Dec 2.57 125,998 2.01 136,477 2.45 623,831
2017         Jan 2.52 130,773 2.00 136,921 2.42 628,271
         Feb 2.55 132,264 1.99 136,362 2.41 631,862         Mar 2.54 132,741 1.98 136,980 2.39 632,484
         Apr 2.51 133,262 1.98 137,137 2.37 637,174
         May 2.45 133,371 1.97 137,779 2.35 643,570         June 2.51 134,741 1.95 138,252 2.33 639,615
         July 2.45 134,305 1.95 138,763 2.31 644,816
         Aug 2.44 133,164 1.94 139,374 2.30 648,618         Sep 2.45 137,853 1.93 138,887 2.28 649,424
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of not any other related charges which may occur for enquiries, admin istration,
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and nonfinancial corporations preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase,
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial including building and home improvements; including loans granted b y building and
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted l oans granted by the
financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal u se in the
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Money and capital markets / Interest rates are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debt conso lidation, education
and yields / Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding etc. 6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 p 
47   ). 
amounts are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016         Sep 0.08 1,173,762 0.32 5,240 0.50 671 0.77 885 0.26 532,980 0.33 53,031
         Oct 0.07 1,184,012 0.30 6,402 0.44 716 0.75 933 0.25 533,209 0.32 52,223
         Nov 0.07 1,208,967 0.30 5,075 0.58 523 0.77 907 0.24 533,406 0.32 51,649         Dec 0.07 1,220,413 0.23 5,583 0.51 621 0.68 967 0.24 536,031 0.32 51,299
2017         Jan 0.07 1,222,852 0.28 6,002 0.59 715 0.61 999 0.23 536,834 0.31 50,563
         Feb 0.06 1,233,193 0.31 4,688 0.47 617 0.70 773 0.22 537,566 0.31 49,971         Mar 0.05 1,233,631 0.26 4,918 0.51 676 0.69 820 0.21 536,136 0.31 49,493
         Apr 0.05 1,253,497 0.19 4,926 0.37 729 0.63 741 0.21 536,260 0.31 49,013
         May 0.05 1,258,521 0.20 4,724 0.43 719 0.87 726 0.21 536,046 0.30 48,646         June 0.04 1,264,791 0.22 4,078 0.27 947 0.73 633 0.21 535,416 0.30 48,253
         July 0.04 1,271,823 0.17 5,276 0.31 653 0.70 617 0.20 537,553 0.31 44,902
         Aug 0.03 1,278,289 0.14 5,198 0.41 492 0.65 716 0.19 537,173 0.30 44,119         Sep 0.03 1,285,601 0.15 3,992 0.31 598 0.65 636 0.19 537,108 0.30 43,509
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         Sep 0.01 389,701 − 0.08 15,158 0.14 598 0.30 792
         Oct 0.00 399,216 − 0.03 10,736 0.14 577 0.36 521
         Nov − 0.00 400,064 − 0.11 13,017 0.24 951 0.39 1,490         Dec − 0.00 401,493 − 0.12 15,159 0.22 1,205 0.36 538
2017         Jan − 0.00 400,475 − 0.05 11,356 0.22 754 0.40 314
         Feb − 0.00 397,363 − 0.07 10,802 0.13 631 0.54 336         Mar − 0.01 395,640 − 0.09 12,614 0.19 450 0.79 309
         Apr − 0.01 397,203 − 0.07 9,275 0.08 899 0.33 1,039
         May − 0.01 401,652 − 0.05 10,212 0.13 912 0.30 837         June − 0.02 415,078 − 0.14 14,661 0.07 525 0.24 586
         July − 0.01 402,113 − 0.09 11,516 0.19 859 0.26 1,382
         Aug − 0.02 409,698 − 0.04 9,710 0.21 185 0.52 666         Sep − 0.02 414,445 − 0.08 10,040 0.09 351 0.37 704
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
2016         Sep 5.94 5.92 7,802 7.11 1,560 6.04 296 4.56 3,257 6.95 4,249
         Oct 5.95 5.93 7,579 7.10 1,482 6.04 300 4.52 3,127 6.99 4,152
         Nov 5.85 5.83 7,595 7.12 1,674 6.05 316 4.51 3,312 6.91 3,967         Dec 5.69 5.67 6,552 7.06 1,399 6.09 320 4.40 3,026 6.83 3,206
2017         Jan 6.06 6.04 8,603 7.16 1,886 6.15 330 4.59 3,242 6.97 5,031
         Feb 5.82 5.80 8,187 6.92 1,619 6.15 273 4.37 3,094 6.69 4,820         Mar 5.62 5.60 9,849 6.88 1,761 6.12 341 4.15 4,041 6.64 5,467
         Apr 5.66 5.65 8,222 6.91 1,544 6.17 287 4.32 3,415 6.61 4,520
         May 5.89 5.87 9,372 7.22 1,814 6.41 337 4.49 3,846 6.87 5,189         June 5.90 5.88 8,683 7.24 1,685 6.28 308 4.49 3,574 6.89 4,801
         July 5.99 5.97 8,940 7.32 1,872 6.22 299 4.57 3,561 6.95 5,080
         Aug 5.88 5.86 8,827 7.20 1,724 6.51 312 4.54 3,703 6.84 4,812         Sep 5.67 5.65 8,212 7.11 1,465 6.09 305 4.31 3,579 6.72 4,328
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10An-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of nual percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges w hich may
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the docum ents, guarantees and
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts credit insurance. for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  
5 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Loans to households
2016         Sep 1.89 6,462 1.76 2,153 1.76 3,266 2.69 807 1.81 2,389
         Oct 1.89 6,445 1.72 2,522 1.70 3,408 2.63 928 1.87 2,109
         Nov 1.92 6,305 1.89 2,070 1.79 3,051 2.71 837 1.81 2,417         Dec 1.93 7,774 1.89 2,343 1.86 3,262 2.61 1,085 1.79 3,427
2017         Jan 1.94 6,698 1.84 2,651 1.78 3,024 2.52 915 1.92 2,759
         Feb 1.94 5,484 1.86 1,916 1.69 2,540 2.56 803 1.99 2,141         Mar 2.01 7,097 1.88 2,130 1.80 3,237 2.72 1,032 1.99 2,828
         Apr 2.00 6,030 1.86 2,229 1.75 2,826 2.67 853 2.05 2,351
         May 2.02 5,890 1.81 1,930 1.83 2,535 2.61 941 1.99 2,414         June 2.06 5,933 1.89 1,852 1.95 2,722 2.73 859 1.93 2,352
         July 1.96 6,388 1.75 2,282 1.76 2,873 2.48 964 1.99 2,551
         Aug 1.99 5,667 1.74 1,625 1.81 2,171 2.66 814 1.92 2,682         Sep 1.99 5,275 1.80 1,455 1.79 2,341 2.60 804 1.99 2,130
of which: loans to sole proprietors
2016         Sep 1.99 4,261 . . 1.88 2,013 2.89 610 1.78 1,638
         Oct 2.00 4,227 . . 1.86 2,096 2.78 728 1.82 1,403
         Nov 2.03 4,139 . . 2.00 1,920 2.78 647 1.76 1,572         Dec 2.01 5,393 . . 1.98 2,257 2.71 881 1.76 2,255
2017         Jan 1.99 4,694 . . 1.92 2,084 2.61 712 1.83 1,898
         Feb 2.07 3,613 . . 1.95 1,579 2.75 568 1.93 1,466         Mar 2.11 4,783 . . 2.01 2,120 2.84 767 1.93 1,896
         Apr 2.09 4,280 . . 1.95 1,931 2.77 670 1.97 1,679
         May 2.12 4,033 . . 2.04 1,667 2.84 689 1.92 1,677         June 2.15 4,197 . . 2.13 1,964 2.84 681 1.88 1,552
         July 2.06 4,142 . . 1.89 1,917 2.82 688 1.94 1,537
         Aug 2.08 3,640 . . 1.95 1,445 2.79 629 1.92 1,566         Sep 2.04 3,411 . . 1.84 1,436 2.81 598 1.90 1,377
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016         Sep 1.70 1.64 18,636 1.79 3,854 2.01 2,062 1.75 1,658 1.48 6,555 1.66 8,361
         Oct 1.68 1.62 17,913 1.72 4,542 1.99 2,093 1.62 1,584 1.45 6,317 1.66 7,919
         Nov 1.67 1.62 20,223 1.72 4,687 1.88 2,611 1.66 1,614 1.43 7,008 1.68 8,990         Dec 1.72 1.66 21,400 1.80 4,757 1.98 2,347 1.67 1,800 1.49 8,054 1.73 9,199
2017         Jan 1.82 1.77 19,804 1.84 5,711 2.08 2,283 1.66 1,780 1.59 7,454 1.86 8,287
         Feb 1.87 1.81 17,838 1.89 4,291 2.17 1,784 1.65 1,567 1.64 6,556 1.90 7,931         Mar 1.87 1.82 22,196 1.86 4,945 2.08 2,428 1.69 1,932 1.67 7,609 1.89 10,227
         Apr 1.91 1.85 18,087 1.89 4,620 2.10 2,001 1.73 1,672 1.71 6,456 1.92 7,958
         May 1.88 1.83 20,484 1.92 4,136 2.17 2,288 1.77 1,731 1.66 7,308 1.88 9,157         June 1.87 1.82 19,294 1.92 3,767 2.02 2,265 1.70 1,541 1.68 6,573 1.89 8,915
         July 1.88 1.82 20,405 1.88 4,612 2.04 2,389 1.68 1,726 1.66 7,420 1.92 8,870
         Aug 1.94 1.87 20,228 2.00 3,743 2.05 2,340 1.89 1,888 1.67 7,199 1.98 8,801         Sep 1.92 1.86 17,363 1.91 3,289 2.04 2,025 1.71 1,571 1.71 5,950 1.96 7,817
of which: collateralised loans 11
2016         Sep . 1.55 7,930 . . 1.98 728 1.46 708 1.39 3,109 1.61 3,385
         Oct . 1.55 7,854 . . 1.89 764 1.43 768 1.39 3,023 1.65 3,299
         Nov . 1.51 9,115 . . 1.54 1,225 1.48 763 1.36 3,407 1.65 3,720         Dec . 1.57 9,705 . . 1.85 863 1.55 878 1.41 3,968 1.66 3,996
2017         Jan . 1.67 8,932 . . 1.90 835 1.50 925 1.52 3,632 1.81 3,540
         Feb . 1.71 7,964 . . 2.06 643 1.50 796 1.57 3,181 1.82 3,344         Mar . 1.72 9,905 . . 1.96 855 1.53 939 1.59 3,565 1.82 4,546
         Apr . 1.75 8,413 . . 1.98 795 1.53 838 1.60 3,204 1.89 3,576
         May . 1.73 9,110 . . 2.09 843 1.59 900 1.58 3,370 1.81 3,997         June . 1.72 8,374 . . 1.87 865 1.53 726 1.61 3,030 1.82 3,753
         July . 1.72 9,062 . . 1.84 896 1.53 891 1.60 3,529 1.84 3,746
         Aug . 1.79 8,461 . . 1.96 821 1.87 996 1.59 3,204 1.92 3,440         Sep . 1.78 7,701 . . 1.97 711 1.53 797 1.63 2,707 1.92 3,486
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         Sep 8.62 41,559 8.66 33,900 15.13 4,269 3.70 66,057 3.71 65,773
         Oct 8.59 40,657 8.60 32,988 15.13 4,328 3.67 64,202 3.68 63,931
         Nov 8.50 39,342 8.51 31,782 15.13 4,222 3.61 64,064 3.63 63,786         Dec 8.50 40,103 8.54 32,351 15.06 4,286 3.69 61,612 3.71 61,357
2017         Jan 8.55 39,784 8.54 32,190 15.12 4,309 3.61 64,182 3.63 63,925
         Feb 8.65 39,345 8.62 31,953 15.14 4,291 3.68 65,697 3.70 65,431         Mar 8.66 40,215 8.61 32,949 15.13 4,273 3.67 65,990 3.68 65,698
         Apr 8.50 38,972 8.49 31,353 15.13 4,295 3.64 65,154 3.66 64,865
         May 8.46 39,394 8.50 31,647 15.13 4,259 3.53 65,353 3.54 65,067         June 8.44 40,606 8.47 32,739 15.13 4,328 3.59 67,282 3.61 66,992
         July 8.45 39,300 8.46 31,374 15.11 4,423 3.52 65,979 3.54 65,695
         Aug 8.48 38,663 8.47 30,914 15.12 4,364 3.48 66,012 3.49 65,718         Sep 8.44 39,627 8.48 31,635 15.09 4,393 3.52 67,886 3.54 67,559
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 
renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016         Sep 1.51 62,170 1.66 19,929 2.54 8,312 2.63 1,431 1.70 1,312 1.24 41,393 1.67 1,986 1.54 7,736
         Oct 1.43 59,422 1.50 20,936 2.44 8,219 2.63 1,417 1.65 1,258 1.16 40,159 1.69 1,960 1.44 6,409
         Nov 1.45 58,860 1.52 15,959 2.48 8,095 2.64 1,497 1.69 1,361 1.16 36,792 1.32 2,628 1.49 8,487         Dec 1.53 78,985 1.63 22,509 2.50 8,638 2.57 1,829 1.77 1,881 1.27 48,315 1.64 3,444 1.62 14,878
2017         Jan 1.33 64,819 1.54 18,857 2.42 8,119 2.60 1,328 1.86 1,423 1.01 43,339 1.40 2,830 1.57 7,780
         Feb 1.33 56,958 1.55 13,746 2.55 7,309 2.58 1,326 1.83 1,209 0.99 37,140 1.29 2,001 1.54 7,973         Mar 1.50 71,530 1.60 22,647 2.51 9,245 2.59 1,733 1.85 1,665 1.20 45,163 1.41 2,977 1.67 10,747
         Apr 1.43 57,323 1.46 19,903 2.44 7,699 2.54 1,493 1.81 1,371 1.14 38,649 1.41 2,188 1.67 5,923
         May 1.35 65,177 1.53 18,706 2.54 8,000 2.58 1,661 1.82 1,423 0.99 41,638 1.55 3,072 1.58 9,383         June 1.41 71,950 1.50 21,083 2.51 8,904 2.57 1,681 1.84 1,442 1.13 46,903 1.08 3,655 1.61 9,365
         July 1.39 67,430 1.48 20,770 2.42 8,497 2.57 1,583 1.87 1,403 1.08 43,495 1.28 3,021 1.61 9,431
         Aug 1.38 59,046 1.52 13,769 2.39 7,401 2.58 1,441 1.82 1,335 1.08 37,547 1.38 2,627 1.57 8,695         Sep 1.38 66,182 1.52 19,843 2.50 8,124 2.60 1,446 1.86 1,236 1.08 43,731 1.24 2,419 1.63 9,226
of which: collateralised loans 11
2016         Sep 1.59 9,002 . . 1.93 550 2.49 104 1.46 379 1.53 5,125 2.18 614 1.45 2,230
         Oct 1.49 8,746 . . 1.85 652 2.40 149 1.48 401 1.40 5,352 1.90 560 1.44 1,632
         Nov 1.49 8,480 . . 2.00 494 2.41 159 1.57 401 1.29 4,031 2.04 610 1.50 2,785         Dec 1.55 16,083 . . 1.91 662 2.46 176 1.57 569 1.39 8,076 1.96 1,310 1.62 5,290
2017         Jan 1.57 8,742 . . 1.80 692 2.24 141 1.81 505 1.41 4,626 2.05 518 1.60 2,260
         Feb 1.46 8,259 . . 2.07 464 2.44 158 1.78 399 1.33 4,051 1.73 512 1.40 2,675         Mar 1.48 11,857 . . 1.87 643 2.52 166 1.72 493 1.37 7,040 1.30 519 1.60 2,996
         Apr 1.42 8,360 . . 1.81 570 2.23 164 1.69 413 1.29 5,640 1.59 299 1.62 1,274
         May 1.61 8,671 . . 2.06 545 2.54 191 1.70 401 1.45 4,558 2.04 646 1.63 2,330         June 1.55 11,011 . . 1.85 632 2.60 150 1.75 444 1.44 6,484 1.64 625 1.66 2,676
         July 1.52 9,023 . . 1.78 661 2.46 155 1.77 415 1.34 5,050 1.74 464 1.68 2,278
         Aug 1.47 9,188 . . 1.99 480 2.39 153 1.69 431 1.30 4,961 1.94 560 1.50 2,603         Sep 1.52 9,811 . . 1.83 535 2.50 132 1.77 351 1.41 5,743 1.64 370 1.62 2,680
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  .11For (d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as
the purposes of the interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
collateral (among others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed betw een customers and the
at leat the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
assigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billing cycle and the date
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becom e due. 15The
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; amount category refers to the single loan transaction conside red as new business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets
  
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and funds Financial technical Non-financial Remainingyear/quarter Total deposits  
2 securities Loans  3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2011 1,584.6 419.8 186.0 246.0 210.4 361.4 5.4 58.4 41.7 55.52012 1,694.4 405.1 240.1 251.7 211.4 425.1 6.1 59.0 43.3 52.72013 1,742.1 386.3 262.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 6.0 59.8 46.4 51.02014 1,892.0 371.6 321.0 271.4 215.9 542.3 6.4 63.9 49.3 50.22015 1,954.1 344.4 344.7 278.9 228.7 578.3 4.5 71.9 51.8 50.8
2016         Q1 2,007.8 343.6 374.1 280.2 230.0 596.3 5.2 73.7 53.1 51.7
         Q2 2,034.6 336.1 395.8 281.9 229.6 607.7 4.8 73.5 53.2 52.0
2016         Q3  
1 2,221.6 383.9 396.9 391.0 280.7 604.9 5.3 47.3 31.8 79.7
         Q4 2,183.9 360.0 370.9 373.9 308.6 620.1 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.5
2017         Q1 2,188.4 339.8 394.0 370.6 298.2 630.3 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,177.7 334.7 392.4 361.8 302.1 642.3 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
Life insurance
2011 859.9 273.3 90.7 146.7 31.6 252.5 2.6 17.8 25.1 19.62012 927.6 261.4 120.0 148.0 31.7 299.2 3.0 18.0 26.1 20.12013 956.9 247.8 131.4 148.7 31.5 329.1 3.0 17.7 28.3 19.52014 1,044.1 237.2 161.2 153.4 32.3 390.3 3.2 17.8 29.7 19.12015 1,063.7 219.7 169.8 158.0 34.9 414.6 2.2 16.3 30.7 17.4
2016         Q1 1,097.8 219.0 187.3 159.0 35.3 428.4 2.5 16.5 32.0 17.6
         Q2 1,118.8 214.6 202.2 160.2 35.6 437.4 2.4 16.6 32.1 17.7
2016         Q3  
1 1,246.9 246.5 204.2 243.1 47.5 437.2 4.1 11.3 19.1 33.8
         Q4 1,192.0 229.8 182.7 222.4 50.7 453.8 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.8
2017         Q1 1,170.1 210.5 198.9 220.8 38.3 457.3 1.7 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,173.1 208.7 200.1 214.8 39.2 465.8 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
Non-life insurance
2011 400.1 133.1 43.7 46.9 42.2 82.7 1.2 24.5 11.7 14.02012 427.3 130.4 59.9 48.9 40.3 97.7 1.5 24.8 12.3 11.42013 448.1 126.0 70.9 51.1 42.8 105.9 1.6 25.1 12.7 12.02014 486.4 122.8 89.4 53.9 44.3 122.5 1.8 26.5 13.7 11.52015 511.0 113.9 97.6 55.6 48.5 134.8 1.3 32.9 14.5 11.9
2016         Q1 530.4 113.3 108.3 55.8 49.6 140.6 1.5 34.4 14.6 12.4
         Q2 535.4 109.5 113.8 56.0 49.3 144.5 1.4 34.0 14.6 12.3
2016         Q3  
1 594.1 125.4 101.7 95.4 50.9 153.9 0.5 28.7 8.7 28.9
         Q4 583.3 118.9 98.5 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 605.9 117.8 105.3 91.4 56.9 156.9 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
         Q2 602.7 114.3 106.7 90.5 58.5 159.9 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1
Reinsurance  4 
2011 324.7 13.5 51.5 52.5 136.6 26.2 1.5 16.1 4.8 22.0
2012 339.5 13.2 60.2 54.7 139.4 28.2 1.6 16.2 4.8 21.22013 337.1 13.3 59.0 57.4 136.8 27.2 1.4 17.1 5.4 19.52014 361.4 12.4 69.7 64.1 139.2 29.5 1.4 19.6 5.9 19.62015 379.4 10.8 77.3 65.3 145.4 28.9 1.1 22.7 6.5 21.4
2016         Q1 379.7 11.3 78.5 65.4 145.1 27.3 1.1 22.8 6.5 21.7
         Q2 380.3 12.0 79.8 65.6 144.8 25.8 1.0 22.8 6.5 22.0
2016         Q3  
1 380.6 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 16.9
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.5 89.9 58.4 203.0 16.2 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.6 56.4 204.4 16.6 0.7 7.9 4.4 14.2
Pension funds  5 
2011 426.6 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 − 3.8 21.7 11.6
2012 468.4 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 − 4.1 23.8 11.52013 494.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 − 4.4 25.1 11.72014 552.5 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 − 4.9 27.8 17.42015 579.5 145.5 60.2 28.8 19.1 268.5 − 5.4 31.5 20.4
2016         Q1 588.8 143.1 66.0 29.0 19.4 273.4 − 5.5 31.9 20.5
         Q2 601.7 142.7 69.1 29.2 20.0 281.9 − 5.5 32.5 20.7         Q3 611.6 144.4 69.2 29.3 20.1 289.0 − 5.6 33.2 20.9         Q4 613.5 144.7 67.8 29.8 20.6 288.9 − 5.7 34.5 21.4
2017         Q1 619.9 146.2 66.1 30.3 21.2 293.9 − 5.8 34.9 21.6
         Q2 623.7 144.6 67.8 30.4 21.3 297.0 − 5.8 35.2 21.6
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data, valuation of listed se- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans and
curities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities database. Up registered Pfandbriefe. 4Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
to and including 2016 Q2 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Fed- mary insurers, which is included there. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
eral Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and own calcu- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Ac counts. Pension funds
lations. 2Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 3Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Debt Claims on
End of securities Shares and pension funds Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
2 other equity Total reserves  3 Non-life  4 derivatives liabilities Net worth  7 
Insurance corporations
 
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 0.0 69.6 98.32012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 0.0 69.5 97.42013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 0.0 68.8 49.22014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 0.0 70.5 115.32015 1,954.1 18.3 91.7 214.8 1,474.7 1,160.6 314.1 0.0 70.2 84.4
2016         Q1 2,007.8 17.7 92.9 220.4 1,501.0 1,179.8 321.2 0.0 71.5 104.3
         Q2 2,034.6 17.6 93.0 191.1 1,508.4 1,188.4 320.1 0.0 71.6 152.9
2016         Q3  
1 2,221.6 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.3 1,396.7 182.5 1.5 153.3 −
         Q4 2,183.9 30.7 70.3 440.7 1,491.9 1,310.8 181.1 2.3 148.1 −
2017         Q1 2,188.4 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.3 1.8 138.6 −
         Q2 2,177.7 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.0 1,308.2 196.9 2.1 134.2 −
Life insurance
2011 859.9 0.0 22.1 11.2 779.7 766.6 13.1 0.0 36.0 10.92012 927.6 0.0 23.1 16.3 814.9 801.2 13.7 0.0 34.9 38.52013 956.9 0.0 23.8 20.2 853.2 839.4 13.8 0.0 34.1 25.62014 1,044.1 0.0 24.7 21.6 891.8 877.4 14.4 0.0 32.8 73.32015 1,063.7 0.0 24.5 24.8 926.0 911.0 15.0 0.0 30.9 57.5
2016         Q1 1,097.8 0.0 24.9 25.4 941.0 925.8 15.2 0.0 31.4 75.0
         Q2 1,118.8 0.0 25.1 22.2 946.6 931.3 15.3 0.0 31.6 93.4
2016         Q3  
1 1,246.9 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.1 1,066.1 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,192.0 4.1 25.0 116.0 991.2 991.2 − 1.2 54.5 −
2017         Q1 1,170.1 4.0 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.6 −
         Q2 1,173.1 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.3 989.3 − 1.0 46.8 −
Non-life insurance
2011 400.1 0.0 9.9 31.5 311.4 193.5 117.9 0.0 15.3 31.92012 427.3 0.0 11.5 44.4 329.9 208.0 122.0 0.0 14.9 26.62013 448.1 0.0 9.2 55.9 351.6 222.0 129.6 0.0 15.3 16.12014 486.4 0.0 10.5 58.2 369.8 236.5 133.4 0.0 15.6 32.32015 511.0 0.0 14.2 64.2 390.5 249.6 140.9 0.0 17.1 25.0
2016         Q1 530.4 0.0 14.8 67.6 401.3 254.0 147.3 0.0 17.8 28.8
         Q2 535.4 0.0 14.7 58.3 403.0 257.1 145.9 0.0 17.7 41.7
2016         Q3  
1 594.1 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 59.2 −
         Q4 583.3 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.4 89.7 0.2 55.3 −
2017         Q1 605.9 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.7 108.2 0.1 54.4 −
         Q2 602.7 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.3 0.1 52.4 −
Reinsurance  5 
2011 324.7 17.0 36.3 64.2 133.2 − 133.2 0.0 18.4 55.5
2012 339.5 22.4 38.5 91.3 135.1 − 135.1 0.0 19.8 32.42013 337.1 16.9 44.7 112.7 135.9 − 135.9 0.0 19.4 7.52014 361.4 17.3 49.1 113.3 150.0 − 150.0 0.0 22.1 9.62015 379.4 18.3 53.0 125.8 158.2 − 158.2 0.0 22.2 1.9
2016         Q1 379.7 17.7 53.1 127.4 158.6 − 158.6 0.0 22.3 0.6
         Q2 380.3 17.6 53.2 110.7 158.8 − 158.8 0.0 22.3 17.7
2016         Q3  
1 380.6 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −
Pension funds  6 
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 − 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 − 1.8 27.32013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 − 2.9 25.32014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 − 1.8 44.22015 579.5 − 4.9 11.3 518.3 517.9 0.4 − 6.1 38.9
2016         Q1 588.8 − 5.0 11.4 522.7 522.2 0.5 − 5.8 44.1
         Q2 601.7 − 5.0 10.0 529.6 529.1 0.5 − 5.8 51.3         Q3 611.6 − 5.1 10.3 535.2 535.2 − − 5.8 55.3         Q4 613.5 − 5.2 11.3 544.7 544.7 − − 6.0 46.4
2017         Q1 619.9 − 5.2 11.9 552.4 552.4 − − 6.0 44.3
         Q2 623.7 − 5.3 11.8 555.3 555.3 − − 6.1 45.3
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data. Up to and including ESA 1995. 4As of 2016 Q3 insurance technical reserves “non-life“ pursuant to Solven-
2016 Q2 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Federal Financial Su- cy II. Up to and including 2016 Q2 unearned premiums and reserves f or outstanding
pervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and own calculations. 2Includ- claims pursuant to ESA 1995. 5Not including the reinsurance business conducted by
ing deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note primary insurers, which is included there. 6The term “pension funds“ refers to the in-
loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 3As of 2016 Q3 insurance technical reserves “life“ stitutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension
pursuant to Solvency II taking account of transitional measures. Up to and including funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational p ension schemes
2016 Q2: Long-term net equity of households in life insurance (including ageing provi- for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included .7Own funds corre-
sions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance spond to the sum of net worth and the liability item „Shares and other equity“. 
schemes with guaranteed premium refund) and pension fund reserves pursuant to

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2017
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
  
€ million
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign includingtotal Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors  7 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5262012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5802013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,3802014 64,027 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,988 53,068 − 12,124 − 11,951 77,143 10,961
2015 31,809 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 67,819 123,820 − 66,330 121,164 68,986 − 92,012
2016 69,798 27,069 19,177 17,905 − 10,012 42,728 173,193 − 58,012 187,500 43,705 − 103,395
2016         Nov − 193 2,417 − 5,172 − 377 7,966 − 2,611 6,331 − 2,469 18,652 − 9,852 − 6,524
         Dec − 30,541 − 21,892 − 10,590 1,125 − 12,426 − 8,649 557 − 9,459 13,554 − 3,538 − 31,098
2017         Jan 24,212 22,588 12,008 4,673 5,908 1,624 20,521 − 7,443 18,146 9,818 3,692
         Feb 4,188 − 2,177 12,413 1,756 − 16,346 6,365 21,814 − 5,044 16,715 10,143 − 17,626         Mar 9,225 8,713 1,179 − 131 7,665 512 17,676 − 8,293 17,769 8,200 − 8,451
         Apr − 12,590 − 15,170 − 5,909 − 276 − 8,985 2,580 3,520 − 5,737 12,817 − 3,560 − 16,110
         May 39,706 28,463 10,800 1,096 16,567 11,243 17,325 3,906 12,751 668 22,381         June 3,582 − 1,090 2,876 − 5,769 1,802 4,672 10,890 − 11,745 12,871 9,764 − 7,309
         July − 7,719 − 17,251 − 7,196 8,174 − 18,228 9,532 9,807 − 6,471 11,565 4,713 − 17,526
         Aug 13,913 12,771 − 1,814 − 1,581 16,166 1,143 7,547 − 8,730 9,902 6,375 6,366         Sep − 15,953 − 18,254 − 8,577 − 3,456 − 6,221 2,301 252 − 8,357 12,865 − 4,256 − 16,205
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  
9 shares  10 Total 11 tutions  6 Other sectors  12 residents  13 
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,8512014 39,903 18,778 21,125 34,148 17,203 16,945 5,755
2015 40,293 7,668 32,625 26,058 − 5,421 31,479 14,235
2016 33,504 4,409 29,095 32,324 − 5,143 37,467 1,180
2016         Nov 3,866 681 3,185 3,772 728 3,044 94
         Dec 3,021 861 2,160 − 12 1,291 − 1,303 3,033
2017         Jan 2,154 148 2,006 1,369 − 247 1,616 785
         Feb 2,436 852 1,584 2,985 1,866 1,119 − 549         Mar 13,985 10,136 3,849 11,531 506 11,025 2,454
         Apr − 1,261 95 − 1,356 − 3,599 − 2,589 − 1,010 2,338
         May 3,434 107 3,327 2,137 475 1,662 1,297         June − 5,794 920 − 6,714 64 5,220 − 5,156 − 5,858
         July 2,728 509 2,219 3,894 − 690 4,584 − 1,166
         Aug 2,241 155 2,086 4,758 − 603 5,361 − 2,517         Sep 5,562 1,482 4,080 4,178 − 1,682 5,860 1,384
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic m utual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most rec ent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,8342007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,8722008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,3762012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,5292013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8912014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 
5 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2017         Feb 99,851 70,911 2,669 733 48,391 19,118 4,105 24,835
         Mar 95,842 47,729 3,548 756 31,244 12,182 4,691 43,421
         Apr 87,097 55,296 2,170 58 45,233 7,836 2,707 29,094
         May 88,568 55,536 1,700 238 41,685 11,913 5,015 28,016         June 73,438 42,842 5,005 364 25,324 12,148 4,284 26,312
         July 81,160 47,165 292 562 38,013 8,298 11,105 22,889
         Aug 83,236 47,675 2,476 20 36,804 8,374 1,462 34,100         Sep 80,958 48,059 1,940 76 34,328 11,716 3,712 29,186
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  6 
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,7112007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
5 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017         Feb 31,566 17,827 2,220 733 11,542 3,332 2,843 10,896
         Mar 34,636 15,895 2,772 462 6,186 6,474 3,396 15,345
         Apr 27,201 15,693 2,055 23 11,781 1,834 1,547 9,962
         May 29,215 12,669 1,165 136 6,045 5,322 3,142 13,404         June 24,255 10,611 3,011 54 3,390 4,156 1,784 11,860
         July 31,503 12,687 111 62 9,523 2,991 7,388 11,428
         Aug 24,629 10,217 2,245 20 5,283 2,670 521 13,890         Sep 26,426 13,324 1,395 24 8,649 3,256 2,765 10,337
Net sales  7 
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,4822007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
5 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017         Feb − 2,582 13,750 1,628 138 1,366 10,618 221 − 16,553
         Mar 11,887 4,049 1,520 − 839 3,038 330 − 705 8,543
         Apr − 15,906 − 5,239 1,191 − 1,613 − 1,034 − 3,781 − 1,836 − 8,832
         May 26,524 10,344 − 1,329 − 1,105 13,027 − 250 − 226 16,406         June − 6,370 1,035 2,036 − 245 4,667 − 5,423 − 2,704 − 4,701
         July − 12,190 − 6,664 − 2,176 209 − 1,958 − 2,738 8,539 − 14,065
         Aug 13,424 − 1,646 975 − 94 2,334 − 4,861 − 934 16,004         Sep − 11,050 − 6,065 − 749 − 1,959 779 − 4,137 − 1,796 − 3,189
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. e. 6Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 7Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal redemptions. 
Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2017
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Publicin years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,7012007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,7942008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,0972009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201
1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,2262012 3,285,422
1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,1382014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 
1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017         Mar 3,083,371 1,195,823 141,239 62,787 644,707 347,090 277,153 1,610,395
         Apr 3,067,464 1,190,584 1 142,097 61,174 1 644,126 343,188 275,317 1,601,563
         May 3,093,988 1,200,928 140,768 60,069 657,153 342,938 275,091 1,617,969         June 3,087,618 1,201,963 142,804 59,824 661,820 337,515 272,387 1,613,268
         July 3,075,428 1,195,300 140,628 60,033 659,861 334,777 280,925 1,599,203
         Aug 3,088,852 1,193,654 141,603 59,939 662,196 329,917 279,992 1,615,207         Sep 3,097,730 1,187,589 140,854 57,980 662,975 325,780
3 298,123 1,612,018
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2017 
1,003,919 453,163 41,546 23,265 275,262 113,090 54,989 495,769    less than 2
665,387 293,037 34,665 13,411 171,919 73,044 56,310 316,040 2 to less than 4
463,518 162,518 27,280 8,699 81,151 45,386 40,560 260,441 4 to less than 6
319,785 116,140 20,096 4,588 63,864 27,592 30,046 173,599 6 to less than 8
217,889 70,568 13,613 5,430 28,749 22,777 13,738 133,583 8 to less than 10
129,007 38,894 2,789 1,248 20,965 13,892 20,493 69,620 10 to less than 15
83,375 19,173 218 1,241 14,459 3,255 8,335 55,866 15 to less than 20
214,853 34,099 648 100 6,606 26,745 73,653 107,101 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 3Increase
reclassification of debt securities. 2Calculated from month under review until final due to change in issuers’ country of residence. 
maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values(market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at endend of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  
1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017         Mar 178,273 1,891 2,229 1 0 − − 105 − 94 − 140 1,794,735
         Apr 178,328 54 93 2 02−0 − 1 3 − 4 7 1,828,445
         May 178,326 − 2 78 48 50 − 0 − 17 − 162 1,845,930         June 178,620 294 64 202 218 − 0 − 6 − 184 1,811,817
         July 179,467 847 493 48 58−3 − 1 8 − 1 2 5 1,800,324
         Aug 179,207 − 260 155 2 6 − − 167 − 173 − 83 1,787,670         Sep 179,448 241 165 18 119 − − 13 − 7 − 41 1,888,218
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017         May 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.7 141.95 110.90 572.60 12,615.06
         June 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.79 109.60 557.50 12,325.12
         July 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.7 140.78 108.71 552.08 12,118.25
         Aug 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.6 141.85 110.01 551.25 12,055.84         Sep 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.7 141.21 109.06 585.63 12,828.86
         Oct 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.6 141.63 109.70 603.37 13,229.57
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly fig ures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual f igures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 139,768 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,057 143,560 819 − 1,745 142,741 43,802 − 3,790
2015 180,762 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 34,626 173,417 7,362 494 166,055 34,131 7,3452016 155,955 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,586 162,883 2,877 − 3,172 160,006 39,757 − 6,928
2017         Mar 12,841 7,318 3,636 − 64 2,626 704 3,682 5,523 12,039 133 − 176 11,906 5,699 802
         Apr 10,284 6,496 2,607 − 51 1,878 450 3,890 3,788 11,594 302 − 193 11,292 3,981 − 1,309
         May 6,140 5,658 3,113 − 12 2,492 238 2,545 481 5,515 422 250 5,093 231 625         June 4,858 4,745 1,831 66 874 488 2,915 113 5,512 556 662 4,956 − 549 − 654
         July 14,039 9,699 4,537 − 35 4,033 353 5,162 4,340 13,152 545 230 12,607 4,110 887
         Aug 9,664 6,458 408 238 1,450 − 1,493 6,050 3,206 9,686 517 − 47 9,169 3,253 − 22         Sep 6,698 3,246 3,996 31 2,849 709 − 750 3,452 6,910 101 − 224 6,809 3,676 − 212
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 10.29 34.47 34.39 3.31 7.11 18.90 5.06 6.15 13.41
Debt securities − 5.38 − 0.93 − 3.22 0.87 − 3.32 0.17 − 0.94 − 0.89 − 0.76
short-term debt securities 1.62 − 0.77 − 0.57 0.98 − 0.70 − 0.02 − 0.82 0.23 − 1.89long-term debt securities − 7.00 − 0.15 − 2.65 − 0.10 − 2.62 0.19 − 0.11 − 1.13 1.13
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.88 0.73 − 2.60 0.51 − 2.54 − 0.04 − 0.52 − 0.52 − 0.06
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85 − 0.71Financial corporations − 1.26 1.93 − 2.49 0.31 − 1.80 − 0.53 − 0.47 − 0.34 0.64General government − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.81 − 0.46 − 0.62 0.47 − 0.20 − 1.03 0.01
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.50 − 1.66 − 0.62 0.37 − 0.78 0.21 − 0.41 − 0.38 − 0.71
Loans 18.48 26.96 12.62 5.41 − 6.83 0.18 13.86 28.72 4.64
short-term loans 33.19 25.81 8.63 0.47 − 1.52 − 3.94 13.62 17.82 − 0.63long-term loans − 14.71 1.16 3.98 4.94 − 5.31 4.11 0.24 10.90 5.27
Memo item
to domestic sectors 14.11 8.75 − 1.45 4.62 − 5.36 − 2.11 1.39 10.74 − 1.20
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 6.06 6.17 − 11.07 − 1.74 0.57 2.75 2.51Financial corporations 14.46 7.88 4.47 − 1.59 5.67 − 0.40 0.78 7.99 − 3.71General government 0.08 0.03 0.14 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 4.37 18.22 14.06 0.79 − 1.47 2.28 12.47 17.98 5.84
Equity and investment fund shares − 1.85 44.58 60.71 9.56 3.86 12.27 35.03 17.14 − 0.96
Equity 8.53 28.24 54.89 9.11 4.61 8.18 32.99 18.39 1.22
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 1.62 − 10.41 20.66 − 6.00 − 0.77 6.72 20.70 − 5.54 − 2.10
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45 − 2.26Financial corporations 3.78 − 2.37 0.31 0.17 0.17 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.09 0.16
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.85 12.45 10.13 0.66 − 0.59 1.37 8.69 3.23 11.64
Other equity  
1 15.00 26.20 24.10 14.45 5.97 0.09 3.60 20.70 − 8.32
Investment fund shares − 10.38 16.35 5.82 0.45 − 0.75 4.08 2.04 − 1.25 − 2.18
Money market fund shares 0.23 0.21 0.36 − 0.30 − 0.10 − 0.03 0.79 − 0.28 0.00Non-MMF investment fund shares − 10.61 16.13 5.46 0.75 − 0.65 4.11 1.25 − 0.97 − 2.18
Insurance technical reserves − 0.06 2.97 2.50 0.57 0.76 0.71 0.45 0.50 0.97Financial derivatives − 1.23 0.56 4.93 − 2.09 0.84 − 1.08 7.25 − 1.29 1.18Other accounts receivable − 78.98 28.63 − 14.06 7.06 − 6.66 − 5.84 − 8.61 78.67 − 18.76
Total − 79.29 137.24 97.86 24.70 − 4.23 25.30 52.10 128.98 − 0.29
External financing
Debt securities 1.26 7.78 23.71 10.40 4.60 2.88 5.82 7.57 − 0.52
short-term securities − 11.63 1.96 − 0.15 2.04 0.18 − 0.57 − 1.79 5.47 − 0.42
long-term securities 12.89 5.82 23.85 8.36 4.43 3.45 7.61 2.11 − 0.10
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 4.27 1.77 10.93 4.97 1.27 1.59 3.10 3.30 0.95
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85 − 0.71Financial corporations 4.12 2.08 10.11 3.59 1.96 1.56 3.00 3.14 1.77General government 0.00 0.02 0.01 − 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 − 0.01 0.02Households 0.20 0.46 0.12 0.73 − 0.57 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.69 − 0.13
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.01 6.02 12.78 5.43 3.33 1.29 2.73 4.28 − 1.48
Loans − 7.42 46.85 43.12 30.54 7.75 17.31 − 12.48 39.59 19.13
short-term loans 0.55 29.77 14.65 15.46 − 1.70 3.27 − 2.37 7.74 2.75long-term loans − 7.97 17.08 28.47 15.08 9.45 14.05 − 10.11 31.85 16.38
Memo item
from domestic sectors 10.74 19.99 19.71 26.37 − 6.43 11.41 − 11.63 20.61 14.35
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 6.06 6.17 − 11.07 − 1.74 0.57 2.75 2.51Financial corporations 22.30 26.00 25.42 12.07 3.79 15.42 − 5.86 11.41 10.53General government − 11.15 − 6.85 0.35 8.12 0.85 − 2.28 − 6.35 6.45 1.31
from the rest of the world − 18.16 26.86 23.41 4.17 14.18 5.91 − 0.85 18.98 4.78
Equity 31.11 16.63 8.95 3.60 2.05 2.18 1.12 2.83 3.52
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 0.34 7.36 21.96 − 2.67 3.30 4.33 17.00 − 6.70 2.68
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45 − 2.26Financial corporations 2.22 11.75 − 2.31 − 1.14 3.22 − 2.25 − 2.13 − 0.88 6.21General government 0.03 0.11 0.07 0.04 0.05 0.01 − 0.02 0.07 0.13Households 2.80 3.55 3.85 4.61 0.98 − 0.26 − 1.47 − 0.44 − 1.40
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 9.09 − 1.34 − 20.44 2.71 − 2.89 − 4.10 − 16.16 7.03 − 1.28
Other equity  
1 22.37 10.61 7.43 3.56 1.64 1.95 0.29 2.51 2.12
Insurance technical reserves 6.41 5.60 3.60 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.21 − 10.81 − 0.13 5.34 − 5.71 8.05 − 7.81 0.67 0.43
Other accounts payable − 1.73 15.92 28.53 6.15 0.20 − 1.61 23.79 28.70 − 24.87
Total 29.41 81.96 107.77 56.94 9.78 29.71 11.34 80.26 − 1.42
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 407.0 464.5 516.2 457.3 467.8 504.3 516.2 517.9 526.5
Debt securities 49.6 47.8 44.8 48.8 45.7 46.0 44.8 43.9 42.8
short-term debt securities 6.8 6.0 5.5 7.0 6.3 6.3 5.5 5.8 3.9long-term debt securities 42.9 41.7 39.3 41.7 39.3 39.6 39.3 38.1 39.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.9 23.3 20.8 23.8 21.4 21.4 20.8 20.3 20.2
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6Financial corporations 12.7 14.5 12.0 14.8 13.0 12.5 12.0 11.6 12.3General government 5.7 5.2 4.4 4.8 4.2 4.6 4.4 3.4 3.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 26.7 24.4 24.0 24.9 24.3 24.5 24.0 23.6 22.7
Loans 455.3 485.1 496.7 488.2 481.6 480.8 496.7 526.0 527.3
short-term loans 356.2 383.7 392.4 383.1 381.9 377.6 392.4 410.8 408.4long-term loans 99.1 101.4 104.2 105.2 99.7 103.1 104.2 115.2 118.9
Memo item
to domestic sectors 303.6 312.4 310.9 317.0 311.6 309.5 310.9 321.7 320.5
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 207.2 219.5 208.4 206.7 207.2 210.0 212.5Financial corporations 84.9 92.8 97.2 91.2 96.8 96.4 97.2 105.2 101.5General government 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.4 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.5
to the rest of the world 151.7 172.7 185.7 171.2 170.0 171.2 185.7 204.3 206.8
Equity and investment fund shares 1,698.6 1,872.9 1,916.3 1,789.4 1,747.6 1,805.2 1,916.3 1,997.8 1,985.6
Equity 1,563.1 1,721.0 1,756.4 1,638.3 1,595.9 1,647.0 1,756.4 1,837.0 1,827.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 262.2 273.0 292.3 248.1 239.4 265.1 292.3 304.1 304.1
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9Financial corporations 10.0 6.3 6.1 6.1 5.7 5.8 6.1 5.5 6.2
Listed shares of the rest of the world 50.0 62.5 73.9 62.9 62.1 64.5 73.9 79.7 89.3
Other equity  
1 1,250.8 1,385.5 1,390.2 1,327.3 1,294.3 1,317.4 1,390.2 1,453.2 1,434.1
Investment fund shares 135.5 151.9 159.9 151.1 151.7 158.2 159.9 160.8 158.2
Money market fund shares 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.9 1.7 1.7Non-MMF investment fund shares 134.4 150.6 158.0 150.1 150.6 157.2 158.0 159.1 156.4
Insurance technical reserves 46.1 48.8 51.6 49.5 50.2 50.9 51.6 52.3 53.1Financial derivatives 22.8 24.1 27.3 23.3 25.3 22.0 27.3 23.6 22.7Other accounts receivable 883.4 913.5 931.6 905.3 904.9 905.6 931.6 1,016.5 965.4
Total 3,562.8 3,856.7 3,984.6 3,761.8 3,723.1 3,814.7 3,984.6 4,178.0 4,123.4
Liabilities
Debt securities 150.9 156.8 183.8 173.1 179.0 183.0 183.8 189.7 188.1
short-term securities 1.8 3.0 2.9 5.1 5.3 4.7 2.9 8.3 7.9
long-term securities 149.1 153.7 180.9 168.0 173.7 178.3 180.9 181.4 180.2
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 60.2 58.7 72.2 65.9 68.2 71.3 72.2 74.7 75.1
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6Financial corporations 39.8 40.0 51.9 46.0 49.1 50.9 51.9 54.3 55.6General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.8 15.0 15.7 15.6 14.9 15.9 15.7 15.0 14.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world 90.7 98.1 111.7 107.1 110.8 111.8 111.7 115.0 113.0
Loans 1,390.6 1,438.6 1,476.2 1,463.8 1,467.8 1,486.1 1,476.2 1,515.2 1,529.8
short-term loans 486.6 515.6 528.8 529.2 527.6 532.0 528.8 536.6 536.2long-term loans 904.0 923.0 947.5 934.6 940.2 954.1 947.5 978.6 993.7
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,093.9 1,110.5 1,123.9 1,134.1 1,123.2 1,134.7 1,123.9 1,143.8 1,157.0
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 207.2 219.5 208.4 206.7 207.2 210.0 212.5Financial corporations 822.2 845.5 863.5 856.1 856.2 870.5 863.5 875.0 883.7General government 59.2 51.7 53.1 58.5 58.6 57.5 53.1 58.8 60.8
from the rest of the world 296.7 328.0 352.4 329.7 344.6 351.4 352.4 371.4 372.8
Equity 2,543.6 2,673.9 2,749.3 2,570.6 2,490.5 2,665.4 2,749.3 2,870.5 2,889.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors 570.8 626.4 664.0 585.2 569.6 616.9 664.0 696.5 697.8
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9Financial corporations 134.7 150.1 154.7 140.3 139.2 147.8 154.7 161.3 166.4General government 35.2 43.4 44.4 41.5 40.4 40.8 44.4 47.0 46.7Households 148.7 166.2 178.7 161.5 156.3 168.9 178.7 189.7 186.8
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 719.1 756.3 803.7 724.7 684.7 782.2 803.7 865.4 879.1
Other equity  
1 1,253.7 1,291.2 1,281.6 1,260.8 1,236.2 1,266.4 1,281.6 1,308.5 1,312.4
Insurance technical reserves 250.3 255.9 259.5 256.8 257.7 258.6 259.5 260.4 261.3Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 51.8 42.0 38.2 49.6 46.5 50.4 38.2 35.4 32.7
Other accounts payable 981.3 1,004.1 1,038.2 985.2 989.1 996.7 1,038.2 1,062.6 1,008.1
Total 5,368.5 5,571.1 5,745.2 5,499.1 5,430.5 5,640.2 5,745.2 5,933.8 5,909.4
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.82 96.67 115.04 8.73 29.08 24.74 52.50 12.32 25.59
Currency 15.64 25.51 21.37 3.03 4.82 7.11 6.41 3.60 1.00Deposits 70.18 71.16 93.68 5.70 24.26 17.63 46.09 8.72 24.59
Transferable deposits 73.84 100.96 105.26 7.24 28.09 23.41 46.52 13.26 29.95Time deposits 8.74 − 9.22 1.28 0.83 2.16 − 1.73 0.02 − 1.59 − 2.32Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 12.41 − 20.58 − 12.87 − 2.37 − 5.99 − 4.05 − 0.45 − 2.96 − 3.04
Debt securities − 18.00 − 17.40 − 12.20 − 1.76 − 4.10 − 3.16 − 3.18 − 1.19 − 1.57
short-term debt securities − 0.67 0.75 − 0.10 0.10 − 0.62 0.10 0.33 0.38 0.20
long-term debt securities − 17.33 − 18.16 − 12.10 − 1.86 − 3.48 − 3.26 − 3.50 − 1.57 − 1.77
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 15.08 − 9.34 − 3.81 1.08 − 1.57 − 1.74 − 1.58 0.11 − 0.72
Non-financial corporations 0.02 0.39 0.02 0.67 − 0.59 0.03 − 0.09 − 0.65 − 0.20Financial corporations − 12.52 − 6.80 − 2.22 0.74 − 0.36 − 1.29 − 1.31 1.08 − 0.23General government − 2.58 − 2.93 − 1.61 − 0.33 − 0.63 − 0.48 − 0.18 − 0.33 − 0.28
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.93 − 8.06 − 8.39 − 2.84 − 2.53 − 1.42 − 1.60 − 1.30 − 0.86
Equity and investment fund shares 36.87 46.39 42.23 15.67 11.57 10.20 4.79 10.62 12.07
Equity 12.17 15.03 18.16 10.26 5.22 3.35 − 0.67 1.86 1.96
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.61 4.06 6.49 6.59 2.69 0.25 − 3.03 − 0.70 − 0.67
Non-financial corporations 2.69 3.77 3.22 4.52 0.69 − 0.30 − 1.69 − 0.36 − 1.43
Financial corporations 1.93 0.28 3.28 2.07 2.00 0.55 − 1.33 − 0.33 0.76
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 3.70 6.75 6.83 1.65 1.21 2.08 1.88 1.78 1.96Other equity  
1 3.86 4.22 4.83 2.02 1.32 1.02 0.47 0.77 0.66
Investment fund shares 24.70 31.36 24.07 5.41 6.35 6.86 5.46 8.76 10.12
Money market fund shares − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.52 − 0.30 − 0.15 0.10 − 0.17 − 0.22 0.04
Non-MMF investment fund shares 25.04 31.93 24.60 5.71 6.50 6.76 5.63 8.98 10.08
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.85 20.09 17.36 4.68 4.18 4.32 4.18 3.38 3.40
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.89 31.36 39.88 19.62 7.56 8.98 3.73 13.26 10.77
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 36.84 30.85 26.39 2.94 6.39 5.52 11.54 7.60 4.31
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  
2 − 34.45 − 16.59 − 27.21 11.40 − 5.10 − 7.06 − 26.46 14.09 − 1.78
Total 161.82 191.36 201.49 61.26 49.58 43.55 47.10 60.08 52.78
  External financing
Loans 20.59 38.20 47.13 5.98 15.82 15.98 9.35 6.36 16.99
short-term loans − 1.98 − 3.17 − 4.31 − 0.42 − 0.91 − 0.93 − 2.05 − 0.35 − 0.34
long-term loans 22.57 41.36 51.44 6.40 16.73 16.92 11.39 6.71 17.33
Memo item
Mortage loans 24.87 35.63 41.59 4.26 12.13 14.30 10.91 4.57 13.66Consumer loans 1.21 5.44 9.78 2.11 3.93 2.86 0.88 2.41 3.25Entrepreneurial loans − 5.49 − 2.88 − 4.24 − 0.38 − 0.24 − 1.17 − 2.44 − 0.62 0.07
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 18.87 39.35 42.87 5.24 13.81 15.74 8.08 7.10 15.54Loans from other financial institutions 1.72 − 1.16 4.26 0.74 2.01 0.25 1.27 − 0.74 1.45Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00Other accounts payable 0.78 − 1.14 0.34 0.19 0.03 0.11 0.01 − 0.16 0.05
Total 21.37 37.06 47.47 6.17 15.85 16.09 9.35 6.20 17.03
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,998.1 2,094.8 2,208.9 2,103.6 2,132.7 2,157.6 2,208.9 2,222.0 2,247.6
Currency 127.7 153.2 174.6 156.2 161.0 168.1 174.6 178.2 179.2
Deposits 1,870.4 1,941.6 2,034.4 1,947.4 1,971.6 1,989.5 2,034.4 2,043.8 2,068.4
Transferable deposits 981.4 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,089.8 1,117.9 1,141.5 1,188.0 1,201.2 1,231.2
Time deposits 256.4 246.8 248.7 248.3 250.4 248.7 248.7 247.9 245.6
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 632.7 612.4 597.7 609.3 603.4 599.3 597.7 594.7 591.7
Debt securities 162.2 139.8 127.4 137.1 133.5 130.6 127.4 126.7 125.4
short-term debt securities 2.1 2.9 2.7 2.9 2.3 2.4 2.7 3.1 3.2
long-term debt securities 160.1 136.9 124.7 134.2 131.2 128.3 124.7 123.6 122.2
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 102.4 89.4 85.6 89.6 87.8 87.1 85.6 86.1 86.2
Non-financial corporations 14.1 13.4 13.9 13.9 13.1 14.1 13.9 13.3 13.0Financial corporations 78.7 69.5 66.7 69.4 69.0 67.8 66.7 68.2 68.9General government 9.6 6.5 5.0 6.3 5.7 5.2 5.0 4.6 4.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 59.8 50.3 41.8 47.6 45.7 43.5 41.8 40.6 39.3
Equity and investment fund shares 951.4 1,040.7 1,107.7 1,023.0 1,028.6 1,068.8 1,107.7 1,155.5 1,158.1
Equity 508.9 555.9 589.9 543.6 540.8 563.7 589.9 614.6 610.9
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 169.7 188.9 200.8 181.8 174.6 187.9 200.8 213.0 211.1
Non-financial corporations 142.1 158.7 169.8 154.1 148.6 160.6 169.8 180.4 177.5
Financial corporations 27.6 30.3 31.0 27.6 26.0 27.3 31.0 32.6 33.6
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 64.0 74.8 86.8 73.1 76.8 80.7 86.8 93.1 92.7
Other equity  
1 275.3 292.2 302.4 288.8 289.4 295.1 302.4 308.5 307.1
Investment fund shares 442.5 484.8 517.8 479.3 487.8 505.1 517.8 540.9 547.2
Money market fund shares 4.0 3.4 2.8 3.1 3.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.8
Non-MMF investment fund shares 438.5 481.4 515.0 476.3 484.7 502.1 515.0 538.2 544.4
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 307.2 324.3 337.7 327.6 331.0 334.4 337.7 341.0 344.4
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 885.6 919.5 963.1 940.4 948.7 958.5 963.1 976.3 987.1
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 752.1 786.6 813.0 789.6 796.0 801.5 813.0 820.6 824.9
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 35.8 37.1 35.6 36.8 36.5 36.0 35.6 35.3 35.1
Total 5,092.5 5,342.8 5,593.4 5,358.1 5,406.9 5,487.4 5,593.4 5,677.5 5,722.6
  Liabilities
Loans 1,570.5 1,606.6 1,654.4 1,613.0 1,628.8 1,645.0 1,654.4 1,660.7 1,679.0
short-term loans 64.6 60.9 56.6 60.5 59.6 58.6 56.6 56.3 55.9
long-term loans 1,505.9 1,545.8 1,597.7 1,552.5 1,569.2 1,586.3 1,597.7 1,604.5 1,623.1
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,118.0 1,153.8 1,195.5 1,158.1 1,170.3 1,184.6 1,195.5 1,200.1 1,216.8Consumer loans 188.9 191.9 201.8 194.0 197.8 200.9 201.8 204.2 207.4Entrepreneurial loans 263.6 260.9 257.0 260.9 260.7 259.5 257.0 256.4 254.8
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,520.5 1,534.3 1,550.2 1,558.3 1,565.4 1,582.3Loans from other financial institutions 92.9 91.8 96.0 92.5 94.5 94.8 96.0 95.3 96.8Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 16.5 15.1 16.0 16.0 16.1 16.6 16.0 16.8 16.3
Total 1,587.0 1,621.7 1,670.4 1,629.0 1,644.9 1,661.6 1,670.4 1,677.5 1,695.3
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.72013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.22014 
p + 9.5 + 8.7 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 19.4 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 25.7 + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.2 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2015         H1  p + 12.5 + 1.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2
         H2  p + 6.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
2016         H1  p + 17.5 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 6.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4
         H2  p + 8.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2017         H1  pe + 18.3 − 2.5 + 8.1 + 6.1 + 6.6 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2011 2,125.0 1,344.1 653.8 143.5 1.3 78.6 49.7 24.2 5.3 0.0
2012 2,202.2 1,387.9 683.5 147.5 1.2 79.8 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.02013 2,186.6 1,390.4 661.7 150.6 1.3 77.4 49.2 23.4 5.3 0.02014 
p 2,187.0 1,396.5 655.0 152.0 1.4 74.6 47.6 22.3 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,156.6 1,372.6 651.3 152.2 1.4 70.9 45.1 21.4 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,140.0 1,366.8 634.0 153.4 1.1 68.1 43.5 20.2 4.9 0.0
2015         Q1  p 2,192.6 1,398.0 663.1 152.4 1.4 74.2 47.3 22.4 5.2 0.0
         Q2  p 2,158.4 1,380.6 642.7 152.2 1.4 72.3 46.3 21.5 5.1 0.0
         Q3  p 2,160.2 1,374.7 650.2 153.1 1.5 71.7 45.6 21.6 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,156.6 1,372.6 651.3 152.2 1.4 70.9 45.1 21.4 5.0 0.0
2016         Q1  p 2,164.8 1,382.5 644.2 154.4 1.2 70.6 45.1 21.0 5.0 0.0
         Q2  p 2,168.1 1,391.1 640.6 154.0 1.1 69.9 44.8 20.7 5.0 0.0
         Q3  p 2,161.3 1,381.1 640.8 154.8 1.0 69.2 44.2 20.5 5.0 0.0
         Q4  p 2,140.0 1,366.8 634.0 153.4 1.1 68.1 43.5 20.2 4.9 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,113.3 1,350.9 624.1 152.1 1.2 66.6 42.5 19.7 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,107.7 1,353.5 617.5 151.5 0.9 66.0 42.4 19.3 4.7 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.72013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.32014 
p 1,308.3 674.1 482.0 152.3 1,298.8 691.0 224.0 137.4 60.0 51.2 135.2 + 9.5 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.3 704.3 500.8 149.2 1,334.9 722.3 229.2 142.2 64.2 46.4 130.6 + 19.4 1,210.6
2016 p 1,414.2 739.0 523.8 151.5 1,388.6 754.9 236.5 150.0 66.8 41.6 138.8 + 25.7 1,269.6
as a percentage of GDP
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.32013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.62014 
p 44.6 23.0 16.4 5.2 44.3 23.6 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.7 4.6 + 0.3 39.6
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.5 4.9 43.9 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.5 4.3 + 0.6 39.8
2016 p 45.0 23.5 16.7 4.8 44.2 24.0 7.5 4.8 2.1 1.3 4.4 + 0.8 40.4
Percentage growth rates
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.62013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.42014 
p + 3.9 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.3 − 0.3 − 7.7 + 3.9 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.5 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 2.0 + 2.8 + 4.5 + 2.3 + 3.5 + 7.0 − 9.3 − 3.4 . + 4.3
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.2 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 10.4 + 6.2 . + 4.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and lution Fund established at the European level. 
social contributions plus customs duties and levies from banks to the Single Reso-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.7 + 3.8 1,033.7 1,108.8 − 75.1
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 + 15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.92012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.6 601.5 594.6 + 6.9 1,354.7 1,330.2 + 24.5
2015         Q1  p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2  p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3  p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4  p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016         Q1  p 205.7 169.9 1.4 206.5 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 321.8 326.2 − 4.5
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
         Q4  p 233.1 189.2 2.1 233.4 68.0 82.3 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.3 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.7 358.2 + 7.5
2017         Q1  p 215.6 180.4 0.9 200.9 63.1 80.9 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 14.6 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 337.5 327.7 + 9.8
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.7 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.8 + 13.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans gran ted.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 373.5 + 7.6 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2015         Q1  p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2  p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3  p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4  p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016         Q1  p 81.1 83.6 − 2.5 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 92.5 − 1.6 104.3 105.5 − 1.2 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 84.6 + 3.5 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.1 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,6152012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,4982013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,791 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,679 + 148 27,836
2015         Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016         Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584         Q4 189,180 164,382 83,919 72,608 7,855 32,513 − 7,715 7,253
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,387 66,605 6,922 27,631 − 456 6,825         Q3 ... 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 ... ... 7,467
2016         Sep . 57,860 30,506 24,726 2,628 . . 2,261
2017         Sep . 60,441 32,219 25,989 2,233 . . 2,222
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,5172012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2015         Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016         Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
2016         Sep 62,333 33,588 14,231 12,680 5,386 1,291 17,691 13,272 4,419 2 8,826 1,777 449 4,474
2017         Sep 65,200 35,194 14,580 13,498 5,826 1,289 18,518 13,756 4,761 7 9,160 1,864 457 4,759
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2016: 49.4:48.3:2.2. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2016: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Period Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits land and ance lottery business property
tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2010 39,838 11,713 13,492 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 5,290 4,404 1,412 1,039 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,313 50,097 13,654
2015         Q1 4,704 3,783 2,223 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 2,760 1,668 426 353 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 4,278 3,683 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 2,561 1,617 433 227 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,714 3,981 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 3,021 1,335 401 272 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 4,155 5,034 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 2,906 1,670 452 236 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016         Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,039 13,673 3,024
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 ... ... ...
2016         Sep 3,399 1,949 1,170 592 719 548 164 283 991 531 158 97 . . .
2017         Sep 3,427 2,040 1,337 704 694 567 161 231 1,106 525 137 95 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2015         Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2015         Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of t he basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2010 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,4502012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2015         Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,643 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 18,237 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2015         Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,088,387 4,440 667,539 207,062 62,207 1,147,138
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,125,032 4,440 613,186 206,631 53,974 1,246,8012012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,242 4,440 637,133 199,132 60,140 1,301,3972013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,186,643 4,440 644,067 190,555 43,969 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,186,954 4,440 613,794 190,130 44,915 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,156,645 77,220 601,629 186,661 44,977 1,246,158
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016  
p 2,140,009 196,320 578,865 179,755 41,352 1,143,717
2015         Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 2,192,594 12,335 622,160 189,048 44,414 1,324,637
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 2,158,420 34,310 602,743 187,280 44,792 1,289,295         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 2,160,212 54,990 607,882 188,165 44,785 1,264,390         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 2,156,645 77,220 601,629 186,661 44,977 1,246,158
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1  
p 2,164,801 100,051 616,144 183,160 41,334 1,224,112
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2  p 2,168,052 133,297 604,796 181,372 39,529 1,209,058
         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3  p 2,161,325 163,636 591,243 179,359 38,827 1,188,260
         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4  p 2,140,009 196,320 578,865 179,755 41,352 1,143,717
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  p 2,113,322 230,505 564,984 178,219 39,361 1,100,254
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,107,734 255,879 551,214 176,810 38,641 1,085,190
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
  
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isationor quarter) Total (Bubills)  
1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2011 1,751,730 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 289,426 102 113,773 4,440 2
2012 1,791,656 57,172 417,470 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,133 70 114,272 4,440 22013 1,815,991 50,129 423,442 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 289,725 41 112,005 4,440 22014 1,817,244 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 275,582 42 113,035 4,440 2
2015         Q1 1,821,383 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 289,247 42 112,315 4,440 2
         Q2 1,806,631 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 269,992 42 111,974 4,440 2         Q3 1,810,827 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 268,390 42 112,046 4,440 2         Q4 1,804,522 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 261,189 59 114,983 4,440 2
2016         Q1 1,813,655 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 275,378 100 111,771 4,440 2
         Q2 1,812,131 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 275,038 40 109,804 4,440 2         Q3 1,804,296 31,237 433,493 245,945 922 717,358 1,021 260,003 39 109,835 4,440 2         Q4 1,786,609 24,509 430,701 236,136 737 724,528 1,010 254,273 21 110,251 4,440 2
2017         Q1  
p 1,771,555 16,098 424,930 227,906 619 730,531 995 257,179 25 108,830 4,440 2
         Q2  p 1,771,215 15,759 422,682 219,668 487 745,792 986 252,629 32 108,737 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 22013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 22014 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015         Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016         Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
         Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2         Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2         Q4 1,102,410 23,609 95,727 236,136 737 722,124 1,010 11,761 − 6,866 4,440 2
2017         Q1 1,096,711 14,910 95,148 227,906 619 727,887 995 17,829 − 6,976 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,991 14,431 93,795 219,668 487 743,120 986 18,076 − 6,986 4,440 2         Q3 1,105,486 11,851 91,893 229,519 398 741,039 977 18,420 − 6,949 4,440 2
State government
2011 536,696 1,975 283,601 .... 150,631 62 100,426 . 1
2012 541,237 950 299,751 .... 137,068 51 103,416 . 1
2013 545,788 125 313,412 .... 131,302 30 100,918 . 1
2014 544,612 0 326,188 .... 117,451 5 100,967 . 1
2015         Q1 546,975 1,821 323,055 .... 121,130 5 100,964 . 1
         Q2 537,947 2,040 320,492 .... 114,816 5 100,593 . 1
         Q3 543,477 2,056 326,447 .... 114,081 5 100,887 . 1
         Q4 543,003 895 333,429 .... 106,720 5 101,953 . 1
2016         Q1 541,653 1,278 328,858 .... 113,286 5 98,225 . 1
         Q2 536,101 1,173 328,397 .... 109,680 6 96,845 . 1
         Q3 541,288 611 331,441 .... 112,558 6 96,672 . 1
         Q4 537,009 900 334,975 .... 103,071 6 98,056 . 1
2017         Q1  p 529,520 1,188 329,782 .... 101,940 3 96,607 . 1
         Q2  p 524,473 1,327 328,887 .... 97,768 3 96,487 . 1
Local government9
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 129,412 40 3,897 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 134,872 18 2,073 . .2013 137,698 . − . . 646 . 134,606 11 2,435 . .2014 142,505 . − . . 1,297 . 137,622 37 3,549 . .
2015         Q1 147,366 . − . . 1,597 . 142,829 37 2,903 . .
         Q2 147,047 . − . . 1,847 . 142,155 37 3,008 . .         Q3 147,680 . − . . 1,997 . 142,534 37 3,112 . .         Q4 147,778 . − . . 2,047 . 140,644 54 5,033 . .
2016         Q1 147,611 . − . . 2,076 . 139,559 94 5,882 . .
         Q2 147,435 . − . . 2,453 . 139,122 34 5,826 . .         Q3 148,300 . − . . 2,455 . 139,651 33 6,161 . .         Q4 147,190 . − . . 2,404 . 139,441 15 5,330 . .
2017         Q1  
p 145,325 . − . . 2,645 . 137,410 23 5,247 . .
         Q2  p 144,751 . − . . 2,672 . 136,785 29 5,265 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8Including the Finan-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cial Market Stabilisation Fund, the Investment and Repayment Fund and the Re-
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the structuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of municipal special purpose
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- associations. Data other than year-end figures have been estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2015   2016   2017
  2014   2015   2016   2014   2015   2016   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 110.3 112.8 114.9 5.3 2.2 1.9 2.2 1.1 4.5 1.2 0.6 4.4 − 0.3Construction 102.9 102.9 104.9 2.8 0.0 1.9 2.5 1.4 5.3 1.7 − 0.4 6.2 1.5Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 107.8 108.5 111.1 1.7 0.7 2.4 0.5 1.1 4.2 1.6 2.5 3.8 1.0Information and communication 125.2 128.5 132.0 4.7 2.6 2.7 4.5 3.1 2.7 3.5 1.6 4.3 3.7Financial and insuranceactivities 105.1 104.3 107.4 − 4.9 − 0.7 3.0 0.3 2.1 3.7 4.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.4Real estate activities 103.1 103.3 103.9 − 1.2 0.2 0.6 0.1 0.5 0.9 0.4 0.5 1.2 0.6Business services  
1 106.1 108.1 110.0 2.4 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.0 3.1 1.7 1.5 3.7 0.8
Public services, education andhealth 103.0 105.3 107.7 0.7 2.2 2.2 2.2 1.7 2.6 2.3 2.4 2.4 1.1Other services 98.6 99.3 100.2 − 0.3 0.7 0.9 1.1 − 0.4 1.9 1.2 1.0 2.3 − 0.1
Gross value added 106.7 108.3 110.4 1.9 1.5 1.9 1.8 1.2 3.3 1.7 1.4 3.3 0.6Gross domestic product  
2 106.7 108.6 110.7 1.9 1.7 1.9 2.1 1.5 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.2 0.8
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 104.3 106.1 108.3 1.0 1.7 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.9 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.6
Government consumption 105.0 108.0 111.9 1.5 2.9 3.7 3.2 4.1 4.3 3.4 3.0 1.6 1.5Machinery and equipment 106.9 111.1 113.4 5.9 3.9 2.2 7.3 4.7 6.4 1.4 − 2.6 3.3 − 0.7Premises 109.9 108.3 111.3 2.3 − 1.4 2.7 1.7 3.1 5.4 2.1 0.4 6.2 2.3Other investment  
4 111.2 117.3 123.8 4.0 5.5 5.5 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.1 2.6 3.9 3.4
Changes in inventories  5, 6 . . . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.4 − 0.1 0.3
Domestic demand 104.4 106.1 108.7 1.3 1.6 2.4 2.7 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.9 2.3 2.0
Net exports  6 . . . 0.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.0
Exports 118.5 124.7 128.0 4.6 5.2 2.6 4.1 1.7 4.9 1.3 2.6 6.9 1.0Imports 114.1 120.5 125.2 3.6 5.6 3.9 5.8 3.4 5.1 2.8 4.3 5.4 3.8
Gross domestic product  
2 106.7 108.6 110.7 1.9 1.7 1.9 2.1 1.5 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.2 0.8
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,593.2 1,630.5 1,674.4 1.9 2.3 2.7 2.8 2.6 3.2 2.2 2.8 3.7 3.2
Government consumption 563.9 587.1 615.4 3.9 4.1 4.8 4.5 5.5 5.4 4.5 4.1 3.5 3.7Machinery and equipment 191.7 200.8 205.8 6.5 4.7 2.5 8.2 5.2 6.7 1.7 − 2.3 3.6 − 0.4Premises 289.7 291.0 304.5 4.5 0.4 4.6 3.4 4.6 7.3 4.1 2.5 9.1 5.4Other investment  
4 105.1 112.5 119.7 5.6 7.0 6.4 8.2 7.8 7.4 6.9 3.7 4.9 4.8
Changes in inventories  5 − 14.2 − 21.5 − 26.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,729.5 2,800.3 2,893.4 2.7 2.6 3.3 3.7 3.0 3.9 3.2 3.2 4.1 4.0
Net exports 203.0 243.3 250.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,340.3 1,426.7 1,450.0 4.5 6.4 1.6 4.7 1.2 3.1 − 0.0 2.3 8.6 3.1Imports 1,137.3 1,183.4 1,199.4 2.0 4.1 1.4 3.7 0.4 1.0 0.2 3.9 9.6 7.3
Gross domestic product  
2 2,932.5 3,043.7 3,144.1 3.8 3.8 3.3 4.2 3.1 4.7 2.9 2.5 4.1 2.3
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 105.6 106.2 106.9 0.9 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.5 1.1 1.9 1.6Gross domestic product 106.5 108.7 110.1 1.8 2.0 1.3 2.1 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.2 0.9 1.5Terms of trade 99.5 102.1 103.7 1.4 2.7 1.5 2.7 2.5 2.2 1.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.2
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,485.1 1,542.3 1,600.3 3.9 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.2 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.2Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 696.2 722.6 737.7 3.3 3.8 2.1 4.6 0.8 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 3.3 − 1.6
National income 2,181.3 2,264.9 2,338.0 3.7 3.8 3.2 4.2 3.0 5.2 2.3 2.5 3.9 2.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,990.4 3,099.8 3,197.2 3.5 3.7 3.1 4.1 3.1 4.7 2.4 2.5 3.9 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2017. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2013 106.4 106.4 96.4 107.7 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.7
2014 108.1 109.5 92.7 109.8 106.2 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.6 107.0 97.5 110.3 106.1 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.4 114.8 119.3
2016 109.8 109.6 96.2 111.7 107.3 119.3 105.9 103.0 113.0 111.4 114.8 121.6
 
2016         Q3 110.1 117.9 91.8 111.4 108.3 117.6 103.0 104.0 112.6 113.5 113.2 119.4
         Q4 112.9 120.5 101.6 113.3 104.8 124.1 109.6 106.1 111.7 114.1 124.1 117.8
2017         Q1 108.4 90.8 101.8 111.7 109.3 117.7 110.0 101.8 115.3 112.9 110.6 125.4
         Q2 113.0 118.0 91.4 115.0 112.4 122.4 109.4 102.4 119.2 116.5 117.0 126.2         Q3
x,p 114.6 123.2 88.7 116.7 114.1 123.2 109.0 107.2 119.6 121.4 118.0 126.3
 
2016         Sep 115.4 119.5 93.1 117.7 111.5 127.5 115.7 106.9 117.3 120.3 122.6 131.7
         Oct 115.7 122.4 99.5 116.8 111.9 124.0 114.5 109.9 118.6 116.6 114.2 132.2
         Nov 118.7 123.6 102.2 120.2 111.8 131.6 115.9 111.3 121.8 120.4 127.3 131.0         Dec 104.3 115.4 103.1 102.9 90.6 116.7 98.4 97.2 94.6 105.3 130.9 90.1
2017         Jan 99.8 68.9 108.2 103.1 104.3 103.8 102.7 98.2 108.3 106.0 94.9 112.6
         Feb 106.1 90.7 97.2 109.5 106.1 116.8 108.8 98.0 112.4 109.5 110.1 126.0         Mar 119.2 112.8 100.0 122.6 117.5 132.4 118.5 109.3 125.1 123.1 126.7 137.5
         Apr 111.7 116.4 93.3 113.4 112.1 119.2 109.3 101.1 117.9 115.0 112.0 127.0
         May 111.8 116.5 92.2 113.6 111.3 120.3 107.0 102.4 118.5 113.4 114.2 125.1         June 115.5 121.2 88.8 118.1 113.8 127.7 111.9 103.8 121.1 121.1 124.7 126.5
         July
2,x 115.0 126.3 88.6 116.8 115.4 122.8 104.6 105.8 120.7 121.1 117.2 124.9
         Aug 2,x 109.3 118.4 89.2 110.6 110.0 113.9 101.5 105.0 113.4 115.9 109.5 115.0
         Sep x,p 119.6 124.8 88.4 122.8 116.8 132.8 120.9 110.9 124.6 127.2 127.3 139.0
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.2
2015 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.1 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.9
 
2016         Q3 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 1.6
         Q4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.1
2017         Q1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 0.2
         Q2 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 1.7         Q3
x,p + 4.1 + 4.4 − 3.3 + 4.8 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 5.8 + 3.1 + 6.2 + 7.0 + 4.3 + 5.8
 
2016         Sep + 1.8 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 2.2
         Oct + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 3.7 − 1.6 + 1.6
         Nov + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 3.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 1.2         Dec 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 5.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.2
2017         Jan − 0.4 − 5.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.1 + 3.3 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 2.2
         Feb + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 0.6
         Mar + 2.1 + 5.2 − 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 3.0 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 1.9
         Apr + 2.9 + 7.3 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 + 7.3 + 1.9 − 1.0
         May + 5.0 + 6.6 + 2.6 + 4.9 + 4.0 + 6.6 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 7.5 + 6.5 + 8.1         June + 2.8 + 5.6 + 3.3 + 2.3 + 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 5.1 + 2.6 − 1.5
         July
2,x + 4.2 + 4.6 − 3.4 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 3.0 + 6.3 + 8.2 + 5.5 + 2.5
         Aug 2,x + 4.6 + 4.2 − 1.5 + 5.2 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.9 + 2.5 + 6.0 + 7.1 + 3.5 + 9.9
         Sep x,p + 3.6 + 4.4 − 5.0 + 4.3 + 4.8 + 4.2 + 4.5 + 3.7 + 6.2 + 5.7 + 3.8 + 5.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Pro duction Survey and the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013 109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.02014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2016 115.7 + 0.8 102.1 − 0.9 125.3 + 1.7 115.3 + 0.9 112.6 + 5.5 116.2 − 0.6
2016         Sep 113.9 + 1.8 100.5 + 0.5 123.3 + 2.7 115.4 + 1.1 119.2 + 2.4 114.1 + 0.6
         Oct 118.7 + 4.4 105.0 + 2.2 128.4 + 6.6 117.9 − 1.8 129.5 + 12.9 113.8 − 6.6
         Nov 119.0 + 2.1 107.5 + 2.1 127.1 + 1.8 118.3 + 2.5 119.1 + 8.7 118.0 + 0.5         Dec 121.1 + 9.5 93.6 + 3.7 143.0 + 13.9 104.1 − 2.1 103.5 + 4.9 104.2 − 4.4
2017         Jan 115.1 + 1.1 107.0 + 2.6 120.7 + 1.1 116.9 − 4.1 115.6 − 0.7 117.4 − 5.2
         Feb 119.0 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.4 123.8 + 3.7 121.7 + 4.1 116.6 + 11.9 123.4 + 1.7         Mar 133.6 + 4.3 119.5 + 10.0 143.8 + 0.8 131.1 + 8.2 134.9 + 14.7 129.9 + 6.0
         Apr 119.4 + 5.5 111.0 + 5.9 125.3 + 4.9 118.7 + 7.8 121.0 + 2.4 117.9 + 10.0
         May 118.3 + 5.7 109.2 + 7.6 125.1 + 4.9 116.4 + 4.4 119.3 + 18.5 115.4 + 0.1         June 126.7 + 6.7 114.2 + 10.9 136.4 + 4.6 120.9 + 6.0 129.6 + 16.8 117.8 + 2.3
         July 121.5 + 6.5 112.3 + 10.0 127.8 + 4.7 123.7 + 5.5 116.8 + 6.1 126.0 + 5.1
         Aug 113.4 + 9.9 108.7 + 17.0 115.2 + 5.7 124.3 + 8.6 121.3 + 19.0 125.4 + 5.4         Sep 
p 126.4 + 11.0 112.1 + 11.5 137.0 + 11.1 123.3 + 6.8 132.9 + 11.5 119.9 + 5.1
From the domestic market
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.1 − 4.3 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.3 102.8 + 0.9 99.5 + 1.32014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.8
+ 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015 107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.7 106.3 + 4.0
2016 107.4 + 0.0 96.8 − 2.2 118.7 + 2.1 103.4 − 1.7 105.6 + 3.4 102.6 − 3.5
2016         Sep 104.4 − 0.9 92.8 − 3.5 116.0 + 1.5 104.0 − 3.5 115.8 + 0.7 99.9 − 5.0
         Oct 111.0 + 3.1 100.5 + 1.8 122.2 + 4.7 107.0 − 1.1 120.6 + 6.8 102.2 − 4.1
         Nov 111.3 + 0.8 102.4 + 0.4 120.9 + 1.4 107.5 − 0.7 114.6 + 5.7 105.0 − 3.0         Dec 107.3 + 9.6 86.4 + 2.7 131.0 + 16.1 91.0 + 0.2 88.9 + 6.3 91.7 − 1.8
2017         Jan 106.2 + 0.5 100.8 + 2.1 112.0 − 1.0 103.6 + 0.2 104.6 + 1.6 103.2 − 0.3
         Feb 113.5 + 7.5 108.4 + 13.9 119.3 + 3.2 109.9 + 1.9 104.3 + 3.8 111.9 + 1.4         Mar 122.5 + 4.9 111.5 + 9.2 135.3 + 1.9 111.3 + 2.1 117.6 + 1.0 109.1 + 2.5
         Apr 111.8 + 3.2 104.8 + 2.7 120.7 + 4.0 99.9 + 0.6 106.3 + 0.1 97.6 + 0.8
         May 107.8 + 2.7 102.7 + 7.2 114.0 − 0.5 101.7 − 0.7 102.9 + 8.2 101.3 − 3.5         June 116.4 + 7.4 104.4 + 7.6 130.3 + 7.6 104.7 + 4.0 106.4 + 4.9 104.1 + 3.7
         July 115.2 + 9.1 107.2 + 9.8 123.9 + 9.1 110.7 + 5.3 106.1 + 3.1 112.3 + 6.0
         Aug 109.0 + 9.3 106.5 + 17.0 110.7 + 2.7 114.0 + 10.7 112.4 + 11.0 114.5 + 10.5         Sep 
p 115.5 + 10.6 104.3 + 12.4 127.2 + 9.7 112.0 + 7.7 121.0 + 4.5 108.8 + 8.9
From abroad
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.8 + 3.6 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.8 − 0.4 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.7 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.52014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.2 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.3 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.7 + 0.3 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.4 126.0 + 2.0
2016 122.4 + 1.4 108.3 + 0.6 129.4 + 1.6 125.5 + 2.8 118.8 + 7.3 127.8 + 1.4
2016         Sep 121.7 + 3.8 109.5 + 4.8 127.8 + 3.3 125.1 + 4.6 122.2 + 3.9 126.2 + 4.9
         Oct 124.9 + 5.4 110.3 + 2.6 132.3 + 7.7 127.2 − 2.2 137.3 + 18.1 123.7 − 8.3
         Nov 125.2 + 2.9 113.6 + 4.0 130.9 + 1.9 127.6 + 5.0 123.1 + 11.2 129.1 + 3.1         Dec 132.4 + 9.4 102.0 + 4.5 150.4 + 12.7 115.3 − 3.6 116.3 + 4.0 114.9 − 6.1
2017         Jan 122.4 + 1.7 114.3 + 3.2 126.0 + 2.2 128.3 − 6.8 125.1 − 2.3 129.4 − 8.2
         Feb 123.5 + 4.9 115.9 + 6.8 126.6 + 4.0 131.7 + 5.6 127.4 + 18.5 133.2 + 2.1         Mar 142.6 + 3.9 129.0 + 10.9 149.1 + 0.2 148.1 + 12.5 150.0 + 26.4 147.5 + 8.4
         Apr 125.5 + 7.2 118.2 + 9.4 128.2 + 5.4 134.8 + 13.0 133.8 + 4.0 135.1 + 16.4
         May 126.9 + 8.0 116.9 + 8.0 131.9 + 8.0 128.9 + 8.1 133.6 + 26.6 127.3 + 2.7         June 135.1 + 6.3 125.8 + 14.3 140.1 + 2.9 134.7 + 7.2 149.9 + 25.5 129.4 + 1.3
         July 126.7 + 4.7 118.2 + 10.1 130.2 + 2.2 134.8 + 5.5 126.2 + 8.5 137.7 + 4.5
         Aug 116.9 + 10.2 111.2 + 16.9 118.0 + 7.5 133.2 + 7.1 129.0 + 26.0 134.7 + 2.0         Sep 
p 135.2 + 11.1 121.2 + 10.7 143.0 + 11.9 132.9 + 6.2 143.2 + 17.2 129.3 + 2.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.3 128.0 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.7 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.7 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.7 − 0.2 104.1 − 3.3
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.4 − 1.8 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.2 + 4.9
2016 142.2 + 14.5 153.7 + 15.0 193.4 + 16.9 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.7 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 126.9 + 16.2
 
2016         Aug 138.9 + 12.2 148.7 + 14.3 184.1 + 16.7 141.7 + 15.2 99.6 + 2.9 129.2 + 9.9 132.4 + 11.0 127.4 + 10.9
         Sep 144.5 + 7.6 161.6 + 6.8 225.4 + 11.5 133.2 − 0.5 120.3 + 16.7 127.4 + 8.6 129.7 + 1.1 127.1 + 12.3
         Oct 145.2 + 23.4 156.9 + 22.6 194.4 + 22.8 147.8 + 26.9 110.3 + 7.3 133.6 + 24.4 144.7 + 20.1 126.1 + 27.9
         Nov 127.1 + 7.0 139.7 + 1.9 189.4 + 24.4 121.8 − 15.8 95.1 + 12.0 114.5 + 13.9 124.4 − 11.5 104.8 + 26.0         Dec 131.1 + 6.2 149.9 + 10.9 171.8 + 2.8 153.8 + 22.6 95.4 − 5.7 112.2 + 0.4 141.0 + 22.8 104.6 − 8.7
2017         Jan 113.5 + 4.7 125.0 + 6.3 154.5 + 4.7 122.5 + 15.2 74.4 − 19.1 102.1 + 2.9 124.5 + 11.9 85.9 − 4.1
         Feb 130.2 + 7.9 144.2 + 14.4 176.0 + 11.6 139.0 + 20.3 97.4 + 2.9 116.2 + 0.7 127.3 + 16.1 114.8 − 2.0         Mar 179.1 + 8.8 190.5 + 13.2 243.7 + 7.2 172.4 + 17.7 139.7 + 19.4 167.7 + 4.2 165.2 + 10.2 167.3 + 8.3
         Apr 165.1 + 9.3 170.3 + 9.6 204.4 + 4.4 166.4 + 16.7 114.7 + 0.6 160.0 + 9.0 153.8 + 9.4 160.9 + 11.8
         May 155.5 − 1.2 162.6 − 7.7 202.3 − 3.5 143.2 − 17.5 142.1 + 20.8 148.4 + 7.0 138.6 − 11.2 154.0 + 11.7         June 173.0 + 4.7 187.6 + 3.5 237.9 + 6.6 164.1 − 6.2 158.6 + 35.8 158.4 + 6.1 155.9 − 3.5 164.5 + 13.0
         July 164.0 + 7.5 167.6 + 2.5 203.9 + 4.6 159.5 + 0.8 120.4 + 2.6 160.4 + 13.2 155.1 + 7.7 157.1 + 8.8
         Aug 145.3 + 4.6 153.0 + 2.9 184.9 + 0.4 142.4 + 0.5 121.5 + 22.0 137.7 + 6.6 139.0 + 5.0 135.9 + 6.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of whichin stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2013 106.3 + 1.8 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.7 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.4 + 2.7 123.4 + 5.9
2014 108.2 + 1.8 102.7 + 1.4 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.8 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 126.2 + 2.3
2015 3 112.2 + 3.7 3 106.7 + 3.9 114.8 + 2.9 105.2 + 0.3 95.5 + 1.0 104.6 + 2.6 116.6 + 5.3 3 151.5 + 20.0
2016 4 115.0 + 2.5 108.8 + 2.0 117.0 + 1.9 104.8 − 0.4 95.5 + 0.0 106.1 + 1.4 121.4 + 4.1 166.4 + 9.8
 
2016         Sep 111.0 + 1.0 104.7 + 0.4 112.8 + 2.5 101.7 − 9.4 88.5 − 4.8 100.7 − 1.4 119.6 + 5.1 157.6 − 0.3
         Oct 120.5 + 4.0 113.2 + 3.4 118.8 + 2.9 131.3 + 9.2 101.9 + 4.1 112.7 + 1.8 124.4 + 4.2 179.7 + 9.7
         Nov 121.4 + 2.9 114.1 + 1.9 118.8 + 2.1 111.3 + 6.9 109.7 − 0.7 112.2 − 2.0 126.8 + 3.4 200.9 + 8.2         Dec 139.9 + 3.9 131.9 + 2.2 138.4 + 3.4 128.8 + 3.6 151.2 + 2.0 116.0 + 2.3 137.3 + 5.0 220.8 + 8.1
2017         Jan 107.9 + 3.1 101.7 + 1.0 108.8 + 1.3 91.4 + 2.1 107.3 + 9.9 91.1 − 1.5 118.9 + 2.9 173.1 + 11.0
         Feb 105.8 + 4.6 98.9 + 2.2 109.2 + 3.8 83.6 + 6.6 88.4 + 3.8 93.0 − 0.7 116.1 + 2.7 162.2 + 6.6         Mar 122.4 + 6.5 113.8 + 4.5 122.1 + 4.7 113.5 + 18.0 98.7 + 8.7 117.4 + 4.4 127.7 + 3.2 180.5 + 6.1
         Apr 120.2 + 5.5 111.3 + 3.7 124.2 + 6.4 113.2 + 2.7 89.3 + 8.4 113.0 + 1.1 123.6 + 4.0 173.0 + 16.5
         May 120.0 + 5.0 111.2 + 3.3 123.3 + 4.2 109.6 + 2.8 84.9 + 6.9 110.8 + 0.8 124.5 + 5.2 172.9 + 10.8         June 118.6 + 6.4 110.5 + 4.6 122.0 + 5.2 109.2 + 8.3 90.8 + 6.3 106.5 + 3.2 123.8 + 5.8 168.8 + 11.1
         July 120.2 + 4.4 112.6 + 2.9 123.7 + 4.0 108.9 + 2.5 96.7 + 9.3 108.4 + 2.2 127.5 + 2.8 169.9 + 13.3
         Aug 115.9 + 4.3 108.4 + 2.6 120.1 + 3.7 102.7 + 6.4 93.4 + 9.9 101.8 + 0.4 121.8 + 3.4 167.4 + 9.3         Sep 118.1 + 6.4 109.4 + 4.5 118.9 + 5.4 121.8 + 19.8 97.3 + 9.9 103.3 + 2.6 122.5 + 2.4 175.3 + 11.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added integration of a larger online retail sales based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business establishment in Germany in May 2015. 4As of January 2016, figures are provision-
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to esti-
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015, mates for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers  4 Unemployment  5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies,  5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2012 42,062 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 171 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 42,319 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 4572014 42,672 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,069 + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,638 + 1.3
p 31,485 p + 2.2 p 9,022 p 21,390 p 834 p 4,805 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2014         Q3 42,861 + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 800 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 42,965 + 0.8 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 110 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015         Q1 42,517 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 310 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,998 + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560         Q3 43,286 + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595         Q4 43,476 + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016         Q1 43,096 + 1.4 31,064 + 2.3 8,927 21,120 793 4,786 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 43,557 + 1.3
p 31,326 p + 2.1 p 8,983 p 21,279 p 820 p 4,824 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
         Q3 43,832 + 1.3 p 31,536 p + 2.0 p 9,039 p 21,391 p 858 p 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 44,066 + 1.4 32,015 + 2.2 9,137 21,772 866 4,782 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 r 43,750 r + 1.5 31,791 + 2.3 9,040 21,698 830 4,729 307 41 2,734 8 987 6.2 671
         Q2 r 44,225 r + 1.5 9 32,073 9 + 2.4 9 9,112 9 21,863 9 852 9 4,759 ... 9 25 2,513 822 10 5.6 717
         Q3 11 44,500 11 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,504 833 5.6 763
2014         June 42,765 + 0.9 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July 42,792 + 0.9 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,815 + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 42,976 + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,065 + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,017 + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,813 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 204 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015         Jan 42,444 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 327 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,470 + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 352 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,638 + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 251 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,832 + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 43,013 + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557         June 43,150 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,190 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,245 + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep 43,422 + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct 43,508 + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov 43,545 + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec 43,374 + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan 43,005 + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb 43,059 + 1.4 31,055 + 2.3 8,921 21,116 793 4,771 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614         Mar 43,224 + 1.4 31,195 + 2.2 8,951 21,205 804 4,783 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635         Apr 43,388 + 1.3 31,299 + 2.1 8,980 21,267 809 4,808 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640         May 43,577 + 1.3 31,395 + 2.2 8,997 21,324 826 4,839 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655         June 43,707 + 1.3
p 31,374 p + 2.0 p 8,991 p 21,289 p 846 p 4,864 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July 43,689 + 1.2 p 31,258 p + 1.7 p 8,974 p 21,188 p 852 p 4,861 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug 43,807 + 1.3 31,658 + 2.2 9,070 21,475 864 4,805 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685         Sep 43,999 + 1.3 32,009 + 2.2 9,157 21,731 869 4,770 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687         Oct 44,086 + 1.3 32,046 + 2.2 9,154 21,775 871 4,768 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691         Nov 44,131 + 1.3 32,070 + 2.2 9,147 21,809 876 4,795 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681         Dec 43,982 + 1.4 31,849 + 2.3 9,062 21,732 835 4,795 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan 
r 43,662 r + 1.5 31,709 + 2.4 9,017 21,649 825 4,720 370 43 2,777 8 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb r 43,714 r + 1.5 31,775 + 2.3 9,032 21,691 828 4,707 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar r 43,874 r + 1.5 31,931 + 2.4 9,078 21,778 838 4,723 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr r 44,049 r + 1.5 32,014 + 2.3 9,101 21,832 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May r 44,238 r + 1.5 9 32,148 9 + 2.4 9 9,128 9 21,913 9 860 9 4,767 ... 9 25 2,498 810 10 5.6 714
         June r 44,387 r + 1.6 9 32,180 9 + 2.6 9 9,138 9 21,914 9 880 9 4,802 ... 9 23 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July r 44,372 r + 1.6 9 32,129 9 + 2.8 9 9,124 9 21,870 9 889 9 4,802 ... 9 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug r 44,474 r + 1.5 9 32,403 9 + 2.4 9 9,193 9 22,067 9 895 9 4,742 ... 9 23 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep 11 44,654 11 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,389 772 5.4 780
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Security Code (SGB
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- III). 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2015 and
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: 2016, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal of 1.1 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5 % for
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding 33.9 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 10From May 2017 calculated on the
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
abroad. 8From January 2017, persons receiving additional income assistance tical Office. 
(unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same time) shall be

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  6 
prices ofindustrial
of which
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer- sold on
energy struction the prices price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food  2 Energy  3 Services rents  4 concept) index market  5 Exports Imports Energy  7 products  5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2012 9 97.5 9 94.2 98.1 107.8 95.9 96.1 9 104.1 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.62014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1
10 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
 
2015         Dec 100.1 100.2 100.4 95.0 101.2 100.4 107.0 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016         Jan 99.1 100.4 99.7 92.7 99.9 100.6 106.1 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 99.5 100.8 99.9 91.8 100.6 100.7 106.5 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6         Mar 100.3 101.2 101.0 92.7 101.5 100.8 107.3 101.2 106.6 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 99.8 101.6 101.5 93.6 99.7 100.9 106.9 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 100.2 101.3 101.4 95.0 100.5 101.0 107.2 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2         June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0
10 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.2 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017         Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 114.8 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
         Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.2 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9         Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.6 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
         Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 104.7 119.9 106.2 102.3 100.4 110.1
         May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 116.6 104.5 120.9 106.0 101.3 93.1 104.2         June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 104.5 121.2 105.8 100.2 85.7 100.4
         July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 104.7 120.2 105.7 99.8 86.5 102.9
         Aug 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 117.5 104.9 121.1 105.6 99.8 90.1 103.3         Sep 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 105.2 116.1 105.8 100.7 96.3 102.8
         Oct 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 ... ... ... ... 101.6 102.7
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 9 + 2.1 9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 9 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.62014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7
10 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
 
2015         Dec + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.7 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 4.4 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016         Jan + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 8.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4
10 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017         Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2         Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 13.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 33.7 + 15.3
         May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 14.1 + 2.2 + 4.1 + 12.7 + 7.2         June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 13.9 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
         Aug + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 13.5 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 7.4 + 4.8         Sep + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.1 + 10.9 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 ... ... ... ... + 5.6 + 2.9
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value-added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Differences from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From January 2012, increase in tobacco
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as tax. 10 From September 2016 onwards, provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.62012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.32013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.92014 1,212.7 3.9 806.9 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.2 3.3 1,759.8 2.5 166.6 8.4 9.5
2015 1,260.8 4.0 836.6 3.7 417.0 4.7 1,253.7 4.0 1,804.0 2.5 173.5 4.2 9.6
2016 1,311.5 4.0 869.1 3.9 430.1 3.1 1,299.2 3.6 1,854.1 2.8 179.7 3.5 9.7
2016         Q1 305.5 4.5 202.4 4.5 108.4 2.3 310.8 3.7 457.0 2.6 58.5 2.7 12.8
         Q2 319.5 3.6 207.6 3.7 106.0 3.1 313.6 3.5 462.9 3.4 43.6 5.3 9.4         Q3 323.3 3.9 218.6 3.6 108.8 4.2 327.4 3.8 461.8 2.2 37.7 2.0 8.2         Q4 363.1 4.1 240.4 3.8 106.9 3.0 347.4 3.6 472.4 2.9 39.9 4.4 8.5
2017         Q1 319.2 4.5 211.6 4.5 112.9 4.2 324.5 4.4 475.8 4.1 62.5 6.8 13.1
         Q2 333.3 4.3 215.3 3.7 110.0 3.8 325.3 3.8 477.5 3.1 44.6 2.5 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2017. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.2 2.5 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.0 2.5 107.0 2.5 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.12014 110.1 2.9 110.0 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.2 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.2 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.2 112.7 2.3 114.5 2.8
2016 115.0 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.4
2016         Q2 107.8 2.1 107.6 2.1 107.7 1.8 114.9 2.1 114.6 2.0
         Q3 117.4 2.1 117.2 2.2 117.5 2.2 115.8 2.2 115.4 2.4         Q4 128.3 2.2 128.1 2.2 128.4 2.2 116.1 2.3 128.4 2.5
2017         Q1 109.0 2.5 108.8 2.5 109.0 2.4 116.8 2.5 113.7 2.7
         Q2 110.1 2.1 109.8 2.0 110.1 2.3 117.6 2.4 117.5 2.5         Q3 119.8 2.0 119.5 2.0 119.8 2.0 118.2 2.1 . .
2017         Mar 109.2 2.3 108.9 2.3 109.2 2.3 117.0 2.3 . .
         Apr 110.2 2.5 110.0 2.5 110.3 2.5 117.4 2.6 . .
         May 110.1 2.1 109.9 2.0 110.2 2.1 117.6 2.3 . .         June 109.9 1.7 109.6 1.6 110.0 2.3 117.7 2.3 . .
         July 138.5 2.0 138.2 1.9 138.6 1.9 118.0 2.0 . .
         Aug 110.4 2.1 110.1 2.0 110.4 2.0 118.3 2.1 . .         Sep 110.5 2.1 110.2 2.0 110.5 2.0 118.4 2.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2017. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End-of-year/end-of-halfyear data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2013 1,902.2 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.1 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.6 1,332.6 706.0 377.5 626.6 191.0 163.1
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.82015 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.32016
p 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.0 152.2 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 481.9 806.5 258.5 192.9
2015         H1 2,163.8 1,346.9 453.6 539.8 270.0 816.8 217.9 197.4 127.0 622.4 1,541.4 830.0 440.6 711.4 223.0 173.2
         H2 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2016         H1 2,256.6 1,381.0 462.4 549.8 272.0 875.6 226.7 195.2 140.5 607.4 1,649.2 895.4 464.6 753.8 243.9 174.9
         H2 p 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.0 152.2 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 481.9 806.5 258.5 192.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 19.8 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.52015 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.12016
p 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.9 8.1
2015         H1 100.0 62.3 21.0 25.0 12.5 37.8 10.1 9.1 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.4 20.4 32.9 10.3 8.0
         H2 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2016         H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.1 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
         H2 p 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.9 8.1
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 280.5 512.2 170.2 114.92014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.42015 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.62016
p 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 232.5 141.0
2015         H1 1,743.3 1,047.8 293.3 432.1 257.1 695.4 201.0 151.7 103.6 487.1 1,256.2 670.0 336.1 586.2 194.9 127.3
         H2 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2016         H1 1,818.4 1,059.3 296.6 432.5 254.2 759.1 210.1 150.0 112.3 466.0 1,352.3 717.9 351.0 634.4 219.2 130.0
         H2 p 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 232.5 141.0
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.4 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.42015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.22016
p 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 12.2 7.4
2015         H1 100.0 60.1 16.8 24.8 14.8 39.9 11.5 8.7 5.9 27.9 72.1 38.4 19.3 33.6 11.2 7.3
         H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2016         H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.8 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
         H2 p 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 12.2 7.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2013 378.6 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.7 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.4 20.8 48.22014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016
p 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.0 36.6 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.5 126.6 26.0 51.9
2015         H1 420.5 299.1 160.3 107.7 12.9 121.4 17.0 45.7 23.4 135.3 285.2 160.0 104.4 125.2 28.0 45.9
         H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016         H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
         H2 p 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.0 36.6 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.5 126.6 26.0 51.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.62015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.92016
p 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2015         H1 100.0 71.1 38.1 25.6 3.1 28.9 4.0 10.9 5.6 32.2 67.8 38.1 24.8 29.8 6.7 10.9
         H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016         H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
         H2 p 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
  
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-change change centage change centage
Period in %  
3 in % 3 % points  3 % % % in %  3 % points  3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2009 1,158.6 − 10.7 135.6 − 16.9 11.7 − 0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 − 29.2 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 4.9 9.3
2010 1,321.0 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.5 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.8 12.1
2011 1,414.4 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.4 10.9 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.02012 1,533.0 6.6 189.3 3.1 12.4 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.0 11.02013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.92014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,636.2 6.9 196.4 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.6 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.5 11.3
2016
p 1,626.0 − 0.4 222.7 11.9 13.7 1.5 6.5 11.3 17.8 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.5 6.5 12.0
2012         H1 751.0 8.1 93.3 3.6 12.4 − 0.5 4.7 9.1 16.8 55.7 1.6 7.4 − 0.5 1.0 5.7 11.4
         H2 782.2 5.2 95.9 2.6 12.3 − 0.3 4.7 11.0 17.9 39.9 − 19.2 5.1 − 1.4 1.4 6.8 11.7
2013         H1 762.8 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.5 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.7 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.1 12.1
2014         H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.7 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.1 17.6 59.1 1.4 7.3 − 0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.7 5.2 93.8 − 7.5 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.7 3.9 − 2.6 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016         H1 782.3 − 2.0 111.7 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.7 10.3 17.3 65.6 2.8 8.4 0.4 1.5 6.4 11.3
         H2 p 843.8 1.1 110.9 18.3 13.2 1.9 6.1 11.8 18.8 46.4 21.2 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2009 837.7 − 11.8 94.9 − 20.6 11.3 − 1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 − 32.6 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,283.3 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.2 − 20.2 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016
p 1,267.1 − 1.1 164.4 11.2 13.0 1.4 6.5 10.8 16.0 80.5 4.4 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.2 10.4
2012         H1 580.1 9.5 73.3 5.2 12.6 − 0.5 5.7 10.5 14.9 46.8 3.5 8.1 − 0.5 1.9 6.1 10.5
         H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 − 0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2013         H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015         H1 636.8 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.8 4.9 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 647.1 5.3 63.9 − 13.3 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 10.9 15.5 16.4 − 52.5 2.5 − 3.3 1.7 6.8 10.3
2016         H1 610.8 − 2.7 83.9 1.2 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.3 15.3 50.6 − 6.6 8.3 − 0.3 1.7 6.4 9.9
         H2 p 656.4 0.5 80.5 23.8 12.3 2.3 6.1 11.0 16.8 29.9 35.1 4.6 0.9 2.7 6.3 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2009 321.0 − 7.4 40.7 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.4 5.8 45.1 8.9 13.3 0.4 5.6 10.8 19.6 22.6 46.8 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.5 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.4 10.1 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.1 13.82012 359.2 2.8 48.5 − 3.4 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 22.7 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 362.2 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.4 5.1 9.9 21.1 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.5 5.9 12.22014 368.3 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.4 4.8 14.9 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016
p 358.9 2.4 58.3 14.4 16.2 1.7 6.7 12.7 24.8 31.5 24.8 8.8 1.6 2.3 8.2 15.2
2012         H1 170.9 3.3 20.0 − 2.6 11.7 − 0.7 2.6 8.0 21.0 8.9 − 9.8 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 4.5 13.9
         H2 188.3 2.3 28.5 − 4.0 15.1 − 1.0 5.2 11.2 23.7 5.1 − 73.2 2.7 − 5.2 2.7 7.4 15.3
2013         H1 174.0 − 0.5 21.7 1.4 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.0 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.3 0.3 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.3 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.3 13.4
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.6 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.6 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.4 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.4 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.9 10.8 16.2 0.9 7.3 12.2 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.1 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 p 187.4 3.5 30.4 4.4 16.2 0.1 6.9 13.2 24.2 16.5 2.8 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 8.9 16.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory not es in the Statistical
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups in agriculture
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, and forestry. 
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug  p
Current account + 245,761 + 335,017 + 360,160 + 112,683 + 63,963 + 62,916 + 31,400 + 37,086 + 29,613A
1 Goods
Exports 1,966,061 2,138,897 2,131,811 555,883 559,110 564,880 193,130 184,136 176,905
Imports 1,724,958 1,780,137 1,754,134 459,744 488,680 476,700 158,870 154,038 154,385
Balance + 241,104 + 358,760 + 377,680 + 96,139 + 70,429 + 88,180 + 34,260 + 30,098 + 22,520
2 Services
Receipts 706,388 769,235 786,143 204,183 191,169 208,336 75,163 75,204 72,057
Expenditure 628,051 707,420 748,186 200,881 179,618 188,726 65,920 65,358 64,777
Balance + 78,338 + 61,817 + 37,957 + 3,302 + 11,551 + 19,612 + 9,244 + 9,846 + 7,280
3 Primary income
Receipts 638,693 666,059 652,312 184,390 155,040 173,323 58,324 51,868 51,072
Expenditure 570,131 614,175 569,963 137,335 132,726 181,696 58,687 41,919 40,742
Balance + 68,565 + 51,882 + 82,349 + 47,055 + 22,314 − 8,373 − 363 + 9,949 + 10,330
4 Secondary income
Receipts 96,442 109,468 110,779 28,983 25,922 29,308 9,983 8,026 7,718
Expenditure 238,688 246,910 248,601 62,796 66,253 65,811 21,724 20,832 18,236
Balance − 142,246 − 137,442 − 137,826 − 33,813 − 40,331 − 36,504 − 11,741 − 12,807 − 10,517
Capital account + 13,711 − 12,466 − 817 − 159 − 10,318 − 10,229 − 2,696 + 914 + 482B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 264,839 + 283,782 + 305,390 + 94,329 + 62,420 + 48,667 + 30,109 + 40,697 + 41,064C
1 Direct investment + 71,932 + 241,686 + 216,554 + 63,824 − 12,722 − 19,525 − 57,383 + 8,724 − 6,548
By resident units abroad + 216,544 + 976,478 + 391,596 + 102,545 + 187,055 + 51,039 − 26,805 − 177,376 + 12,683
By non-resident units in the euro area + 144,612 + 734,796 + 175,042 + 38,721 + 199,777 + 70,565 + 30,579 − 186,100 + 19,231
2 Portfolio investment + 26,370 + 96,384 + 431,428 + 45,959 + 106,579 + 63,959 + 34,662 + 13,815 + 95,239
By resident units abroad + 459,905 + 392,290 + 391,770 + 23,194 + 172,294 + 174,542 + 63,409 + 65,835 + 68,909
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 142,536 + 10,920 + 22,074 + 25,865 + 28,448 + 58,269 + 17,710 + 23,338 + 21,809
Long-term debt securities + 224,271 + 368,619 + 366,873 + 19,404 + 96,794 + 128,660 + 43,545 + 59,029 + 39,215
Short-term debt securities + 93,094 + 12,750 + 2,823 − 22,076 + 47,053 − 12,386 + 2,154 − 16,532 + 7,885
By non-resident units in the euro area + 433,535 + 295,905 − 39,659 − 22,766 + 65,716 + 110,583 + 28,747 + 52,020 − 26,330
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 303,756 + 238,775 + 83,934 + 17,453 + 83,988 + 118,244 + 29,838 + 61,914 + 18,642
Long-term debt securities + 141,184 + 91,835 − 174,544 − 19,195 − 64,675 − 10,170 − 29 − 6,169 − 41,050
Short-term debt securities − 11,406 − 34,707 + 50,953 − 21,024 + 46,402 + 2,508 − 1,062 − 3,726 − 3,922
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 49,274 + 87,196 + 18,504 + 15,884 + 21,825 − 1,275 − 7,472 − 5,287 − 7,903
4 Other investment + 112,902 − 152,049 − 376,552 − 35,919 − 50,772 + 7,213 + 58,866 + 28,613 − 39,062
Eurosystem + 31,506 − 25,391 − 151,296 − 90,054 − 29,782 − 8,922 − 41,872 + 36,096 − 15,846
General government + 12,224 + 19,293 + 1,811 − 3,668 + 2,011 − 4,570 − 2,307 + 339 + 3,343
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 99,280 − 120,298 − 151,015 + 46,847 − 18,966 + 18,602 + 83,636 − 84 − 13,750
Enterprises and households − 30,106 − 25,656 − 76,046 + 10,958 − 4,037 + 2,104 + 19,409 − 7,738 − 12,808
5 Reserve assets + 4,360 + 10,565 + 15,457 + 4,579 − 2,487 − 1,705 + 1,436 − 5,168 − 662
Net errors and omissions + 5,369 − 38,765 − 53,955 − 18,196 + 8,776 − 4,018 + 1,406 + 2,697 + 10,969D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob)  1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,606
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 189,616 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 61,969 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 36,3072014 + 218,026 + 228,361 − 5,873 − 25,323 + 56,177 − 41,188 + 2,355 + 238,630 − 2,564 + 18,2482015 + 259,963 + 261,182 − 2,668 − 18,602 + 57,370 − 39,987 − 635 + 234,603 − 2,213 − 24,7252016 
r + 259,286 + 268,369 − 1,434 − 21,218 + 52,136 − 40,001 + 1,112 + 243,586 + 1,686 − 16,811
2014         Q4 + 66,413 + 60,143 − 2,536 − 3,609 + 21,123 − 11,244 − 216 + 68,678 − 1,722 + 2,481
2015         Q1 + 59,401 + 60,330 − 1,426 − 2,104 + 17,030 − 15,855 + 298 + 29,421 − 21 − 30,277
         Q2 + 59,356 + 68,659 − 1,737 − 2,871 + 611 − 7,043 + 505 + 72,121 − 465 + 12,260         Q3 + 67,057 + 67,516 + 978 − 10,628 + 16,866 − 6,697 + 701 + 67,337 − 1,455 − 421         Q4 + 74,149 + 64,676 − 483 − 2,999 + 22,864 − 10,391 − 2,138 + 65,723 − 272 − 6,287
2016         Q1  
r + 63,623 + 63,412 + 621 − 3,363 + 16,933 − 13,359 − 269 + 36,937 + 1,228 − 26,417
         Q2  r + 69,291 + 77,109 + 242 − 4,009 + 584 − 4,393 + 1,092 + 62,620 + 761 − 7,762
         Q3  r + 58,213 + 67,022 − 126 − 11,696 + 13,516 − 10,630 + 228 + 61,531 − 261 + 3,090
         Q4  r + 68,160 + 60,827 − 2,171 − 2,150 + 21,103 − 11,620 + 61 + 82,498 − 43 + 14,278
2017         Q1 + 65,371 + 66,742 + 2,419 − 3,315 + 15,902 − 13,958 + 457 + 74,476 − 360 + 8,647
         Q2 + 55,219 + 67,378 − 170 − 4,015 + 4,662 − 12,805 + 7 + 64,700 + 385 + 9,475         Q3 + 62,964 + 68,541 − 454 − 11,074 + 16,448 − 10,952 + 445 + 52,460 + 152 − 10,949
2015         Apr + 21,755 + 22,266 − 1,084 − 514 + 2,898 − 2,895 + 377 + 30,681 − 69 + 8,549
         May + 11,465 + 20,915 − 690 − 1,177 − 6,268 − 2,005 + 483 + 16,041 − 78 + 4,093         June + 26,136 + 25,478 + 38 − 1,180 + 3,980 − 2,143 − 355 + 25,400 − 318 − 382
         July + 25,776 + 25,151 − 896 − 3,062 + 6,027 − 2,339 + 448 + 20,865 − 1,170 − 5,359
         Aug + 14,760 + 16,897 + 661 − 4,616 + 5,265 − 2,785 + 44 + 21,976 − 180 + 7,171         Sep + 26,521 + 25,469 + 1,213 − 2,950 + 5,575 − 1,573 + 209 + 24,497 − 105 − 2,233
         Oct + 22,205 + 23,927 + 147 − 4,630 + 6,013 − 3,105 − 85 + 20,171 + 154 − 1,949
         Nov + 25,362 + 22,542 + 4 − 685 + 6,368 − 2,863 + 183 + 24,896 − 548 − 649         Dec + 26,582 + 18,207 − 634 + 2,315 + 10,483 − 4,423 − 2,236 + 20,656 + 123 − 3,689
2016         Jan  
r + 14,891 + 14,140 − 3 − 1,527 + 4,518 − 2,241 − 37 − 2,007 − 186 − 16,860
         Feb  r + 19,889 + 22,040 + 724 − 226 + 5,600 − 7,525 + 520 + 18,706 + 1,478 − 1,703
         Mar  r + 28,843 + 27,232 − 99 − 1,610 + 6,815 − 3,594 − 752 + 20,238 − 64 − 7,853
         Apr  r + 27,951 + 27,812 − 116 − 858 + 2,726 − 1,730 + 1,287 + 25,738 + 696 − 3,500
         May  r + 17,694 + 23,149 + 511 − 880 − 4,001 − 574 + 268 + 14,378 + 776 − 3,583
         June  r + 23,646 + 26,147 − 153 − 2,271 + 1,859 − 2,089 − 463 + 22,504 − 711 − 679
         July  r + 18,065 + 20,523 + 520 − 3,503 + 4,494 − 3,449 − 139 + 18,115 + 342 + 188
         Aug  r + 16,667 + 21,044 − 367 − 4,965 + 5,092 − 4,504 − 126 + 18,180 + 93 + 1,639
         Sep  r + 23,481 + 25,455 − 279 − 3,227 + 3,930 − 2,677 + 493 + 25,236 − 695 + 1,262
         Oct  r + 18,411 + 20,456 + 163 − 3,551 + 5,076 − 3,570 − 182 + 30,423 − 145 + 12,194
         Nov  r + 24,860 + 23,551 − 385 − 339 + 5,677 − 4,029 − 90 + 25,794 + 140 + 1,024
         Dec  r + 24,889 + 16,820 − 1,949 + 1,740 + 10,349 − 4,021 + 332 + 26,281 − 38 + 1,060
2017         Jan + 13,840 + 15,862 + 278 − 1,271 + 6,080 − 6,830 − 262 + 19,471 − 124 + 5,892
         Feb + 20,557 + 22,961 + 993 − 777 + 3,008 − 4,635 + 271 + 7,355 − 216 − 13,473         Mar + 30,974 + 27,920 + 1,148 − 1,268 + 6,814 − 2,492 + 448 + 47,650 − 21 + 16,228
         Apr + 14,565 + 19,380 − 43 − 769 + 4,234 − 8,281 − 311 + 18,894 − 2 + 4,640
         May + 15,842 + 23,186 − 1,020 − 1,801 − 4,624 − 918 + 66 + 6,955 − 47 − 8,953         June + 24,812 + 24,812 + 893 − 1,445 + 5,052 − 3,606 + 251 + 38,851 + 434 + 13,788
         July + 19,589 + 21,569 + 654 − 3,793 + 6,191 − 4,378 + 553 + 14,839 + 463 − 5,304
         Aug + 17,962 + 21,571 − 788 − 4,819 + 4,646 − 3,437 + 146 + 8,723 − 912 − 9,386         Sep  
p + 25,413 + 25,401 − 320 − 2,463 + 5,611 − 3,137 − 255 + 28,899 + 602 + 3,740
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fina ncial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital  account. 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2017
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2017
Group of countries/country  2014  2015  2016 May Jun Jul Aug Sep  p Jan. / Aug. 
All countries  1 Exports 1,123,746 1,193,555 1,203,833 844,284 110,529 107,220 103,613 103,022 110,427
Imports 910,145 949,245 954,917 683,588 88,704 85,073 84,328 82,943 86,339Balance + 213,601 + 244,310 + 248,916 + 160,696 + 21,824 + 22,147 + 19,285 + 20,079 + 24,088
I Exports 761,914 803,425 818,644 576,285 75,141 74,422 69,600 68,802 ...European countries
Imports 642,738 653,782 657,753 467,136 60,465 58,339 57,708 55,170 ...Balance + 119,176 + 149,643 + 160,891 + 109,148 + 14,676 + 16,084 + 11,892 + 13,632 ...
Exports 648,446 692,493 705,548 494,670 64,121 63,876 59,864 58,587 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 527,117 543,334 551,344 389,268 50,407 48,989 48,653 46,221 ...Balance + 121,329 + 149,159 + 154,204 + 105,402 + 13,714 + 14,887 + 11,211 + 12,366 ...
Euro area (19) Exports 413,753 434,075 441,092 310,527 40,764 39,958 37,985 36,047 ...
Imports 350,550 356,643 358,848 252,156 32,634 31,927 31,782 29,542 ...Balance + 63,203 + 77,432 + 82,244 + 58,371 + 8,130 + 8,032 + 6,203 + 6,506 ...
of which
Austria Exports 55,807 58,217 59,778 41,079 5,379 5,176 5,103 4,965 ...
Imports 36,218 37,250 38,543 27,129 3,535 3,363 3,463 3,285 ...Balance + 19,590 + 20,967 + 21,235 + 13,950 + 1,844 + 1,813 + 1,640 + 1,680 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,345 46,196 46,931 33,451 4,327 4,344 3,820 3,997 ...
Luxembourg Imports 42,548 40,116 40,960 29,672 3,961 3,706 3,781 3,449 ...
Balance + 4,797 + 6,079 + 5,971 + 3,780 + 365 + 637 + 39 + 548 ...
France Exports 100,580 102,762 101,106 69,677 9,385 8,989 8,402 7,813 ...
Imports 66,714 66,819 65,651 42,380 5,269 5,472 5,281 4,788 ...Balance + 33,866 + 35,943 + 35,454 + 27,298 + 4,116 + 3,517 + 3,121 + 3,025 ...
Italy Exports 54,240 57,987 61,265 42,924 5,772 5,704 5,571 4,284 ...
Imports 48,522 49,038 51,737 36,565 4,777 4,876 4,846 4,011 ...Balance + 5,718 + 8,949 + 9,528 + 6,359 + 995 + 828 + 725 + 273 ...
Netherlands Exports 72,736 79,191 78,433 56,309 7,198 6,992 7,012 7,041 ...
Imports 87,796 87,889 83,142 60,235 7,639 7,206 7,458 7,192 ...Balance − 15,060 − 8,697 − 4,709 − 3,926 − 441 − 214 − 446 − 151 ...
Spain Exports 34,820 38,715 40,497 28,532 3,775 3,816 3,454 3,023 ...
Imports 24,804 26,442 27,870 20,921 2,802 2,878 2,731 2,073 ...Balance + 10,016 + 12,273 + 12,627 + 7,611 + 972 + 937 + 723 + 950 ...
Other EU member Exports 234,693 258,417 264,456 184,143 23,357 23,918 21,879 22,539 ...
states Imports 176,567 186,691 192,496 137,112 17,773 17,063 16,871 16,679 ...
Balance + 58,126 + 71,727 + 71,960 + 47,031 + 5,585 + 6,855 + 5,008 + 5,861 ...
of which
United Exports 79,163 89,018 85,939 56,730 7,136 7,215 6,961 6,478 ...Kingdom Imports 38,545 38,414 35,654 24,697 3,072 2,924 3,218 2,883 ...
Balance + 40,618 + 50,604 + 50,285 + 32,033 + 4,064 + 4,291 + 3,743 + 3,596 ...
Exports 113,468 110,932 113,096 81,615 11,020 10,546 9,736 10,215 ... 2 Other European
Imports 115,621 110,448 106,409 77,868 10,058 9,349 9,055 8,949 ... countries
Balance − 2,153 + 484 + 6,687 + 3,746 + 962 + 1,197 + 681 + 1,266 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,202 49,070 50,161 36,218 4,856 4,681 4,183 4,328 ...
Imports 39,392 42,089 43,896 30,902 3,991 3,699 3,735 3,377 ...Balance + 6,810 + 6,981 + 6,265 + 5,316 + 865 + 982 + 448 + 951 ...
II Exports 358,337 387,398 382,486 265,983 35,079 32,486 33,878 33,948 ...Non-European
Imports 267,407 295,461 297,164 216,394 28,240 26,677 26,620 27,773 ... countries
Balance + 90,930 + 91,936 + 85,322 + 49,589 + 6,839 + 5,809 + 7,258 + 6,175 ...
Exports 22,505 23,897 24,434 17,781 2,507 2,051 1,923 2,033 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,242 18,307 16,675 13,466 1,719 1,656 1,596 1,825 ...Balance + 2,263 + 5,590 + 7,759 + 4,315 + 788 + 395 + 327 + 209 ...
Exports 135,293 156,982 147,542 102,255 13,247 12,421 13,052 12,642 ... 2 America
Imports 74,191 85,582 83,499 59,493 8,077 7,533 7,075 7,122 ...Balance + 61,103 + 71,400 + 64,043 + 42,762 + 5,170 + 4,888 + 5,977 + 5,519 ...
of which
Exports 95,928 113,733 106,822 73,848 9,493 8,808 9,173 8,992 ... United States
Imports 49,207 60,217 57,968 40,747 5,441 5,136 4,652 4,975 ...Balance + 46,721 + 53,516 + 48,855 + 33,101 + 4,053 + 3,672 + 4,521 + 4,018 ...
Exports 190,973 196,297 200,158 138,646 18,402 17,055 17,976 18,318 ... 3 Asia
Imports 170,050 188,621 193,979 140,641 18,053 17,197 17,597 18,582 ...Balance + 20,923 + 7,676 + 6,179 − 1,995 + 348 − 141 + 379 − 263 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 35,462 39,518 36,659 21,898 3,038 2,326 3,052 2,781 ...
Imports 7,865 7,330 6,581 4,611 641 605 664 577 ...Balance + 27,598 + 32,188 + 30,079 + 17,287 + 2,398 + 1,721 + 2,387 + 2,204 ...
Japan Exports 16,910 16,968 18,307 12,964 1,559 1,534 1,819 1,642 ...
Imports 19,007 20,180 21,922 15,363 2,095 1,792 1,791 1,910 ...Balance − 2,097 − 3,213 − 3,615 − 2,399 − 537 − 258 + 28 − 268 ...
Exports 74,369 71,284 76,046 56,171 7,469 7,083 7,345 7,698 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,828 91,930 94,172 65,309 8,235 7,928 8,276 8,727 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 5,459 − 20,646 − 18,126 − 9,138 − 766 − 845 − 931 − 1,029 ...
Exports 48,476 51,510 51,921 34,777 4,477 4,390 4,345 4,506 ... New industrial countries
Imports 38,782 42,478 42,966 34,164 4,245 4,320 4,289 4,566 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,695 + 9,032 + 8,955 + 613 + 232 + 70 + 55 − 60 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,566 10,221 10,352 7,302 924 958 927 954 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,924 2,951 3,011 2,795 391 292 352 244 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,641 + 7,271 + 7,341 + 4,507 + 533 + 666 + 576 + 710 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Kore a, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 2,187 + 61,666 + 1,005
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,205 + 1,2232014 − 25,323 − 7,301 − 37,653 + 7,008 + 3,639 + 2,785 − 1,418 + 3,024 + 451 + 54,849 + 8772015 − 18,602 − 5,476 − 36,595 + 9,331 + 4,942 + 4,037 − 3,116 + 3,106 + 783 + 56,948 − 3612016 − 21,218 − 5,962 − 38,266 + 9,189 + 6,450 + 3,312 − 3,276 + 3,119 + 652 + 53,196 − 1,712
2016         Q1 − 3,363 − 1,660 − 6,286 + 2,095 + 1,215 + 219 − 819 + 852 + 756 + 16,817 − 640
         Q2 − 4,009 − 1,080 − 8,654 + 2,174 + 1,190 + 1,238 − 687 + 831 − 107 + 3,501 − 2,810         Q3 − 11,696 − 1,414 − 15,956 + 1,892 + 1,629 + 483 − 173 + 833 − 384 + 15,089 − 1,190         Q4 − 2,150 − 1,808 − 7,371 + 3,029 + 2,416 + 1,372 − 1,597 + 604 + 386 + 17,788 + 2,928
2017         Q1 − 3,315 − 1,260 − 5,956 + 2,016 + 1,223 + 426 − 1,464 + 723 + 740 + 16,280 − 1,118
         Q2 − 4,015 − 438 − 9,179 + 2,305 + 1,600 + 908 − 948 + 785 − 91 + 6,584 − 1,832         Q3 − 11,074 − 1,140 − 16,110 + 2,397 + 1,583 + 480 + 191 + 696 − 463 + 18,020 − 1,109
2016         Nov − 339 − 773 − 1,540 + 1,321 + 727 + 29 − 728 + 209 + 151 + 5,938 − 412
         Dec + 1,740 − 555 − 529 + 1,068 + 609 + 1,357 − 702 + 197 + 60 + 6,366 + 3,923
2017         Jan − 1,271 − 470 − 1,575 + 831 + 289 − 317 − 660 + 201 + 271 + 6,219 − 410
         Feb − 777 − 298 − 1,459 + 478 + 484 + 62 − 498 + 277 + 272 + 3,072 − 335         Mar − 1,268 − 492 − 2,921 + 707 + 450 + 681 − 307 + 244 + 197 + 6,989 − 373
         Apr − 769 − 109 − 1,760 + 881 + 688 − 392 − 532 + 262 − 42 + 4,720 − 444
         May − 1,801 − 165 − 3,049 + 806 + 293 + 212 − 554 + 255 − 18 − 3,162 − 1,444         June − 1,445 − 164 − 4,371 + 618 + 619 + 1,088 + 138 + 268 − 31 + 5,026 + 56
         July − 3,793 − 211 − 4,879 + 693 + 817 − 167 − 485 + 182 − 190 + 6,750 − 369
         Aug − 4,819 − 500 − 6,429 + 1,110 + 460 + 75 − 130 + 259 − 146 + 5,167 − 374         Sep  
p − 2,463 − 428 − 4,801 + 594 + 306 + 572 + 806 + 254 − 127 + 6,104 − 365
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001, the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2012 − 38,894 − 25,446 − 5,167 + 5,206 − 13,448 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,158
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,6682014 − 41,188 − 28,106 − 5,972 + 8,101 − 13,082 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,355 + 2,898 − 5422015 − 39,987 − 24,925 − 6,648 + 9,830 − 15,062 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 635 + 2,377 − 3,0122016 − 40,001 − 26,227 − 8,376 + 9,934 − 13,774 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 1,112 + 3,324 − 2,212
2016         Q1 − 13,359 − 10,088 − 2,840 + 1,307 − 3,271 − 1,052 − 1,049 − 269 − 521 + 253
         Q2 − 4,393 − 836 − 1,567 + 5,561 − 3,556 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 1,092 + 2,219 − 1,127         Q3 − 10,630 − 6,866 − 1,702 + 1,772 − 3,763 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 228 + 887 − 659         Q4 − 11,620 − 8,437 − 2,267 + 1,294 − 3,183 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 61 + 739 − 679
2017         Q1 − 13,958 − 7,816 − 2,668 + 1,774 − 6,141 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 457 + 643 − 186
         Q2 − 12,805 − 2,861 − 1,394 + 5,170 − 9,944 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 7 + 445 − 438         Q3 − 10,952 − 5,548 − 1,779 + 1,727 − 5,403 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 445 + 1,185 − 739
2016         Nov − 4,029 − 2,910 − 451 + 27 − 1,119 − 353 − 350 − 90 + 244 − 334
         Dec − 4,021 − 2,696 − 1,157 + 937 − 1,325 − 351 − 350 + 332 + 507 − 175
2017         Jan − 6,830 − 3,731 − 1,622 + 189 − 3,099 − 386 − 384 − 262 − 85 − 178
         Feb − 4,635 − 2,699 − 699 + 714 − 1,936 − 385 − 384 + 271 + 8 + 263         Mar − 2,492 − 1,386 − 347 + 871 − 1,106 − 386 − 384 + 448 + 719 − 271
         Apr − 8,281 − 1,856 − 398 + 811 − 6,425 − 385 − 384 − 311 − 37 − 274
         May − 918 + 829 − 198 + 3,216 − 1,748 − 387 − 384 + 66 + 215 − 149         June − 3,606 − 1,835 − 798 + 1,143 − 1,771 − 386 − 384 + 251 + 267 − 16
         July − 4,378 − 2,624 − 906 + 482 − 1,755 − 385 − 384 + 553 + 757 − 203
         Aug − 3,437 − 1,463 − 696 + 455 − 1,974 − 386 − 384 + 146 + 341 − 194         Sep  
p − 3,137 − 1,462 − 177 + 789 − 1,675 − 386 − 384 − 255 + 87 − 342
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep  p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 301,030 + 249,102 + 380,469 + 235,373 + 36,179 + 58,084 − 5,948 − 6,940 + 70,973
1 Direct investment + 83,960 + 101,357 + 69,323 + 48,982 + 22,668 + 21,439 + 2,375 + 5,806 + 13,258
Equity + 56,733 + 67,801 + 61,655 + 16,835 + 14,149 + 17,725 + 4,106 + 8,058 + 5,560
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 + 18,535 + 9,711 + 13,224 + 6,206 + 7,891 + 9,174 + 1,200 + 3,999 + 3,975
Debt instruments + 27,227 + 33,556 + 7,668 + 32,147 + 8,520 + 3,714 − 1,731 − 2,252 + 7,698
2 Portfolio investment + 146,979 + 122,005 + 96,602 + 30,952 + 20,473 + 29,159 + 14,916 + 5,477 + 8,766
Shares  2 + 8,935 + 19,561 + 17,288 + 5,528 − 2,404 + 5,186 + 1,043 + 1,129 + 3,014
Investment fund shares  3 + 42,057 + 34,626 + 36,586 + 16,923 + 4,382 + 10,997 + 4,340 + 3,206 + 3,452
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 95,025 + 73,519 + 48,826 + 5,347 + 19,465 + 14,732 + 8,967 + 829 + 4,936
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 963 − 5,700 − 6,098 + 3,155 − 970 − 1,756 + 566 + 313 − 2,635
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 31,896 + 26,202 + 32,792 + 0 + 2,351 + 1,368 − 634 + 872 + 1,130
4. Other investment  7 + 40,759 + 1,750 + 180,067 + 155,799 − 9,699 + 5,966 − 23,068 − 18,183 + 47,217
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 76,296 − 90,287 + 18,747 + 72,179 − 26,659 − 16,026 − 17,260 − 11,501 + 12,735
Long-term + 21,139 − 2,803 + 45,099 + 12,896 + 2,596 − 1,397 + 1,731 − 3,061 − 67Short-term + 55,156 − 87,484 − 26,353 + 59,283 − 29,255 − 14,629 − 18,991 − 8,440 + 12,802
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 2,952 − 19,122 − 10,373 + 7,423 − 11,894 + 5,297 − 1,498 − 3,307 + 10,103
Long-term + 6,364 + 12,513 + 1,254 − 162 − 723 − 795 + 483 − 994 − 284Short-term − 9,316 − 31,635 − 11,627 + 7,585 − 11,171 + 6,092 − 1,981 − 2,313 + 10,387
General government + 17,295 − 12,205 + 1,202 − 567 − 2,565 − 2,434 − 749 + 681 − 2,366
Long-term − 405 − 7,557 − 5,331 − 1,253 − 1,240 − 169 − 180 + 49 − 38Short-term + 17,700 − 4,648 + 6,533 + 686 − 1,325 − 2,265 − 569 + 632 − 2,328
Bundesbank − 49,880 + 123,364 + 170,491 + 76,764 + 31,420 + 19,129 − 3,560 − 4,056 + 26,745
5. Reserve assets − 2,564 − 2,213 + 1,686 − 360 + 385 + 152 + 463 − 912 + 602
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 62,400 + 14,499 + 136,883 + 160,898 − 28,521 + 5,624 − 20,787 − 15,663 + 42,074
1 Direct investment + 11,930 + 47,284 + 46,695 + 28,686 + 5,896 + 22,238 + 3,753 + 6,793 + 11,692
Equity + 23,558 + 20,935 + 12,126 + 5,627 − 887 + 5,635 + 2,135 + 1,960 + 1,541
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 + 3,325 + 4,375 + 5,905 + 3,565 + 1,533 + 4,123 + 1,544 + 1,280 + 1,298
Debt instruments − 11,628 + 26,349 + 34,569 + 23,059 + 6,783 + 16,602 + 1,618 + 4,833 + 10,151
2 Portfolio investment + 13,483 − 74,941 − 111,309 − 20,789 − 4,557 − 29,035 − 17,812 + 3,826 − 15,049
Shares  2) + 6,314 + 9,725 − 985 + 1,460 − 2,181 − 2,323 − 1,172 − 2,519 + 1,369
Investment fund shares  3 − 3,790 + 7,345 − 6,928 + 136 − 1,338 + 653 + 887 − 22 − 212
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 14,131 − 101,208 − 95,730 − 12,459 + 781 − 21,780 − 15,540 + 9,884 − 16,124
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 3,171 + 9,197 − 7,666 − 9,926 − 1,819 − 5,585 − 1,986 − 3,517 − 81
3. Other investment  7 + 36,987 + 42,156 + 201,497 + 153,000 − 29,860 + 12,421 − 6,728 − 26,282 + 45,431
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 32,480 − 41,166 + 86,802 + 107,204 − 18,932 − 3,551 − 623 − 38,559 + 35,631
Long-term − 14,558 − 19,536 + 5,834 + 2,847 + 347 − 1,325 − 760 − 860 + 295Short-term + 47,039 − 21,630 + 80,968 + 104,357 − 19,279 − 2,226 + 137 − 37,699 + 35,336
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 16,355 + 10,459 + 1,988 + 13,837 − 16,249 + 8,698 − 446 + 1,171 + 7,972
Long-term + 2,960 + 15,960 + 6,716 + 3,042 + 667 + 4,485 + 1,653 + 2,551 + 281Short-term + 13,395 − 5,501 − 4,728 + 10,795 − 16,916 + 4,213 − 2,099 − 1,379 + 7,691
General government − 5,575 − 11,521 + 1,796 + 1,161 − 548 + 5,846 + 2,942 + 1,457 + 1,448
Long-term − 931 − 3,942 − 2,847 − 2,850 − 842 + 281 − 13 − 72 + 366Short-term − 4,645 − 7,579 + 4,642 + 4,012 + 294 + 5,565 + 2,955 + 1,529 + 1,082
Bundesbank − 6,273 + 84,383 + 110,911 + 30,797 + 5,869 + 1,428 − 8,601 + 9,649 + 380
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 238,630 + 234,603 + 243,586 + 74,476 + 64,700 + 52,460 + 14,839 + 8,723 + 28,899
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,9072016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,799 397,651
2015         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 443,519 301,033
         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 434,696 333,160
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,061 326,376
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 436,637 321,863         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 439,905 316,357
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 444,709 318,537
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 440,954 340,331         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 462,529 311,899
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 468,522 318,172
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,779 330,541         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,907
2016         Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,127 334,844
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,497 349,839         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,161 345,214
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,599 360,667
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,617 383,270         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,466 403,766
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,921 385,124
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,322 393,370         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,884 407,976
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,007 404,711
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,602 438,506         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,799 397,651
2017         Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,997 456,807
         Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,242 451,652         Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,526 451,513
         Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 603,035 486,108
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 604,178 494,701         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 628,540 470,340
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 619,671 473,099
         Aug 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 629,245 460,638         Sep 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 629,642 485,557
         Oct 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 612,351 473,564
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro opening
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2013 787,308 282,026 505,282 325,614 179,668 164,454 15,214 939,252 144,884 794,368 632,110 162,258 95,302 66,9572014 833,644 279,559 554,085 365,230 188,856 174,058 14,798 959,833 154,566 805,267 636,328 168,939 102,126 66,8132015 866,912 265,170 601,743 409,858 191,885 177,397 14,488 1,003,050 150,054 852,996 672,312 180,684 109,062 71,6222016 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2017         Apr 864,608 220,308 644,300 433,207 211,093 196,561 14,532 1,046,984 122,302 924,682 732,879 191,803 117,103 74,700
         May 862,375 215,937 646,438 436,547 209,892 195,247 14,645 1,044,280 119,183 925,096 734,160 190,936 115,520 75,416         June 873,636 216,911 656,726 441,631 215,094 201,253 13,841 1,051,719 119,559 932,160 740,409 191,751 118,820 72,931
         July 866,338 215,822 650,516 440,689 209,826 196,355 13,471 1,051,322 116,987 934,335 745,799 188,536 115,024 73,512
         Aug 859,633 213,414 646,219 440,278 205,941 192,378 13,564 1,054,736 117,557 937,179 749,860 187,319 113,159 74,160         Sep 878,502 218,837 659,665 442,333 217,333 203,580 13,752 1,052,709 122,349 930,359 734,121 196,238 123,456 72,782
Industrial countries 1
 
2013 697,475 278,723 418,753 296,675 122,077 108,620 13,458 852,420 143,577 708,843 594,623 114,220 79,543 34,6762014 733,191 274,660 458,531 330,034 128,497 115,398 13,099 869,392 153,412 715,980 595,396 120,583 85,122 35,4612015 761,648 261,267 500,381 368,033 132,348 119,309 13,038 906,968 145,136 761,832 635,205 126,627 90,716 35,9112016 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2017         Apr 747,178 216,494 530,683 385,883 144,800 131,859 12,941 952,807 118,386 834,421 699,917 134,504 96,593 37,911
         May 745,902 211,998 533,904 391,173 142,730 129,749 12,981 948,825 115,512 833,313 700,437 132,875 94,797 38,078         June 756,604 212,904 543,701 396,298 147,402 135,227 12,176 956,798 115,708 841,090 707,159 133,931 97,108 36,823
         July 750,965 211,939 539,026 397,315 141,711 129,870 11,840 954,229 111,507 842,722 712,597 130,124 93,446 36,679
         Aug 746,289 209,552 536,737 398,012 138,724 126,825 11,899 960,329 112,945 847,384 717,235 130,148 93,097 37,051         Sep 763,319 214,828 548,491 400,778 147,713 135,589 12,123 951,222 112,963 838,259 701,497 136,762 100,558 36,204
EU member states 1
 
2013 589,286 264,271 325,014 237,949 87,066 76,539 10,527 713,044 129,044 583,999 504,337 79,663 53,340 26,3232014 617,489 259,516 357,973 266,777 91,196 80,585 10,611 724,674 138,894 585,780 502,054 83,726 56,580 27,1472015 626,482 243,139 383,344 289,190 94,153 83,665 10,488 743,011 134,564 608,448 524,316 84,132 58,384 25,7482016 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2017         Apr 596,286 197,208 399,078 296,736 102,341 92,078 10,264 780,830 107,987 672,842 581,525 91,317 64,010 27,307
         May 590,986 193,047 397,938 297,142 100,796 90,502 10,294 778,585 105,601 672,985 582,110 90,874 63,385 27,490         June 597,934 194,237 403,696 300,021 103,675 94,123 9,553 786,173 105,077 681,096 589,821 91,274 64,949 26,326
         July 593,228 192,791 400,437 300,403 100,034 90,467 9,567 784,598 100,389 684,209 594,647 89,562 63,447 26,115
         Aug 590,108 190,337 399,771 301,487 98,283 88,730 9,554 788,546 100,783 687,763 597,936 89,827 63,581 26,246         Sep 604,226 194,857 409,369 305,331 104,038 94,232 9,806 778,050 101,007 677,042 582,302 94,740 68,697 26,043
of which:  Euro-area 2
 
2013 428,179 197,430 230,749 174,605 56,143 49,968 6,175 603,366 101,722 501,645 448,142 53,502 36,671 16,8322014 456,469 204,043 252,426 194,207 58,219 51,999 6,220 606,525 107,694 498,831 444,401 54,430 37,498 16,9322015 465,919 195,751 270,168 208,862 61,305 54,730 6,575 598,884 93,947 504,937 452,298 52,639 37,994 14,6442016 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2017         Apr 437,053 149,207 287,846 220,490 67,356 60,187 7,169 631,496 70,909 560,587 501,343 59,244 43,966 15,279
         May 435,699 150,097 285,602 219,346 66,256 59,140 7,116 627,775 67,035 560,740 501,801 58,940 43,574 15,366         June 438,331 148,448 289,883 221,502 68,381 61,226 7,155 636,945 69,711 567,234 507,451 59,783 44,573 15,210
         July 433,899 146,251 287,648 221,209 66,439 59,229 7,209 636,189 66,063 570,126 510,427 59,699 44,398 15,301
         Aug 432,126 144,124 288,001 222,827 65,174 57,979 7,195 639,953 64,913 575,040 514,960 60,080 44,729 15,351         Sep 442,024 147,882 294,142 225,810 68,332 60,956 7,376 625,367 63,942 561,425 499,439 61,986 46,864 15,122
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2013 89,826 3,303 86,523 28,937 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,829 1,307 85,522 37,487 48,035 15,755 32,2802014 100,400 4,849 95,551 35,193 60,358 58,659 1,699 90,439 1,153 89,285 40,931 48,354 17,003 31,3522015 104,276 3,094 101,182 41,825 59,358 57,908 1,450 91,912 947 90,964 36,908 54,057 18,346 35,7112016 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2017         Apr 115,444 2,541 112,903 46,758 66,145 64,554 1,591 91,597 1,613 89,984 32,735 57,249 20,475 36,774
         May 115,005 2,665 112,340 45,339 67,001 65,337 1,664 92,803 1,273 91,530 33,522 58,007 20,687 37,321         June 115,552 2,742 112,810 45,299 67,511 65,846 1,665 92,055 1,240 90,815 33,049 57,765 21,674 36,091
         July 113,881 2,607 111,273 43,331 67,942 66,311 1,631 92,488 1,195 91,293 33,001 58,292 21,541 36,751
         Aug 111,844 2,585 109,259 42,222 67,037 65,372 1,664 90,634 1,161 89,473 32,425 57,048 20,022 37,026         Sep 113,647 2,699 110,948 41,511 69,437 67,808 1,629 92,944 1,181 91,763 32,408 59,355 22,860 36,495
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. r Corrected. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.89562002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2016         Dec 1.4356 1.4070 7.2983 7.4362 122.39 9.0252 9.7095 1.0750 0.84441 1.0543
2017         Jan 1.4252 1.4032 7.3189 7.4355 122.14 8.9990 9.5110 1.0714 0.86100 1.0614
         Feb 1.3886 1.3942 7.3143 7.4348 120.17 8.8603 9.4762 1.0660 0.85273 1.0643         Mar 1.4018 1.4306 7.3692 7.4356 120.68 9.0919 9.5279 1.0706 0.86560 1.0685
         Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
         May 1.4878 1.5041 7.6130 7.4400 124.09 9.4001 9.7097 1.0904 0.85554 1.1058         June 1.4861 1.4941 7.6459 7.4376 124.58 9.4992 9.7538 1.0874 0.87724 1.1229
         July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
         Aug 1.4919 1.4889 7.8760 7.4379 129.70 9.3201 9.5485 1.1398 0.91121 1.1807         Sep 1.4946 1.4639 7.8257 7.4401 131.92 9.3275 9.5334 1.1470 0.89470 1.1915
         Oct 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2017
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.1 85.3 88.1 85.9 91.8 97.3 85.2 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.1 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.3 86.0 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.4 95.1 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.2 100.3 100.5 107.1 101.4 95.5 94.5 97.5 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.6 104.9 103.2 103.9 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.2 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 100.9 101.9 109.7 102.4 94.6 91.9 98.9 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 100.1 100.6 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.2 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.1 106.0 101.9 102.7 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.5 102.0 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.92008 109.3 108.1 103.2 105.9 117.2 105.5 94.3 88.0 105.1 90.3 102.1 97.7 97.02009 110.7 108.8 104.2 110.7 120.2 106.6 94.6 88.8 104.3 90.8 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 95.8 102.7 111.7 97.6 92.1 88.5 98.0 87.0 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.6 101.2 112.4 97.0 91.7 88.3 97.3 86.1 98.1 92.7 91.32012 97.7 94.8 88.2 95.1 107.3 92.2 89.8 88.2 92.3 83.5 95.8 89.7 88.22013 101.0 97.7 90.9 97.7 111.8 95.1 92.1 88.7 97.6 85.4 98.1 91.4 90.12014 101.4 97.2 91.0 98.6 114.3 95.4 92.8 89.6 97.9 86.1 98.2 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.8 88.2 105.7
p 87.0 90.0 90.5 89.2 82.5 94.1 86.4 p 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 85.0 p 89.3 109.7 p 89.3 90.9 91.0 90.7 83.9 94.7 87.5 p 87.0
2014         Nov 98.4 94.1 88.5 95.9 111.3 92.4 92.2 89.9 95.8 85.1 97.2 90.0 89.0
         Dec 98.4 94.0 112.3 93.0 97.1 89.9 89.2
2015         Jan 94.6 90.3 108.1 89.3 95.1 87.8 87.0
         Feb 92.8 88.7 83.3 89.9 106.2 87.8 90.0 90.3 89.6 82.5 94.8 87.2 86.4         Mar 90.0 86.1 103.0 85.1 93.6 85.6 84.6
         Apr 89.1 85.3 101.7 84.0 93.4 85.2 84.0
         May 91.0 87.1 81.5 87.0 104.1 85.8 89.6 90.4 88.3 81.9 94.0 86.2 85.1         June 91.7 87.7 105.2 86.8 94.1 86.4 85.6
         July 90.7 86.6 104.3 85.8 93.7 85.8 85.0
         Aug 92.4 88.1 83.1 88.2 107.2 88.0 90.2 90.5 89.6 82.8 94.3 86.7 86.4         Sep 93.2 88.9 108.7 89.2 94.5 87.1 87.1
         Oct 93.0 88.8 108.2 88.7 94.5 87.1 86.9
         Nov 90.5 86.3 83.1 87.9 105.1
p 86.0 90.2 90.8 89.4 82.9 93.5 85.8 p 85.3
         Dec 91.9 87.5 107.1 p 87.5 93.7 86.2 p 85.9
2016         Jan 93.0 88.4 108.9 p 88.7 93.9 86.7 p 86.7
         Feb 94.2 89.2 84.7 p 89.1 110.3 p 89.9 90.8 91.1 90.3 83.8 94.4 87.2 p 87.1
         Mar 93.6 88.8 109.1 p 89.0 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
         Apr 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.4 94.9 87.6 p 87.1
         May 94.6 89.9 85.1 p 89.5 110.3 p 89.9 90.9 91.1 90.7 84.1 94.8 87.8 p 87.4
         June 94.4 89.7 109.9 p 89.6 94.6 87.6 p 87.2
         July 94.6 89.8 109.6 p 89.2 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
         Aug 94.9 90.1 85.3 p 89.5 110.1 p 89.5 91.1 91.1 91.1 84.2 95.0 87.7 p 87.1
         Sep 95.1 90.1 110.3 p 89.7 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
         Oct 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.5 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
         Nov 94.6 89.6 84.7 p 89.1 109.7 p 89.0 90.9 90.9 90.7 83.8 94.7 87.4 p 86.7
         Dec 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 88.2 94.6 87.3 p 86.6
2017         Jan 93.9 89.1 109.1 p 88.4 94.4 87.1 p 86.4
         Feb 93.4 88.8 83.4 p 88.3 108.2 p 87.9 90.5 90.8 90.0 83.2 94.4 87.0 p 86.1
         Mar 94.0 89.2 108.6 p 88.0 94.6 87.1 p 86.1
         Apr 93.7 89.0 108.3 p 87.7 94.4 87.0 p 86.0
         May 95.6 90.5 84.7 p 89.2 110.5 p 89.3 91.6 91.4 91.9 84.2 95.4 88.1 p 87.1
         June 96.3 91.3 111.5 p 90.1 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
         July 97.6 p 92.4 113.4 p 91.6 96.6 p 89.2 p 88.5
         Aug 99.0 p 93.7 ... ... 115.1 p 92.9 ... ... ... ... 97.2 p 89.8 p 89.2
         Sep 99.0 p 93.6 115.1 p 92.8 p 97.4 p 89.9 p 89.3
         Oct 98.6 p 93.2 114.9 p 92.5 p 97.3 p 89.7 p 89.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea land,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turke y and
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently not
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November available due to the state of emergency in the national statistical sys tem declared by
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2017, pp  41-43). For more the government of Argentina on 7 January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina is not
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 included in the calculation of the EER-38 CPI deflated series from Februa ry 2016. The
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5Euro area countries (from 2001 including
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cypr us and Malta, from
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 201 4 including Latvia,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro area countries (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 5) and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro area countries and
EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2016 see the index attached 
to the January 2017 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Wage dynamics amid high euro-area un -
employment
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2015
January 2017
– The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the ex -
change rate of the euro
– Recent developments in the indebtedness of 
the private non- financial sector in selected 
euro- area countriesFebruary 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2017
– German balance of payments in 2016
– Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the con -
text of the debt brake
April 2017
– The role of banks, non- banks and the central 
bank in the money creation process
– Demographic change, immigration and the 
potential output of the German economy
May 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Design and implementation of the European 
fiscal rules
July 2017
– The market for corporate bonds in the low- 
interest- rate  environment
– The development of government interest ex -
penditure in Germany and other euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
83•

– Return on private financial assets taking into 
account inflation and taxes
– The danger posed to the global economy by 
protectionist  tendencies
– Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics
August 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2017
– Monetary policy indicators at the lower 
bound based on term structure models
– Distributed ledger technologies in payments 
and securities settlement: potential and risks
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2016
– Changes to the investment funds statistics: 
scope enhancements, results and outlook
October 2017
– Global liquidity, foreign exchange reserves 
and exchange rates of emerging market 
economies
– The natural rate of interest
– The supervisory review and evaluation pro -
cess for smaller institutions and proportion -
ality considerations
– The Eurosystem’s new money market statis -
tical reporting – initial results for Germany
– The new ESCB insurance statistics – inte -
grated reporting flow and initial results
November 2017
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
July 20172, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
July 20172
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to 
2016, May 20172
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2013 bis 2014 , 
May 20172, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20171, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
22/2017  
The optimal conduct of central bank asset pur -
chases
23/2017  
The financial market effects of the ECB’s asset 
purchase programs
24/2017  
Euro area banks’ interest rate risk exposure to 
level, slope and curvature swings in the yield curve
25/2017  
Optimal trend inflation
26/ 2017  
An integrated shortfall measure for Basel III
27/ 2017  
Do all new brooms sweep clean? Evidence for 
outside bank appointments
28/ 2017  
Should unconventional monetary policies be -
come conventional?
29/ 2017  
Disagreement and monetary policy
30/ 2017  
(Un)expected monetary policy shocks and term 
premia
31/2017  
Bargaining power and outside options in the 
interbank lending market
32/2017  
Vulnerable asset management? The case of 
 mutual funds
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2017  
86•

