Monthly Report
August 2017
Vol 69  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 18 August 2017.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
Supply-side influences on the price of oil  ............................................................................  12
The importance of external and domestic stimuli for the economic upturn  
in the euro area  ..................................................................................................................  18
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Real portfolio returns of households in Germany  ................................................................  31
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  38
Recalculated weights for indicators of the German economy’s  price competitiveness  .........  41
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  50
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  60Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
5

Overview
German economy shows 
strong, broad- based growth
The impression that global economic activity 
has stabilised has been confirmed. Global eco -
nomic output is likely to have risen significantly 
in the second quarter of 2017. In addition, the 
latest available data indicate that the dip in 
growth at the beginning of the year was less 
severe than originally estimated. In the United 
States, real gross domestic product (GDP) saw 
a resurgence of growth following a rather slug -
gish start to the year. The pace of growth 
picked up considerably in Japan. Moreover, 
economic activity in the euro area remained 
buoyant. China and other important emerging 
market economies likewise continued to ex -
perience relatively favourable economic condi -
tions. However, economic output in the United 
Kingdom was subdued, growing at approxi -
mately the same rate as in the first quarter.
Although the quarterly GDP rates are volatile, 
the underlying pace of global economic activity 
is unlikely to change substantially during the 
third quarter. The global purchasing managers’ 
indices (PMIs) for July again revealed marked 
growth in the manufacturing industry and 
other sectors. Although alternative sentiment 
indicators even suggest a further quickening of 
pace in the short term, the Bundesbank’s lead -
ing indicator, which had signalled a cyclical up -
turn in the world economy since June 2016, 
has not risen further over the past few months. 
Low saving rates among households in the 
United States and the United Kingdom are rais -
ing doubts about the sustainability of private 
consumption growth rates in these countries.
As yet, the US government and Congress 
appear  to have made very little progress in im -
plementing key economic policy initiatives. Al -
though a number of measures have been taken 
in the area of deregulation, the healthcare re -
form has foundered for the time being. Plans to introduce a comprehensive tax reform have 
not moved forward, either. Nevertheless, by 
abandoning the proposed border adjustment 
tax, a risk for international trade and thus for 
the world economy appears to have been 
averted. Even so, protectionist tendencies in 
general continue to pose a downside risk to 
the global economy. Furthermore, geopolitical 
tensions have become more prominent again 
of late.
Against the backdrop of firmer global eco -
nomic activity, developments in the inter -
national financial markets in the second quar -
ter were mainly determined by political factors 
and changing expectations about the course of 
monetary policy on both sides of the Atlantic. 
While political uncertainty in the euro area di -
minished as Eurosceptic parties failed to gain a 
foothold during elections in France and Italy, 
serious doubt surrounded the implementation 
of planned economic policy measures in the 
United States. By and large, the markets antici -
pated the Federal Reserve’s policy rate hike in 
June 2017. Because further interest rate in -
creases this year are seen as less likely than be -
fore, however, yields on ten-  year US govern -
ment bonds have declined on balance since the 
end of March. GDP- weighted long- term gov -
ernment bond yields also went down on bal -
ance in the euro area, although a speech by 
the ECB President at the end of June gave rise 
to temporary market expectations that the 
Euro system’s asset purchases might be phased 
out earlier than anticipated in response to the 
continued economic upturn. For a short period, 
this triggered a sharp rise in yields, which was 
particularly pronounced in the case of German 
bonds. As a result, yields on ten-  year German 
government bonds have inched upward since 
the end of March 2017, thus also narrowing 
the spreads between German bonds and bonds 
issued by other euro area countries. Buoyed by 
rising earnings expectations, US equity indices 
climbed to new all- time highs at the beginning Global eco-
nomic activity has stabilised …
… and no 
immediate change of pace is likely
Barely any 
progress  on important initiatives  in the 
United StatesDevelopments in the financial markets driven by political factors  and monetary policy expectationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
6

of August , while shares in the euro area have 
been burdened by the strong euro as well as 
by the spread of the diesel emissions scandal 
and anti-  trust complaints against German car 
manufacturers. The euro recorded significant 
gains against the background of favourable 
economic data in the euro area. Measured 
against the currencies of 19 major trading part -
ners, the euro appreciated by just over 5% 
compared with the end of the first quarter.
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept the key interest rates un -
changed in the reporting period. The monthly 
volume of purchases under the expanded asset 
purchase programme has been reduced to €60 
billion since April 2017. These purchases are 
scheduled to take place until the end of Decem-
ber 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any 
case until the ECB  Governing Council sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation 
consistent with its inflation target. The Govern -
ing Council believes that the euro area’s growth 
prospects have improved of late and now con -
siders the risks surrounding the growth outlook 
to be broadly balanced. On the one hand, the 
positive cyclical momentum increases the 
chances that the economic upswing will be 
stronger than expected, while on the other, 
downside risks relating to predominantly global 
factors continue to exist. However, the Govern -
ing Council considers that a substantial degree 
of monetary policy accommodation is still 
needed if price inflation is to meet the stability 
target in the medium term.
The positive underlying dynamics in the monet -
ary indicators persisted in the reporting quarter. 
The broad monetary aggregate M3 again ex -
panded considerably in the second quarter of 
2017 against the backdrop of historically low 
interest rates and robust economic growth in 
the euro area. The mainstay of monetary 
growth was lending to the domestic private 
sector, with loans to households once again 
playing a major role. Moreover, monetary 
growth was also sustained by securities- based 
lending to domestic non- banks, which was dominated by the Eurosystem’s asset purchase 
programmes.
Germany continued to experience rapid eco -
nomic growth in the second quarter of 2017. 
According to provisional data from the Federal 
Statistical Office, after seasonal and calendar 
adjustment, real GDP grew by 0.6% in the 
second quarter compared with 0.7% in the first 
quarter. GDP therefore expanded much faster 
than potential output in both quarters, and 
aggre gate overall capacity utilisation, which 
was already   significantly above average in any 
case, rose again markedly. The fairly brisk 
underlying pace of economic activity seen last 
year owing to buoyant domestic activity re -
cently accelerated further as the result of a 
more favourable external environment.
As in the first quarter, the strong economic 
growth in the second quarter of 2017 was 
mainly attributable to the solid upswing in in -
dustry and construction. After some ups and 
downs last year, industrial output moved onto 
a clear growth path at the turn of the year. This 
also spilled over to business- related services 
sectors such as the wholesale market. The 
boom in the construction sector continued. 
Looking at demand, the recovery was broadly 
based. Exports continued to grow, mainly 
thanks to stimuli from the other euro area 
countries. In addition, investment in machinery 
and equipment expanded again. The fact that 
it has overcome its sustained period of slug -
gishness is probably mainly down to growing 
capacity utilisation in the industrial sector and 
positive sales prospects. Private consumption is 
also likely to have made a major contribution 
to the growth in GDP .
In line with this, German banks again markedly 
expanded their lending to the domestic private 
sector in the quarter under review. The largest 
net expansion was recorded by loans to house -
holds, driven mainly by their brisk demand for 
mortgages. Banks’ lending business with do -
mestic non- financial corporations also grew on 
balance; growth momentum here is still ham -Monetary 
policy : ECB Governing Council leaves policy rates unchanged
Ongoing 
monetary  growth in the euro areaGerman 
economy  
continued  to 
expand 
vigorously  in the 
second quarter
Industry and 
construction as key drivers
Marked rise 
in loans to the domestic private sector in Germany Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
7

pered by the abundant funds available to enter -
prises from alternative sources of financing.
In the second quarter, the situation in the 
labour  market remained very buoyant. Employ -
ment rose sharply, although the extremely 
rapid pace of growth seen in the final quarter 
of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017 could not 
be maintained. This positive development in 
employment continued to be driven mainly by 
the creation of new jobs subject to social se -
curity contributions. As in previous quarters, 
however, the low- paid part- time employment 
segment, as well as the number of self-  
employed, contracted. While registered un -
employment fell significantly in quarter-  on- 
quarter terms, the outlook for the next few 
months remains upbeat.
Notwithstanding the positive labour market 
situation and the favourable economic situ -
ation, wage growth in the second quarter of 
the year remained moderate. Nor do recently 
concluded pay agreements in the services sec -
tor point to any significant boost in wage 
growth. With regard to upcoming wage nego -
tiations, most of which affect the services in -
dustry, the social partners in some sectors will 
not just be campaigning for higher wages, but 
also addressing other aspects such as the im -
pact of digitalisation or more diverse working 
arrangements to allow greater flexibility. Taken 
in isolation, this is likely to dampen wage 
growth.
In the second quarter, consumer prices as 
measured by the Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices (HICP) rose further. At a seasonally 
adjusted 0.3%, this increase was, however, not 
as large as in the previous quarter (+0.5%), 
mainly due to the decline in energy prices 
caused by lower crude oil prices in euro terms. 
Moreover, there was no further increase in 
food prices. By contrast, prices excluding en -
ergy and food went up more noticeably than in 
the past. In particular, the prices of services 
rose more steeply, their upward movement 
having slowed down somewhat at the begin -ning of the year following the recent reform in 
services provided under the public long- term 
care insurance scheme. Prices of indus trial 
goods (excluding energy) rose at roughly the 
same pace as in the first quarter, whereby the 
depreciation of the euro in the final quarter of 
2016 and the first quarter of 2017 is also likely 
to have had an effect, albeit with a time lag. 
The price increase as measured by HICP nar -
rowed overall from 1.9% to 1.6% in year- on- 
year terms. This was partly attributable to a 
base effect arising from the surge in energy 
prices in the second quarter of 2016. Con -
versely, excluding food and energy, the year-  
on- year rate went up quite significantly from 
1.0% to 1.4%, putting it above its longer- term 
average level of 1.0%, amidst above- average 
aggregate capacity utilisation.
The strong economic upturn in the German 
economy is expected to continue in the third 
quarter, with industrial output probably con -
tinuing to play an important role, thanks to a 
substantial expansion in exports. The all- time 
high degree of positive sentiment in manufac -
turing, the robust volume of new orders and 
the large stock of orders still being processed 
suggest that industrial output can be expected 
to grow significantly again in the current quar -
ter. At least according to the survey data avail -
able to date, the discussion about imposing 
bans on older diesel cars in some German cities 
has hardly affected the sentiment among 
enter prises operating in the motor vehicle sec -
tor. Further developments remain to be seen. 
The good sales prospects and the increasing 
utilisation of capacity seen in the manufactur -
ing sector are also likely to further sustain the 
momentum witnessed in business investment. 
Business- related services should likewise bene -
fit from the ongoing favourable level of indus -
trial activity. After recording very strong growth 
rates of late, recent developments in the order 
books indicate that the construction sector 
could generate considerably weaker momen -
tum. All in all, the positive labour market envir -
onment and upbeat income prospects for con -
sumers should, however, persist over the sum -Labour market: 
situation and outlook still very buoyant, …
… but wage 
growth never-
theless subdued
Marked rise 
in consumer prices excluding energy and foodEconomic 
activity  likely to 
remain buoyant 
in Q3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
8

mer months, from which private consumption 
will continue to benefit. The German economy 
in the current year could therefore perform 
even somewhat more strongly than forecast in 
the June projection.
Germany’s public finances continue to benefit 
from the highly favourable underlying eco -
nomic conditions. Despite pursuing an expan -
sionary fiscal policy, a marked surplus is there -
fore to be expected again in the current year. 
On the one hand, the positive economic devel -
opments, along with the extremely beneficial 
financing conditions, ease the strain on public 
coffers. On the other hand, the unconstitu -
tional tax levied on nuclear fuel has had to be 
repaid and expenditure on pensions, health -
care and long- term care, for instance, or on in -
frastructure and military is set to grow signifi -
cantly. The debt ratio continues to narrow, but 
it will still be well above the 60% threshold. As 
things stand, the outlook for public finances 
will initially remain sound, and surpluses will 
persist so long as there is no change in policy. 
That said, the fiscal policy measures discussed 
in the run- up to the general election (such as 
tax relief   or additional expenditure in various 
areas), all in all point to a more expansionary 
stance over the next few years.
In principle, moderate structural surpluses seem 
entirely appropriate for Germany. The debt 
ratio is still high, and the financial burdens that 
are set to arise from demographic develop -
ments will be factored into its public finances in 
the future and need to be absorbed. Most of 
these burdens will not materialise until some 
years down the road, when the baby boomer 
generation retires from the labour force. When 
assessing the shape of public finances or ques -tions relating to pensions, it is therefore im -
portant to take into account significantly longer 
time horizons than those frequently considered 
in current political discussions or international 
recommendations. Overall, there is much to be 
said for taking advantage of the temporary 
relief  due to favourable cyclical conditions and 
the very favourable interest rate level to swiftly 
reduce the debt ratio. This applies first and 
foremost to those state and local governments 
that have very high levels of debt. To this end, 
a more ambitious fiscal policy stance is particu -
larly called for, not least in order to be equipped 
to deal with a normalisation in interest rates.
The central government budget is likely to de -
velop more positively in the current year than 
planned. However, owing to the sizeable finan -
cial burden generated by the reimbursement of 
nuclear fuel tax payments, a deficit must be 
expected . To avoid net borrowing (ensuring a 
“black zero” or balanced budget), withdrawals 
from the reserve are likely to be necessary. 
Under the current implementation regime, 
withdrawals from the reserve increase the Fed -
eral Government’s financial leeway in terms of 
complying with the national debt brake provi -
sions. This methodology differs considerably 
from the European rules, which are based on 
the fiscal balance, which in turn is not affected 
by changes in reserves. This runs counter to the 
aim of ensuring that the national rules also 
ensure  compliance with the European commit -
ments. Furthermore, it would seem that the 
reserve  is not needed to cover the costs of 
refugee- related spending for which it was 
originally  intended. Against this background, it 
would be consistent to release the reserve set 
up for this purpose in the Federal budget by 
repaying debt.German govern-
ment budget in good shape
Favourable 
environment suited to catering  for demographic burdens and enhancing the resilience of public financesReleasing the reserve in the Federal budgetDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The impression of strengthened global eco -
nomic activity has been confirmed. Global eco -
nomic output is likely to have risen significantly 
in the second quarter of 2017, and the most 
recent data indicate that the dip in growth at 
the beginning of the year was less severe than 
originally estimated. Furthermore, initial data 
for individual advanced economies show that 
fixed capital formation continued to expand in 
the second quarter after increasing sharply in 
the previous quarter. Investment therefore 
seems to have recovered from last year’s lull. 
Households also increased their consumer 
spending more markedly again in the second 
quarter in price- adjusted terms after they had 
been somewhat more reticent in the first quar -
ter, probably owing to the surge in energy 
prices.1The global growth profile is likely to have been 
more balanced not only in terms of demand 
components, but also across countries. In the 
United States, in particular, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) saw sharper growth after a ra -
ther weak start to the year. The pace of growth 
picked up considerably in Japan. In addition, 
economic activity in the euro area remained 
buoyant in the second quarter. China and other 
important emerging market economies also 
continued to experience relatively favourable 
economic conditions. However, economic out -
put in the United Kingdom was subdued, 
growing at approximately the same rate as in 
the first quarter of the year.
Backing up the impression that global eco -
nomic activity has strengthened, the global 
growth projection published by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) in July 2017 con -
firmed the projections made in its April World 
Economic Outlook. Aggregated on the basis of 
purchasing power parity exchange rates, global 
economic output is still expected to grow by 
3½% both this year and next. However, con -
trasting adjustments to the projections for indi -
vidual economies have been made. Given the 
upbeat state of the economy, slightly stronger 
growth is now expected – not least for China 
and the euro area. By contrast, the IMF signifi -
cantly lowered its projections for the United 
States. Considering the subdued start to the 
year, a slight reduction for 2017 was expected 
here in any case.2 The significant revision for 
2018 is because the IMF expects the fiscal pol -
icy stance in the United States to be less expan -
sionary than it did in its April report.
A key factor here is likely to have been that the 
US government and Congress appear to have 
made very little progress in implementing key Global economy 
likely to have grown signifi-cantly in the second quarter  , …… supported by 
a fairly broad 
base of 
countries 
IMF confirms 
growth projections 
Selected short-term indicators for international economic activity
Sources: OECD, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Based on the mean value and the standard deviation since 
January 2003. 2 For the global economy. 3 OECD indicators 
(amplitude adjusted) for the OECD area and six other major 
economies.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 20171.51.20.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.5
–––––+++++Monthly, standardised 1
Consumer confidence 3
Composite leading indicator 3Bundesbank leading indicator 2
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Energy prices and private 
consumption, Monthly Report, February 2017, pp 13-15.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European setting, 
Monthly Report, May 2017, pp 10-11.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
10

economic policy initiatives so far. Although a 
number of measures have been taken in the 
area of deregulation, the healthcare reform has 
foundered for the time being. Plans for a com -
prehensive tax reform have also stalled. The ab -
sence of such a reform would deprive the US 
economy of a short to medium- term stimulus.3 
Nevertheless, by dropping proposals for a bor -
der adjustment tax, one risk for international 
trade and thus for the world economy appears 
to have been averted. Even so, protectionist 
tendencies in general continue to pose a down -
side risk to the global economy.4 Furthermore, 
geopolitical threats have recently become more 
prominent again.
The underlying pace of global economic activ -
ity is unlikely to change substantially during the 
third quarter. The global purchasing managers’ 
indices (PMIs) for July continued to show 
marked growth in manufacturing and other 
sectors. Although alternative indicators even 
suggest another quickening of pace in the 
short term, the Bundesbank’s leading indicator, 
which has signalled a cyclical improvement in 
the world economy since June 2016, has not 
risen further over the past few months.5
Furthermore, saving rates among households 
in the United States and the United Kingdom 
recently contracted significantly. Although 
these data are frequently revised,6 they none -
theless raise questions as to the sustainability 
of consumption growth. The situation on some 
sales markets for new motor vehicles, in par -
ticular, appears rather tense. For instance, ac -
cording to the Bundesbank’s calculations, the 
seasonally adjusted sales figures among the in -
dustrialised countries in June were just over 4% 
lower than at the end of 2016.7
Given the stable global economy, information 
from the supply side continued to shape devel -
opments in the crude oil market during the re -
porting period (see also the box on page 12). 
The rise in oil production in Libya, Nigeria and 
the United States, in particular, meant that the 
price of Brent oil had fallen significantly until June 2017 before picking up again in July. Rea -
sons for the turnaround probably include, not 
least, Saudi Arabia’s announcement of its in -
tention to take additional measures to curtail 
its supply after the OPEC countries and other 
major oil- producing countries had agreed to 
extend their production cutbacks back at the 
end of May. As this report went to press, the Barely any 
progress  on important initiatives  in the 
United States
Underlying 
pace of global economic activity  appears stable
Outlook for 
private  
consumption 
Commodity 
prices steadier 
againHouseholds’ saving rates* in selected 
economic areas
Sources:  Eurostat,  national  statistics,  Haver  Analytics  and 
Bundesbank  calculations.  * Saving  by  households  (including 
non-profit institutions serving households) in relation to dispos-able income. For the euro area and the UK, gross saving and 
gross disposable income, incorporating changes to net capital 
in pension funds in each case.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 172468101214As a percentage, quarterly, seasonally adjusted
United StatesEuro area
United 
Kingdom
3 However, it is less clear what the implications would be 
for the economic outlook of the country’s trading partners. 
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The macroeconomic impact of 
tax reform plans in the United States, Monthly Report, May 
2017, pp 12-13.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The danger posed to the 
global economy by protectionist tendencies, Monthly 
Report , July 2017, pp 77-91.
5 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Constructing a new lead -
ing indicator for the global economy, Monthly Report, May 
2010, pp 18-19.
6 In its latest annual revision, for instance, the Bureau of 
Economic Analysis adjusted the saving rate in the United 
States for the first quarter of 2017 downwards from 5.1% 
to 3.9%. According to these data, it stood at 3.6% in the 
final quarter of 2016, its lowest level since the end of 2007.
7 For more information on this calculation, see also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Developments in global car sales 
and implications for the world economy, Monthly Report, 
November 2015, pp 12-14.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
11

Supply-side inﬂ  uences on the price of oil
At the end of 2016, the Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) reached 
an agreement with other major oil- producing 
countries to curb crude oil production. Against 
this background, the price of oil initially rose 
signifi  cantly. However, after a longer period of 
sideways movement, prices began to trend 
downwards again in March 2017. In July, the 
spot price for a barrel of Brent crude oil was 
just under US$50 – roughly as much as it had 
been before the agreement. This box high-
lights factors that are likely to have played a 
role in limiting the extent and duration of the 
rise in oil prices.
Comparing the US Energy Information Admin-
istration’s (EIA) current assessment with the 
pre- OPEC decision projection (November 
2016), year- on- year growth in overall OPEC 
crude oil production from January to April 
2017 was down by an average 1¼ million bar-
rels per day.1 This correlates with information 
indicating that the agreements on curbing production were largely adhered to.
2 As of 
May, however, OPEC output rose and, in July, 
its year- on- year growth fell short of the pro-
jection by only 0.6 million barrels per day. This 
was due mainly to considerable increases in production in Nigeria and, in particular, in 
Libya.
3 Furthermore, the EIA fi  gures suggest that Saudi Arabia stepped up its production in 
June and July, and may have breached the 
designated upper limit. Consequently, OPEC 
as a whole clearly missed its production tar-
get.
In terms of global oil supply, however, it is not 
only OPEC output that needs to be taken into 
account. The price increase at the end of 2016 
boosted the recovery in non- conventional 
production in the USA. According to the latest 
EIA estimate, in the fi  rst seven months of 
2017, the year- on- year growth in US produc-
tion exceeded the November 2016 projection by an average 0.5 million barrels per day, and 
even by as much as 0.7 million barrels per day 
in July. This meant that, ultimately, additional 
US output more than compensated for the 
only moderate drop in OPEC production.
In the light of weakening prices over recent 
months, OPEC – especially Saudi Arabia – has 
made efforts to restrict supply even further.4 
In addition, there have been signs that the 
lower price level has dampened oil industry 
activity in the USA.5 Overall, there is much to 
suggest that particularly US producers re-spond relatively swiftly to price signals and 
thereby serve as fl  exible “marginal providers,” contributing to stabilising oil prices in both an 
upwards and a downwards direction.
6
1 The group of countries is defi  ned on the basis of 
current OPEC membership. Owing to level revisions, 
year- on- year growth is used as a reference.
2 Saudi Arabia reduced its output to a greater extent 
than planned, thereby balancing out failures to curb 
production elsewhere, such as in Iraq.
3 Neither of these two OPEC members was subject to the agreement on curbing production.4 Among other things, the duration of the production cutbacks was extended to March 2018, and Saudi Ara-bia announced short- term export reductions.5 In particular, the rise in the number of active oil drill-ing installations in the USA has levelled out.6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Causes of the fall in oil prices, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 16-17.Deviation in crude oil production from the November 2016 EIA projection
*
Sources:  US  Energy  Information  Administration  (EIA)  and 
Bundesbank calculations. * Deviation and projection in terms of 
year-on-year change. 1  Based on current membership.
Deutsche BundesbankJan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul
20171.51.00.500.51.0
–––++Millions of barrels per day
OPEC 1USADeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
12

spot price for a barrel of Brent crude oil was 
US$51, while forward premiums were roughly 
as low as in mid- May. The prices of other com -
modities picked up again at the beginning of 
the second half of the year.
The price of the basket of consumer goods 
barely increased over the second quarter in the 
industrialised countries, mainly owing to de -
clining energy prices. Furthermore, base effects 
stemming from a marked rise in energy prices 
in the second quarter of 2016 helped to reduce 
the annual rate of change in consumer prices 
from 1.8% in March to 1.4% in June. Although 
inflation in the industrialised countries was 
therefore moderate, it was nonetheless signifi -
cantly higher than in the previous two years. 
Inflation excluding energy and food changed 
only slightly in the second quarter, amounting 
to 1.4% in June, or 1.6% if Japan is factored 
out.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, real GDP in 
China was up by 6.9% on the year in the 
second quarter of 2017. The Chinese economy 
thus maintained the fairly brisk pace of growth 
seen since the beginning of the year. On the 
one hand, economic activity was driven by pri -
vate consumer demand. According to surveys, 
consumer sentiment was exceptionally good in 
the light of solid growth in nominal incomes 
and the favourable labour market situation. 
Added to this, consumer prices in June rose by 
a mere 1.5% on the year. However, the passen -
ger car segment did not benefit from the strong 
appetite for consumption, not least because 
some of the tax relief schemes for small cars 
had been withdrawn at the beginning of the 
year. From next year onwards, these incentives 
are to be phased out entirely. On the other 
hand, in addition to consumption, the con -
tinued boom in the housing market provided 
an important boost to growth. Between Janu -
ary and June 2017, floor space sold and con -struction starts were up by one- seventh on the 
year in each case. The steep rise in real estate 
prices continued in many places. This price in -
crease has recently shown a noticeable slow -
down only in a few major towns and cities in 
which local authorities are attempting to dis -
courage speculative purchases.
Economic activity in India weakened distinctly 
in the first quarter of 2017, the latest for which 
national accounts data are available. Year- on- 
year growth in real GDP fell from 7.0% in the 
last quarter of 2016 to 6.1%. Negative effects 
stemming from the cash reform of November 
2016 may have played a role here because the Moderate 
increase in con-sumer prices
Stable economic 
growth in China
Cyclical fluctuations  in IndiaWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 11 August 2017, or 1 to 17 August 2017 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201733405060708090100110120130US dollar basis,monthly averages, log scale
60708090100110
405060
607080901001102011 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
13

growth rate of private consumption, in particu -
lar, fell considerably. Now that the cash supply 
has returned to normal, growth is likely to have 
picked up again in the quarter just ended. At 
the current end, however, concerns about the 
economy have emerged once again. These 
were mainly attributable to short- term burdens 
caused by the introduction of a nationwide 
value added tax on 1  July, which replaces a 
large number of indirect taxes. Against this 
background, consumer price inflation rose 
markedly. In July, the annual rate of inflation 
stood at 2.4%, having previously fallen to its 
lowest level since the general consumer price 
index (CPI) was introduced in 2011. In the me -
dium to long term, meanwhile, this simplifica -
tion of the tax system is expected to signifi -
cantly boost economic development, particu -
larly the creation of a single market within 
India. The Reserve Bank of India lowered its 
monetary policy rates slightly at the beginning 
of August 2017.
After a long, deep recession, economic output 
in Brazil grew fairly strongly in the first quarter 
of 2017, rising by a seasonally adjusted 1.0% 
on the previous period. This was primarily 
down to significant growth in exports. How -
ever, this momentum probably did not con -
tinue into the second quarter. So far, domestic 
demand appears to have remained weak, one 
potential reason being the currently very diffi -
cult labour market situation. The unemploy -
ment rate still stood at 13.0% in June, despite 
having dipped slightly over the past few 
months. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation 
declined further. The rate of inflation fell to 
2.7% in July. At the beginning of 2016, it had 
still been above 10%. The central bank used 
the resulting monetary policy leeway to make a 
number of significant cuts to its policy rates.
In the quarter just ended, Russia’s real GDP was 
up by 2.5% on the year according to a provi -
sional estimate by the Russian Federal State 
Statistics Service. This compares with an in -
crease of 0.5% in the first quarter of 2017. 
There are thus mounting signs that the Russian economy has regained momentum following 
the severe recession. In the first half of 2017, 
goods imports, which had declined sharply 
during the economic crisis, showed a year- on- 
year increase of just over one- quarter on a US 
dollar basis. This benefited euro area exports, in 
particular. Consumer price inflation remained 
subdued by Russian standards, standing at 
3.9% in July.
United States
According to an initial estimate, real GDP in the 
United States expanded by a seasonally ad -
justed 0.6% in the second quarter of 2017 
compared with the first quarter, thus picking 
up in pace again distinctly. Overall, the US 
economy showed moderate growth in the first 
half of the year, matching the underlying pace 
since the beginning of the upturn in the sum -
mer of 2009.8 On the one hand, the most re -
cent acceleration was largely due to the fact 
that inventories were no longer a drag on over -
all economic developments and gross fixed 
capital formation continued to increase. On the 
other, households recently increased their con -
sumption again fairly sharply following the 
moderate increase in the previous quarter. 
Nevertheless, in price- adjusted terms, they sub -
stantially cut back their spending on new cars 
again.9 Although sales of new cars have stabil -
ised again over the last few months, dealers’ 
strong purchasing incentives continued to 
shape the market in July. Households benefited 
from the continuous rise in employment; the 
unemployment rate fell to a cyclical low of 
4.3% in July 2017. Furthermore, inflation calcu -
lated on the basis of the consumer price index 
went down, falling from 2.7% in February to 
1.7% in July. Against the background of the 
progress already made and still expected in Weak recovery 
in Brazil
Russian 
economy  gains tractionFairly strong private  consumption  growth
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The US economy in the cur -
rent economic upturn, Monthly Report, April 2013, pp 15-
37.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The importance of the auto -
mobile market to the US economy, Monthly Report, May 
2016, pp 18-19.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
14

terms of its monetary policy objectives, the 
US Federal Reserve raised its policy rate again 
and announced that it plans to begin a process 
to normalise its balance sheet.
Japan
The pace of growth in the Japanese economy 
picked up significantly in the second quarter. A 
provisional estimate shows that real GDP grew 
by 1% on the quarter after adjustment for sea -
sonal factors. The acceleration of growth was 
driven by a clear increase in domestic demand. 
In particular, gross fixed capital formation rose 
substantially. In parallel with this, imports ex -
panded distinctly again. Exports, on the other 
hand, were slightly lower, which meant that 
foreign trade dampened aggregate growth in 
arithmetical terms. Although the unemploy -
ment rate remained extremely low in the 
second quarter, at 2.9%, and employment con -
tinued to climb fairly strongly, there were al -
most no signs of an increase in domestic infla -
tionary pressures. Inflation in the basket of 
household goods excluding energy and food 
stayed in negative territory in June. Against this 
backdrop, the Japanese central bank kept its 
monetary policy on an expansionary track.
United Kingdom
Aggregate economic growth in the United 
Kingdom remained muted in the second quar -
ter of 2017. After adjustment for the usual sea -
sonal variations, real GDP in the second quarter 
was up by 0.3% on the previous period, in 
which it had risen by only 0.2%. In contrast to 
the winter months, production in the construc -
tion and manufacturing sectors declined re -
cently. Growth in the important services sector 
distinctly gathered pace, however, especially in 
consumption- driven areas. After a considerable 
setback, real retail sales returned to the level 
reached in the fourth quarter of last year, which 
is consistent with a revival of private consump -
tion. However, the number of new passenger car registrations slumped when vehicle tax was 
reformed. As before, the labour market was ex -
tremely robust, with the unemployment rate 
falling to its lowest level in 42 years in the quar -
ter ended (4.4%). The inflation rate as meas -
ured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) dropped to 2.6% in July, after 
peaking at 2.9% in May. The Bank of England 
kept its monetary policy loose over the report -
ing period.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),10 robust 
economic growth was sustained in the second 
quarter of 2017. Brisk industrial activity, in par -
ticular, provided key impetus in many places. 
Labour market conditions continued to im -
prove in the second quarter. The unemploy -
ment rate in this group of countries fell to 5.0% 
in seasonally adjusted terms, thus reaching a 
new low since the transition period. At the 
same time, the number of vacancies rose, espe-
cially in the services sector. In this setting, aver -
age wages and salaries increased considerably 
according to national data. In the first quarter 
of 2017, the year- on- year increase came to 
4.1% in Poland, 5.3% in the Czech Republic, 
and 11.1% in Hungary, where the minimum 
wage was raised substantially at the start of the 
year. Since then, wage growth appears to have 
accelerated further. Annual consumer price in -
flation as measured by the HICP was nonethe -
less subdued in the second quarter, at 1.5% as 
an average for this group. The inflation rate 
exclud ing energy and unprocessed food picked 
up from 0.9% in the first quarter to 1.2%. The 
Czech National Bank raised its monetary policy 
rate slightly in early August.Significantly 
faster growth
Aggregate 
growth remains subduedUpturn continues 
10 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech 
Republic , Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
15

Macroeconomic trends 
in the euro area
The economic upswing is continuing in the 
euro area. As in the fourth quarter of 2016 and 
first quarter of 2017, economic output in -
creased significantly in the second quarter, and 
the positive sentiment among households and 
enterprises promises a continuation of the up -
turn. In the second quarter of 2017, Eurostat 
data show that real GDP rose by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.6% on the previous quarter,11 which 
represented a year- on- year increase of 2.2%. 
Economic growth was again broadly based 
across the various countries and expenditure 
components.
Domestic demand in the euro area has revived 
considerably in the past few years. However, 
the acceleration of aggregate growth since 
mid-2016 was probably attributable, in particu -
lar, to the strengthening of global activity, which was accompanied by greater export op -
portunities. This is not always clear from the 
traditional breakdown of growth into the 
arithmet ical contributions of the expenditure 
components, because imports are fully netted 
against exports (see the box on pages  18 
to 20).
Growth stimuli are likely to have emanated 
from export business again in the second quar -
ter of 2017. At any rate, the foreign trade data 
reveal a marked increase in revenue from ex -
ports of goods to non- euro area countries. This 
export growth seems to have been driven 
mainly by demand from European countries 
outside the euro area, while in the two previ -
ous quarters it was also fuelled by demand 
from Asia and the United States. Exports are 
likely to have risen markedly in real terms as 
well, because price effects were insignificant. 
Expenditure on imports of goods from non-  
euro area countries was virtually unchanged in 
the second quarter. At the same time, import 
prices fell fairly steeply, resulting in a significant 
increase in real terms. This suggests that do -
mestic growth forces are robust in the euro 
area. Intra- trade also saw brisk growth, in line 
with this.
Industrial activity was a particular beneficiary of 
the dynamic foreign demand. After a first-  
quarter growth hiatus, industrial output picked 
up in the second quarter, rising by 1.2% on the 
previous period in seasonally adjusted terms, 
with this expansion being broadly based across 
sectors.Marked 
economic  growth
Economic 
importance of exportsForeign demand 
still buoyant
Industrial 
activity  gathers paceAggregate output in the euro area
98100102104106108
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Source:  Eurostat.  1 Affected  by  jump  in  Irish  GDP  from 
2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank–3–2–10+1+2+3
Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%Log scale
GDP12010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
11 The growth rate for the two preceding quarters was 
revised when the Irish GDP figures were published. The 
GDP growth rate for the first quarter is now 0.5% instead 
of 0.6%, while the rate for the fourth quarter of 2016 is 
the reverse, namely 0.6% instead of 0.5%. The reason for 
this is that real GDP in Ireland declined by 2.6% in the first 
quarter, according to an initial estimate of the Irish statis -
tical office, after a revised increase of 5.8% (previously 
2.5%) in the preceding quarter. Ireland’s GDP growth rates 
have been very volatile and susceptible to revision for some 
time due to the activities of multinationals. See also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of the euro- area na -
tional accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, November 2016, 
pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
16

The economic indicators show that growth in 
private consumption was probably somewhat 
stronger in the second quarter of 2017 than in 
the previous quarters. Growth in retail sales ac -
celerated significantly in both seasonally and 
price- adjusted terms. New passenger car regis -
trations recorded a decent increase, albeit a 
weaker one than in the first quarter. The strong 
appetite for consumption was supported by 
the ongoing brightening of consumer confi -
dence, which is down to growing economic 
optimism. The sustained labour market recov -
ery and weakening inflation are also likely to 
have boosted the propensity to purchase.
Investment probably continued to pick up.12 It 
appears that more machinery and equipment 
was acquired, and there was probably an in -
crease in construction investment, too. Produc -
tion of capital goods was stepped up distinctly 
in the second quarter, at any rate. Second-  
quarter construction activity was up by 1.2% 
on the first quarter, after seasonal adjustment.
The upturn in the second quarter of 2017 was 
also broadly based across the various countries. 
In France, real GDP rose for the third consecu -
tive quarter by a seasonally adjusted 0.5% on 
the previous period. Growth was fuelled mainly 
by exports, which experienced a major lift after 
a weak preceding quarter. Private consumption 
and investment saw only sluggish increases, by 
contrast. The weak growth in investment is 
likely to be connected with the lapsing of spe -
cial depreciation in April. Imports registered a 
sideways movement, probably in connection 
with significant destocking. The Italian econ -
omy also built on the previous quarter’s pace of 
growth in the second quarter. Real GDP rose by 
0.4% in the second quarter, probably driven by 
exports and investment in machinery and 
equipment. Private consumption and construc -
tion investment tended to be slack, despite a 
further improvement in the labour market. In 
Spain, the robust upswing continued at a 
slightly higher pace, with GDP seeing a second- 
quarter increase of 0.9% on the previous quar -
ter. The strong rise in real retail sales suggests that consumption was a key factor. Added im -
petus came from foreign business, whereas in -
vestment seems to have lost some momentum. 
Very significant GDP growth was also recorded 
in the Netherlands, Latvia, Austria, Cyprus and 
Slovakia. Lithuania experienced robust growth. 
In Belgium, economic output rose distinctly, 
while in Portugal real GDP expanded only 
slightly, after having risen substantially in the 
previous quarters. In Finland, output came 
down from its sharply higher first- quarter level.
In keeping with the economic upturn, the im -
provement in the labour market situation con -
tinued. The standardised unemployment rate 
fell to 9.1% up to June, compared with 10.1% Private 
consumption  somewhat  brisker
Investment still 
on upward track
Growth 
regionally  broadly based
Steady decline in unemployment Euro area trade in goods
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Extra-euro 
area exports price adjusted using the producer price index for 
extra-euro area exports. 2 Extra-euro area imports price adjus-
ted using the price index for extra-euro area imports. 3 Intra-
euro area exports price adjusted using the producer price index 
for intra-euro area exports.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1780901001101201301402010 = 100, quarterly data,
price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
8090100110120130
90100110120Imports2
Intra-trade 3Exports1
12 According to Eurostat, gross fixed capital formation in 
the euro area decreased in the first quarter by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.5% compared with the previous quarter, in 
which it had risen by 1.4%. However, this decline is largely 
driven by one- off developments in the Irish national ac -
counts figures. For the euro area excluding Ireland, there 
was an increase in gross fixed capital formation of 1.3%, 
compared with 0.9% in the fourth quarter of 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
17

The importance of external and domestic stimuli for the 
economic upturn in the euro area
The euro area economy has now been ex-
periencing an upturn for more than four 
years.1 While the recovery was initially very 
moderate, it accelerated over the past year, 
as measured by seasonally adjusted quar-
terly growth in gross domestic product 
(GDP). Over time, however, the strength of 
the upwards movement has varied, as has 
the relative importance of the factors driv-
ing it. At the beginning of the economic im-provement in the second and third quarters of 2013, capital formation and private con-
sumption picked up. Moreover, restocking 
of inventories increased. Exports rose almost  continuously, even in the crisis year of 2012, 
with growth accelerating further in 2014. Faced with weakness of the world econ-omy in the second half of 2015, export momen tum subsequently fl  attened, while 
imports continued to grow strongly on the back of sturdy domestic activity. Exports did 
not pick up again until the latter part of 2016/ early 2017. Private consumption 
gathered strength at the end of 2014, sup-ported by the drop in oil prices. As a result, real GDP was, at last count, just under 8% up on its low from the fi  rst quarter of 2013 and 4% higher than it was at the beginning of 2008, before the crisis hit.
The importance of individual drivers for the 
economic upturn in the euro area can be 
illustrated by a statistical breakdown of eco-
nomic growth into the contributions made 
by the expenditure- side components of 
GDP .2 In a fi  rst, traditional approach, do-
mestic drivers are measured based on the contributions that the expenditure com-ponents of private consumption, govern-ment consumption and capital formation make to growth. The difference between 
exports and imports is interpreted as net ex-ports.
3 According to this depiction, the eco-nomic recovery in the euro area over the 
past few years has been supported by the 
revival in domestic demand. Between 2013 
and 2016, it contributed an average of 
1 percentage point a year to GDP growth. 
Half of this rise was attributable to private 
consumption, which appears to be the main driving force behind the upturn. In 
this representation, foreign trade supported 
economic growth considerably during the 
crisis, but its contribution was actually even slightly negative in the following years.
In this traditional approach, imports are 
fully netted against exports. This may over-state the contribution of domestic factors in 
that all demand components do, in fact, 
contain a certain import share,4 which can 
be estimated. Alternatively, imports can 
therefore be distributed roughly across the 
other expenditure components in order to 
model the cyclical drivers.5
This is based on the input- output tables (IO 
tables) published by Eurostat.6 Alongside 
the output data for the various sectors and 
their contribution to the expenditure- side 
1 Although real gross domestic product (GDP) declined 
slightly by 0.2% in full year 2013, GDP has risen con-tinuously since the second quarter of 2013.2 The analysis covers the euro area excluding Ireland. This is because the Irish data are distorted by the trans-actions of multinationals. Euro  area economic momen-
tum is clearer when Ireland is excluded. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of the euro- area 
national accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, Novem-
ber 2016, pp 16-17.3 Using an expenditure- side calculation, GDP equates to domestic demand plus exports, minus imports.4 See also European Central Bank, Assessing the recent  impulse from the external sector to euro area activity, Monthly Report, June 2005, pp 53-55.
5 See also H Kranendonk and J Verbruggen, Decom-
position of GDP growth in some European countries and the United States, De Economist, 2008, 156(3), 
pp 295-306.6 See symmetric input- output table in Eurostat’s data-base (http:// ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/ data/ database).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
18

GDP components, the IO tables also present 
intermediate consumption and imports 
from countries outside the euro area. This 
allows the import shares of GDP compon-
ents to be estimated for the euro area.7 It 
becomes evident that the import share in 
exports8 is highest at around 30%, followed 
by gross fi  xed capital formation at approxi-
mately 20%,9 private consumption at 15% 
and government consumption at 6%.10 For 
all components, the import share increases over time, refl  ecting growing external trade links with countries outside the euro area.
The shares derived from the IO tables can be used to calculate approximate data on 
the contribution to growth made by individ-
ual GDP expenditure components after ad-
justing for imports.11 It should be noted 
that whereas the traditional breakdown 
also nets the contributions to growth of im-
ports and exports between the individual 
euro area member states (intra- trade), this 
breakdown takes into account only extra- 
euro area trade in line with the IO tables.12
This produces a modifi  ed picture as com-pared with the traditional breakdown.
13 
From this perspective, too, domestic forces 
substantially supported economic growth in 
the euro area. However, the focus moved 
to domestic demand relatively late. Taking 7 See M Bussière, G Callegari, F Ghironi, G Sestieri and 
N Yamano, Estimating trade elasticities: demand com-position and the trade collapse of 2008-2009, Ameri-
can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5(3), 
pp 118-151.8 Extra- euro area exports.
9 Data for individual countries suggest that the share 
of imports in investment in machinery and equipment is much higher than for construction investment. This 
is partly because construction work undertaken in a 
given country by foreign fi  rms is considered part of the domestic product and is not classed as an import.10 As the import share of changes in inventories can-
not be calculated, a percentage of 50% is assumed.
11 The contributions which the GDP components 
make to growth are determined in a two- stage pro-cedure. In a fi  rst step, the import shares are used to 
calculate the adjusted GDP components. The sum of 
imports determined in this way may, however, differ 
from actual imports as a result of various inaccuracies. 
For example, IO tables are currently only available up 
to 2014, and older IO tables do not always incorporate data revisions in a timely fashion. In a second step, the 
resulting residuals are therefore allocated to expend-iture components in line with the shares of the rele-
vant imports in calculated total imports. See H Kranen-donk and J Verbruggen, 2008, op cit.12 No price- adjusted data on extra- euro area trade is, 
as yet, published in the national accounts for the euro 
area. As an approximation, the balance- of- payments data on exports and imports of goods and services, which only measure extra-  euro area trade, were ad-justed using the export and/ or import defl  ator from 
the national accounts.13 Certain diffi   culties arise in this decomposition, par-
ticularly in the intra- year analysis, as sudden bursts in 
imports often go hand in hand with greater stockpil-
ing, and vice versa. If this is the case, the approximate allocation of imports to the components in the above- 
described manner may be misleading. Annual data 
and annual growth rates are therefore used here.GDP growth in the euro area and contributions of components
 *
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. * Excluding Ire-
land.  1  Net  exports  are  defined  as  exports  minus  imports. 
2 Data for 2015 to 2017 based on import shares of 2014. The 
breakdown takes into account only trade flows between the 
euro area and non-euro-area countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017–2–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year change
InventoriesGDP in %
GDP in %Growth contributions in percentage points
Contributions to growth in percentage points210123
––+++
Government 
consumptionGross fixed capital 
formation
Private consumptionContribution of components corrected 
for imports according to their estimated import share
 2Contribution of components according to traditional breakdown
Net exports 1
ExportsInventories
Gross fixed capital 
formationGovernment 
consumption
Private consumption
Q1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
19

one year earlier. By broader measures, too, the 
labour market slack continued to decrease in 
the first quarter.13 At approximately two million 
people, or 1.5%, the year- on- year increase in 
employment again significantly exceeded the 
decline in unemployment by around one mil -
lion people. Despite the improved labour mar -
ket situation, wage growth remained subdued. 
In the first quarter of 2017, labour costs in -
creased by 1.3% year-  on- year on an hourly 
basis. Gross wages per employee went up by 
1.5% over the same period.
As measured by the HICP , consumer prices in 
the euro area were up slightly in the second 
quarter, rising by a seasonally adjusted 0.1% 
quarter-  on- quarter, following a large increase 
of 0.6% in the first quarter. Prices for energy 
and unprocessed food fell fairly significantly as 
a result of lower crude oil prices and the im -
proved weather conditions, but the prices of 
processed food and services rose substantially 
(by 0.7% and 0.6%, respectively). Consumers had to pay much the same amounts as in the 
previous quarter for non- energy industrial 
goods. Annual HICP inflation declined from the 
first quarter by 0.3 percentage point to 1.5%. 
This was partly due to the aforementioned 
dampening baseline effect relating to energy 
prices.
Annual HICP inflation excluding energy and 
food, on the other hand, saw a marked recov -
ery to 1.1% in the second quarter, after having 
stood at 0.8% in the three quarters before. This 
was not just because of Easter shifting from 
March in 2016 to April in 2017; even looking at 
the average of the first two quarters, which is 
unaffected by this shift, there is an increase on 
the second half of 2016. Nevertheless, the core 
inflation rate, as this definition of inflation is 
termed, was still lower in the euro area than in Inflation in 
energy and unprocessed food prices weaker in Q2 than at the start of the year, …… whereas core rate quite significantly  higherinto account the import shares of the indi-
vidual components, GDP growth was 
mainly driven by exports up until the middle 
of 2015. Only in the second half of 2015 did 
domestic demand take over as the main driver. The acceleration in growth in the fi  nal quarter of 2016/ fi  rst quarter of 2017 
was, however, again driven by exports. This 
is also likely to be clearly refl  ected in the calculation of contributions to growth for 
2017, whereas the picture for 2016 was still 
characterised by the weakness in global 
trade, which lasted up until mid-2016.14
The alternative breakdown of growth is less 
precise in arithmetical terms and requires additional assumptions as compared with 
the traditional approach. However, it does 
make clearer the important role of external 
demand for economic developments. 
Nonetheless, both approaches suggest that 
overall economic growth in the euro area in recent years has been increasingly driven by domestic demand. However, neither the 
traditional nor the modifi  ed statistical breakdown can replace model- based ana-
lyses of supply and demand- side drivers of 
economic growth.
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Recent trends in world 
trade in goods, Monthly Report, March 2016, pp 23-
24.
13 For more details on broader measures of underutilisa -
tion of capacity in the euro area, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Labour market slack in the euro area, Monthly 
Report , May 2017, pp 19-20.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
20

Germany (at 1.4%). This is chiefly due to per -
sistently weaker inflation in the prices of non-  
energy industrial goods in the euro area ex -
cluding Germany. By contrast, services prices 
saw fairly similar developments in Germany 
and the rest of the euro area.
In July 2017, HICP inflation in the euro area 
stood at 1.3%, as in June. HICP inflation ex -
cluding energy and food, however, rose slightly 
to 1.2%. This was down to a combination of 
slightly higher price rises for non- energy indus -
trial goods and a persistently higher inflation 
rate for services.
The unabatedly positive sentiment among busi -
nesses and households suggests that the eco -
nomic upturn in the euro area will continue. 
Although the Purchasing Managers’ Index for 
the economy as a whole fell in July for the 
second time in a row, it still exceeds the expan -
sion threshold by a very clear margin. The Euro -
pean Commission’s indicator of business and 
consumer sentiment maintained its high level. 
The surveys indicate a high degree of optimism 
in the retail trade sector and among consumers, 
in particular. The economic expansion in the 
euro area is likely to benefit from internal and 
external stimuli in the third quarter as well. These stimuli include favourable financing 
terms, the continually improving labour market 
situation and strengthened global economic 
activity.Inflation rate 
unchanged in July
Economic 
growth probably robust in Q3, too0.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5Increase in consumer prices* in the
euro area and in Germany
* Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices.  1 Bundesbank calcu-
lations.
Deutsche BundesbankNon-energy industrial goods
Services
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
GermanyEuro area excluding Germany 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its regular economic and monetary 
analyses, the ECB Governing Council decided 
to leave key interest rates unchanged in the re -
porting period. The main refinancing rate 
therefore remains at 0%, while the marginal 
lending rate stands at 0.25% and the deposit 
facility rate at -0.40%. Purchases under the ex -
panded asset purchase programme (APP) con -
tinue to be made at the monthly pace of €60 
billion and are intended to run until the end of 
December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in 
any case until the Governing Council sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation 
consistent with its inflation aim. The net pur -
chases will be made alongside reinvestments of 
the principal payments from maturing secur -
ities purchased under the APP .Since the Governing Council believes that the 
deflation risks previously seen by a majority of 
its members for the euro area have disap -
peared, it has adjusted its expectations for the 
future path of key rates. It now assumes they 
will remain at their present levels for an ex -
tended period of time and well past the hori -
zon of its net asset purchases, but no longer 
expects them to fall any further.
The information that has become available 
since April confirms the Governing Council’s 
view that the economic dynamics in the euro 
area have increased and that the growth pro -
spects have therefore improved. Ultimately, the 
Governing Council considers the risks to the 
growth outlook to be broadly balanced now. 
On the one hand, the positive cyclical momen -
tum increases the chances that the economic 
upswing will be stronger than expected, while 
on the other, downside risks relating predomin -
antly to global factors continue to exist.
The Governing Council, however, believes that 
a very substantial degree of monetary accom -
modation is still needed for sufficient under -
lying inflation pressures to build up and support 
headline inflation in the medium term. It is 
nevertheless expected that inflation will grad -
ually increase over the medium term.
On 11 August 2017, the Eurosystem held assets 
in the amount of €1,680.7 billion as part of the 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The 
average maturity of the PSPP portfolio, which 
largely consists of government bonds, fell yet 
again slightly to 7.9 years from the previous 
maturity of eight years. The outstanding amounts 
purchased to date under the third covered 
bond purchase programme (CBPP3) and the 
asset- backed securities purchase programme 
(ABSPP) came to €226.1 billion and €24.8 bil -
lion, respectively. Purchases under the corpor -
ate sector purchase programme (CSPP), mean -
while, totalled €104.5 billion as at 11 August .ECB Governing 
Council again leaves policy rates unchangedECB Governing 
Council adjusts 
expectations for 
future interest 
rates
Risks to the 
growth outlook broadly balanced 
Purchase 
volumes  still in line with announced target Money market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 17 August 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 20170.40.200.20.40.60.8
––++++
01020Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 3 May 2017 and 25 July 2017 saw another signifi  cant increase in euro area 
liquid ity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors (see the table below). They rose to 
an average of €1,088.6 billion in the June- 
July 2017 reserve period, which was €88.0 
billion more than the average of the March- 
May 2017 reserve period, ie the last one 
prior to the period under review. The sum 
of the autonomous factors fl  uctuated con-
siderably in the two reserve maintenance 
periods, moving within a corridor of €967.2 billion to €1,132.5 billion. Their increase was 
fuelled primarily by government deposits 
with the Eurosystem, which grew by €47.8 billion as against the average of the March- 
May 2017 reserve period, climbing to an average of €229.8 billion in the June- July 
2017 reserve period. In addition, changes in 
the other autonomous factors also had a liquidity- absorbing effect. For instance, comparing the averages of the same two 
periods, banknotes in circulation increased 
by €17.9 billion, and net foreign assets and 
other factors, which are considered to-
gether because of liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, saw an aggregate decrease of €22.3 billion on balance which also re-moved that amount of liquidity from the banking sector. The minimum reserve re-quirement rose across the two reserve 
maintenance periods by a total of €2.0 bil-
lion to €122.6 billion in the June- July 2017 
reserve period, thus additionally pushing up the calculated liquidity needs.
The total outstanding tender volume did 
not change substantially within the two ob-
servation periods, falling slightly by around 
€8 billion to just over €774 billion between the last day of the preceding period and the last day of the period under review (see the 
chart on page 25). The volume of longer- 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2017
3 May
to
13 June14 June
to
25 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –   7.6 – 10.3
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  18.4 – 66.2
3 Net foreign assets
1 +   4.5 – 26.2
4 Other factors 1 –  18.6 + 18.0
Total –   3.3 – 84.7
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –   4.8 –  4.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  60.0 +  0.0
(c) Other operations +  89.7 + 81.1
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility –   0.1 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  43.7 –  1.6
Total + 101.1 + 75.2
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  97.6 –  9.5
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.7 –  0.3
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly Re-
port. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
23

term refi  nancing operations remained almost  
consistent throughout the two periods, 
standing at €767 billion and €768 billion, 
respectively. Even the voluntary early repay-
ments from the fourth TLTRO I operation, 
which were received on 28 June 2017, had 
no notable effect. They amounted to just 
€1.8 billion; the banks had made no use of the early repayment option, available at the 
same time, for the second TLTRO I oper-
ation. The total outstanding TLTRO I volume was thus reduced to €19.9 billion, while the 
total TLTRO II volume still remained at €740.2 billion. The slight decline in the TLTRO I volume was offset by somewhat higher demand for three- month tenders, 
the volume of which increased from a total 
of €5.4 billion at the beginning of the period under review to €7.2 billion at the 
end. However, the volume of main refi  nan-cing operations continued to decline, nearly 
halving to €9.4 billion on average in the June- July 2017 reserve period, compared 
with the average for the March- May 2017 
reserve period (see the chart on page 26). 
With demand standing at €6.8 billion as at 
19  July 2017, the outstanding volume of main refi  nancing operations hit its lowest 
level in the history of the Eurosystem.
The Eurosystem continued to provide the vast majority of central bank liquidity 
through the monetary policy asset purchase 
programmes (see the adjacent table). Dur-
ing the June- July 2017 reserve period, they 
represented balance sheet holdings of 
€2,076 billion on average, which was €171 
billion higher than their average balance sheet amount in the March- May 2017 re-serve period. Of all the liquidity provided through open market operations, almost three- quarters was thus accounted for by 
the asset purchase programmes.
Excess liquidity rose further owing to the 
additional liquidity provided, but the higher 
calculated liquidity needs stemming from autonomous factors and the minimum re-
serve requirement moderated the increase. 
These countervailing effects arising from additional liquidity provision and higher li-quidity needs were particularly evident in 
the June- July 2017 reserve period, in which 
average excess liquidity for the period fell relative to the previous period for the fi  rst 
time since early 2015, albeit only slightly, by €8 billion. However, owing to the May- June 2017 reserve period’s high increase of €140 billion on average compared with the previ-
ous period, excess liquidity rose overall in Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20170.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn%
1,0001,2001,4001,6001,800Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight
Mean value for 
the reservemaintenance period
 2
Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 11 August 
2017
Active programmes
 PSPP + 136.5 1,680.7
CBPP3 +   8.0 226.1
CSPP +  19.0 104.5
ABSPP +   0.9 24.8
Completed programmes 
 SMP –   2.2 91.2
CBPP1 –   0.9 7.5
CBPP2 –   0.9 4.9
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
24

the period under review, climbing to an 
average of €1,642 billion in the June- July 2017 reserve period. As in the previous period, in each of the two observation 
periods 36% of excess liquidity was attrib-
utable to use of the deposit facility and 
64% to excess reserves in the form of cur-rent account holdings; in other words, even though the level of excess liquidity changed, 
its distribution across these two compon-
ents remained constant.
The abundant supply of liquidity meant that 
overnight rates remained geared to the rate 
on the deposit facility during the period under review (see the chart on page 24). 
Eonia almost consistently stood at -0.36%, 
which was 4 basis points higher than the 
deposit facility rate. At the same time, the 
underlying turnover decreased markedly to 
an average of €6.3 billion, following on from €9.2 billion in the two preceding periods. By contrast, secured overnight money in GC  Pooling (ECB basket) still traded below the deposit facility rate in both of the observation periods, at an average  of -0.43%, which was thus again 
1 basis point lower than the average of the 
two previous periods. The rate for secured 
overnight money in the ECB EXTended bas-
ket, which contains a larger set of eligible 
securities, continued to move within a very 
narrow range around the deposit facility 
rate, again trading at an average of -0.40%. 
The associated overnight turnovers in the 
ECB and ECB EXTended baskets rose slightly in total to an average of €6.1 billion, com-pared with €5.6 billion in the two preceding 
periods. The end of the half- year at the 
close of June resulted in the rate for secured overnight money in the ECB EXTended bas-ket temporarily dropping by just over 3 basis points to -0.435% on that day, while Eonia 
rose simultaneously by 1 basis point to 
-0.35%.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
––––++++++
January February March April May June July August
2017Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancingoperations
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series oftargeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO I)
 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
25

In the period under review, excess liquidity con -
tinued to follow the upward trend seen since 
the APP was launched, climbing by €88 billion 
to €1,742 billion. This increase was mainly pro -
pelled as before by the continued asset pur -
chases, while volumes in the standard tender 
operations eased again slightly. The purchases 
planned during the further course of the year 
under the APP are expected to increase excess 
liquidity further.
The unsecured overnight money market rate 
(Eonia) hovered in a narrow range of between 
-0.35% and -0.36% during the period under 
review, just above the deposit facility rate of 
-0.40%, while the secured overnight rate 
(STOXX  GC  Pooling) was slightly below that 
level. The three- month Euribor was largely un -
changed in the reporting period, standing at 
-0.33% at last report. On the whole, money 
market rates have thus remained largely static 
for several months now. Forward rates again 
fluctuated sharply during the period under review  , reflecting ongoing market uncertainty 
over the future path of monetary policy rates 
(more on market movements towards the end 
of the second quarter can be found in the art -
icle on pages 38 to 49). Money market forward 
rates currently suggest that market participants 
are pricing in a first hike of 10 basis points in 
the deposit facility rate for the beginning of 
2019.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 again ex -
panded considerably in the second quarter of 
2017, registering an annual growth rate at the 
end of June of 5.0%, the level seen since April 
2015. The continued expansion of the money 
stock can be explained by the money- holding 
sector’s ongoing strong preference for over -
night deposits given the low opportunity costs. 
A glance at the counterparts reveals that MFI Excess liquidity 
continues upward trend
Market partici-
pants expect first policy rate increases at the beginning of 2019Monetary dynamics still influenced by expansionary monetary policyOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 201703006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,000€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
26

lending to non- banks in the euro area – includ -
ing by the Eurosystem – was once again the 
most significant driver of monetary growth. 
Bank loans to households, in particular, con -
tinued to increase in the quarter under review. 
All in all, loan growth was boosted by robust 
and broad- based economic growth and by the 
very low interest rate level. At the same time, 
securitised lending to general government and 
private non- banks also rose, albeit at a slightly 
more moderate pace on account of the re -
duced volume of asset purchases by the Euro -
system since April 2017.
Money growth was again dominated by strong 
inflows into overnight deposits in the second 
quarter of 2017. These mostly originated from 
households and non- financial corporations, 
which have been building up increasing vol -
umes of overnight deposits since back in 2012. 
Money holdings also remained attractive to 
these risk- averse sectors during the period 
under review due to the narrow yield spread 
between long- term government bonds and 
monetary components. Within M3, shifts from 
short- term time deposits to short- term savings 
deposits and especially to overnight deposits 
continued as the minimal interest rate spreads 
between these types of deposit still favoured 
highly liquid components.MFI lending to non- banks in the euro area was 
again the counterpart that did the most to pro -
pel monetary growth during the quarter under 
review. The pace of growth did, however, re -
cede significantly compared with the preceding 
quarters, owing to securitised lending to gen -
eral government on the one hand and to loans 
to enterprises on the other. Volatile loans to 
finan cial corporations saw appreciable net out -
flows, while loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, which have likewise fluctuated notice -
ably in recent quarters, recorded lower net in -
flows. The annual growth rate of loans to 
private non- banks adjusted for securitisation 
and other one- off effects was consequently 
slightly down on the quarter at 2.5% in the 
quarter under review. The gap between monet -
ary aggregate and loan growth is therefore sig -
nificantly narrower than in mid-2015; it did not 
narrow any further in the second quarter, how -
ever.
As in the preceding quarter, loans to house -
holds contributed the most to loan growth. 
Once again, the driving force behind this was 
loans for house purchase, the annual growth 
rate of which rose from 3.0% at the end of 
March to 3.3% by the end of June. The largest 
contributions in terms of volume came from 
Germany and France; that said, increasing 
– that is to say: less negative – growth rates Overnight 
deposits still main driver of M3 growthLending to domestic non- banks the largest  counterpart  once again
Clear growth 
in loans to 
households 
driven by housing  loans, …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2017 Q2 2017 Q1
Central government deposits –  7.6 – 16.1
Monetary aggregate M3 90.4 215.4
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 159.2 204.3
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) – 23.9 –  7.5
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 44.9 18.6
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 25.2 –  5.0
of which
Capital and reserves –  3.1 42.6
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 22.1 – 47.7Assets 2017 Q2 2017 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 54.6 148.5
Loans 17.9 98.8
Loans, adjusted 1 43.4 87.1
Securities 36.7 49.6
Credit to general government in the euro area 21.2 78.3
Loans –  3.2 – 11.0
Securities 24.0 88.7
Net external assets – 17.9 – 33.6
Other counterparts of M3 0.1 1.6
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
27

were also observable particularly in euro area 
countries in which the household sector as a 
whole is still in the process of scaling back its 
stock of housing loans. The Bank Lending Sur -
vey (BLS) for the second quarter found that 
household demand for loans for house pur -
chase also picked up in the second quarter, 
though the pace of growth fell slightly short of 
the rate observed in the previous two quarters. 
Euro  area banks cited the low general interest 
rate level, stable consumer confidence and a 
still- upbeat household assessment of the out -
look for the residential real estate market as ex -
planatory factors for the rise in the need for 
funds. Credit standards remained essentially 
unchanged on balance.
Consumer credit, too, continued to expand 
strongly during the period under review, its an -
nual growth rate climbing to 5.8% by the end 
of June. Upward momentum was evident in all 
four of the largest countries in the euro area, 
which probably ties in closely with the persist -
ently expansionary underlying path of private 
consumption. This is consistent with the view 
expressed by the banks surveyed in the BLS 
that demand for consumer credit had increased 
yet again. Respondents mainly put this down 
to the low general level of interest rates and 
the high propensity to purchase. On balance, 
credit standards remained virtually unchanged.
Net growth in loans to non- financial corpor -
ations in the euro area slowed down signifi -
cantly on the two preceding quarters, reducing 
the annual growth rate from 2.4% at the end 
of March to 2.1% at the end of June. This de -
crease was to a significant extent due to a one- 
off special effect, which is unlikely to have a 
lasting impact on the recovery in loan growth 
that has been observed for quite some time 
now.1 For one thing, there was a favourable 
setting for a continued recovery in loans to 
enter prises, with economic growth becoming 
entrenched and evident across wide parts of … but also 
continued  substantial  growth in consumer  credit
Growth in loans 
to non- financial corporations down on previous  quarters Monetary aggregates and counterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial  
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and counterpartsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Percentage growth
in M3
Remaining counterparts
Securities-based lending to
general government
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations
HouseholdsNet external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Percentage growth in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage pointsContribution of components in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2
1 See also Monetary developments in the euro area: June 
2017, ECB press release dated 27 July 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
28

the euro area. For another, lending rates 
throughout the currency area are still close to 
historical lows. This upbeat overall setting is 
consistent with reports by the banks which par -
ticipated in the BLS that euro area demand 
among non- financial corporations for bank 
loans picked up perceptibly in the second quar -
ter. Besides pointing to the financing require -
ments for mergers, acquisitions and restructur -
ing measures, the low general interest rate 
level and the need for funds arising from debt 
restructuring, refinancing and renegotiations, 
BLS respondents also put this stronger demand 
down to a rise in the funds needed for fixed 
investment, which has not increased this 
sharply since the final quarter of 2015. At the 
same time, survey respondents said that, on 
balance, they had largely left their standards 
for loans to enterprises unchanged at the pre -
vious quarter’s level.
As in the preceding quarters, growth in loans 
to non- financial corporations in the euro area 
was fuelled chiefly by the contributions of 
banks in Germany and, to a lesser extent, 
France (see the upper adjacent chart). In some 
countries, such as in Germany and Spain, the 
ongoing high availability of funds via internal 
financing   was one major factor dampening 
enterprises  ’ demand for loans. On aggregate, 
they were thus able to finance their resurgent 
investment without having to borrow funds. 
Furthermore, a glance at data for the euro area 
as a whole reveals that debt securities issuance 
is another external source of financing, along -
side loans, which has been gaining significance 
in annualised terms since 2016 for the non-  
financial corporate sector. One important fac -
tor here is the favourable financing terms in the 
capital markets, which can be attributed in part 
to the Eurosystem’s asset purchase pro -
grammes.
The Eurosystem’s asset purchases remained a 
key driver of monetary growth in the second 
quarter of 2017. However, the pace of growth 
was braked somewhat per se  by the reduction 
in the monthly volume of purchases made by the Eurosystem since April 2017. Furthermore, 
the PSPP made less of a contribution to this 
monetary aggregate counterpart than in the 
preceding quarters as the Eurosystem’s net pur -
chases of domestic government bonds were 
partly offset in the reporting quarter by in -
creased net sales by other MFIs (see the lower Discernible 
country- specific differences in loan dynamics
Securities- based 
lending bolstered  by Eurosystem’s asset purchasesLoans to non-financial corporationsin the euro area
*
605040302010010203040
––––––++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Loans  adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Also adjusted for positions 
arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area 1... France
... Italy
... Spain
... GermanyMFIs in ...
Securities-based lending to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 172001000100200300400500600700
––+++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof whichExtended by the MFI sector as a wholeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
29

chart on page 29). In securities-  based lending 
to the private sector, debt securities benefited 
from the CSPP , as in previous quarters; in an 
environment of rising equity prices, MFIs also 
held more shares and investment fund shares 
in the quarter under review.
The supportive effect of longer- term financial 
liabilities on the monetary aggregate, which 
has been observable since the end of 2011, 
lasted into the reporting quarter. Given the cur -
rent interest rate levels, longer- term time de -
posits, in particular, continued to be pared back 
significantly. By contrast, the previous quarters’ 
rather sharp reduction in longer- term bank bonds held by the money- holding sector came 
to a halt during the second quarter of 2017. 
One likely reason for this is the expiry in March 
this year of the Eurosystem’s (extremely favour -
able) targeted longer- term refinancing oper -
ations (TLTROs), which took away a major 
source of alternative funding for the banking 
sector.
Viewed in isolation, the ongoing reduction in 
the MFI sector’s net external asset position 
continued to put a damper on monetary 
growth. Although this impact weakened 
slightly in the reporting quarter in view of per -
sistently high current account surpluses and the 
economic upturn in the euro area, the balance 
of payments data so far available for April and 
May 2017 indicate that non-  resident investors 
again sold a discernible volume of longer- term 
bonds in particular, both from the private 
sector  and the general government sector in 
the euro area. At the same time, domestic non- 
banks’ demand for foreign securities in these 
two months remained high, meaning that, on 
the whole, persistently high net capital exports 
were recorded in portfolio investment.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic  customers
Once again, German banks’ deposit business 
with domestic customers grew significantly in 
the second quarter of 2017. As in the previous 
quarters, though, this was attributable solely to 
growth in short- term bank deposits (more spe -
cifically: overnight deposits), while long- term 
deposits declined further on balance. This 
build- up of highly liquid transferable deposits in 
the quarter under review was aided by the his -
torically low interest rate level and the flat yield 
curve, and was supported by nearly all the 
money- holding sectors (see the adjacent chart).
Households continued to make the largest con -
tribution to this growth in short- term deposits. 
The ongoing preference among households for Continued 
reduction in longer- term financial liabilities Contribution from net exter-nal assets still negative but more moderate than in previous quarter, despite persistently high net capital exports
Deposit growth 
still dominated by build- up of 
overnight depositsInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the ba-
lance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017012345% pa, monthly data
01234Overall volume 1
New business 2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
30

Real portfolio returns of households in Germany
Time and again, the prevailing low- interest- 
rate environment has ignited public debate 
over the low deposit rates earned by Ger-man savers. However, and as the Bundes-
bank has demonstrated in earlier analyses, 
savers’ fi  nancial portfolios also contain, be-
sides bank deposits, other forms of invest-
ment which have a role to play – one which, 
at times, is even as important as that of 
bank deposits. Hence, a comprehensive pic-ture of households’ portfolio returns needs 
to incorporate the returns generated by 
these other types of fi  nancial asset – that is, the yields generated by claims on insurance 
corporations, say, or valuation gains and 
losses and dividend payouts on securities.1 
Since the purchasing power of nominal re-
turns varies with the infl  ation rate, our an-
alysis observes the various rates of return in real terms.
2Below is an updated version of the chart published in the Deutsche Bundesbank’s October 2015 Monthly Report  showing 
how real returns on the main types of fi  nan-
cial asset that feature in German house-
holds’ portfolios evolved between 1991 and the fi  rst quarter of 2017.
Securities returns in particular remained relatively high into 2015 before dwindling 
1 Details on the path of returns and the impact on 
household behaviour can be found in Deutsche Bun-
desbank, German households’ saving and investment 
behaviour in light of the low- interest- rate environ-
ment, Monthly Report, October 2015, pp 25ff.
2 More on this topic can also be found in Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Developments in real interest rates on 
deposits in Germany, Monthly Report, July 2017, 
pp 101-103; and Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Return on private fi  nancial assets taking into account infl  ation and taxes, op cit, pp 69-75. Our analysis does not ad-
just returns for taxes, though the overall qualitative 
outcome would be similar if we did.
Real returns on various types of financial asset held by households in Germany
50403020100102030405060
–––––++++++% pa, quarterly
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  Datastream,  Assekurata,  German  Insurance  Association  (Gesamtverband  der  Deutschen  Versicherungs-
wirtschaft) and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Data on the annual return on investment fund shares are only available as from 1995 Q4. 
2 Nominal deposit interest rates are based on the Bundesbank's interest rate statistics until 2002 and on the harmonised MFI interest 
rate statistics as from 2003. The period prior to 2003 and the years from 2003 onwards can therefore only be compared to a limited 
degree.
Deutsche BundesbankClaims on insurance corporations Investment fund shares 1
Debt securities Currency and deposits 2 Shares
–40+4+8Enlarged in relation to the top part of this chart
Claims on insurance corporations
Currency and deposits 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
31

as that year progressed. Those returns may 
have slightly underperformed 2015 levels 
on the whole since then, but the return on 
shares, especially, has climbed noticeably to date, largely on the back of valuation gains in the capital market. At the same time, the 
returns on bank deposits (including cur-
rency) and on claims on insurance corpor-
ations fell appreciably, the former dropping 
to well below zero at last count. This was 
due chiefl  y to the prevailing rise in the rate of infl  ation since mid-2016.
We measure the real total return on the fi  -
nancial portfolios of German households in 
the period under review by weighting the individual returns with the time- varying portfolio share of each type of fi  nancial 
asset. As the above chart shows, this total 
return, though low at the current end, is 
nonetheless still in positive territory, coming in at just shy of 1.9% in the fi  rst quarter of 
2017. While this is down on the long- term average of 2.8% observed since 1991, it is a 
little higher than the mean value of 1.7% 
recorded since 2008.
One contribution to the total return that 
has been positive and noteworthy through-out came from claims on insurance corpor-ations, though their return, too, has shrunk 
signifi  cantly since 2016. The contribution from securities has likewise been positive 
for the most part, but their relatively small 
portfolio share – especially since 2009, at less than one- quarter  – means that their 
sometimes very high returns in recent years have had no more than a limited effect on 
the total return of German households. Bank deposits (including currency), which 
currently represent a very substantial port-
folio share of just under 40%, on the other 
hand, contributed far less still to the total return throughout the observation period, 
or even eroded it at times.Contribution of individual types of financial asset*
to the real total return of households in Germany
* Weighted according to share of total financial assets.
Deutsche Bundesbank1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17642024681012
–––++++++Percentage points
Debt securities
Investment fund shares
Shares
Claims on insurance corporations
Currency and deposits
Total return (% pa)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
32

The chart above illustrates year- on- year 
changes in the total return and a break-
down into its contributory factors, including changes in the nominal total return and in-
fl  ation (measured with the aid of the con-
sumer price index (CPI)) as well as shifts in 
relative portfolio composition. Essentially, these shifts can be triggered either by transaction- driven infl  ows into individual types of fi  nancial asset, ie active portfolio 
reallocations, or by valuation effects, which largely affect the stocks of securities held in the portfolio.
Developments in nominal returns were, in 
nearly all cases, the key factor for the real 
return on the portfolio. Particularly in 
periods of crisis, such as between 2000 and 2002 (the end of the New Economy boom) 
or in 2007-08, there were negative contri-
butions from nominal returns, largely as a 
result of price losses. A similar pattern can 
be identifi  ed for the year 2016. Moreover, it is always found that movements in the CPI 
make a smaller, albeit signifi  cant contribu-
tion, where, in the above chart, a year- on- year increase produces a negative contribu-
tion, given that it depresses the real total 
return when viewed in isolation. Shrinking 
but still- positive rates of infl  ation meant that the CPI continued to make a positive contribution to the path of the real return in 
2014 and 2015. However, infl  ation rates 
have been picking up again since mid-2016, 
meaning that contribution has been nega-
tive.
Changes in portfolio composition usually 
only have a minor impact on the portfolio 
return, though the year 2002, when the New Economy boom came to an end, 
stands out as a notable exception. That was 
a period in which investors offl   oaded ap-preciable stocks of loss- ridden shares and switched to bank deposits, which were 
yielding positive real returns back then. The otherwise negligible role played by changes 
in portfolio composition is consistent with the observation that German households’ 
portfolio structure tends to be less sensitive 
to returns and is instead driven chiefl  y by personal preferences as well as by slow- 
moving demographic and institutional fac-
tors.3
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), op cit, pp 25ff.Contributions to the change in the real total return
Deutsche Bundesbank1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1710864202468
–––––++++Year-on-year change in percentage points
Consumer price index Nominal returns Portfolio composition
Change in real total returnDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
33

highly liquid bank deposits that can be ob -
served here suggests that the portfolio struc -
ture of households in Germany tends to be less 
sensitive to returns (see the box on pages 31 
to 33). This is also consistent with the observa -
tion that portfolio shifts into higher-  yielding 
types of financial asset are still of relatively little 
importance for this sector.
Non- financial corporations, too, stepped up 
their overnight bank deposits to a considerably 
greater extent than in the previous quarter, in 
spite of the low and, in some cases, even nega -
tive interest rates on offer. Besides the still very 
marginal yield disadvantage relative to other deposit types, this sector’s strong inflows into 
transferable deposits are also likely to be aided 
by German non- financial corporations’ high 
level of cash holdings at present, which is due 
to their strong earnings position.
Financial corporations likewise continued to 
build up their overnight bank deposits during 
the reporting period. On balance, however, 
they decreased their deposits held with domes -
tic banks because all other bank deposits, and 
in particular the long- term time deposits of in -
surers and pension funds, saw significantly 
sharper declines. On the whole, then, the in -
vestment decisions of this sector are likely to 
have again been driven by a search for higher- 
yielding types of financial asset and by regula -
tory requirements during the reporting quar -
ter.2
Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- 
bank sector gained distinct traction in the re -
porting quarter. As in the previous quarters, 
however, this upswing was due solely to the 
stronger flow of credit to private non- banks. In 
addition to loans to the private sector, banks 
also added to their stocks of privately issued 
securities, which they had reduced discernibly 
in the preceding quarter. At the same time, do -
mestic banks reported yet another decline in 
lending business with the domestic public sec -
tor, affecting both securitised lending as well 
as loans, and reflecting a further reduction in 
finan cing needs as a result of the favourable 
state of public finances.
As in the previous quarters, a large proportion 
of the loans to the private sector were granted 
to households, in particular in the form of loans 
for house purchase, for which demand was 
roughly as buoyant as during the preceding 
quarter. At 3.9% at the end of June, however, 
year- on- year growth in this credit segment 
–  which was supported by exceptionally fa -Private non- 
financial sector contributes most to growth in overnight depositsDecline in 
deposits in the 
financial sector 
driven by 
insurers and 
pension funds
Stronger growth 
for lending to domestic 
non- banks
Loans to 
households  still dominated by loans for house purchase Lending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2017
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 43.0 47.4
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 5.8 – 6.2
over 2 years –  7.0 – 7.0
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 0.0 1.7
over 3 months –  1.7 – 0.7
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans –  7.8 – 6.9
Securities – 11.3 – 5.9
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 19.7 22.7
of which to households 3 12.7 13.6
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 5.7 7.4
Securities –  2.0 8.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Ongoing portfolio shifts into 
higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly Report, May 
2017, pp 30-33.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
34

vourable interest rates – was only marginally 
higher than at the end of the previous quarter. 
Thus, the interest rate on long- term loans for 
house purchase barely changed over the course 
of the second quarter, ending the quarter at 
1.9%, which is just above its all- time low since 
harmonised MFI interest rate statistics were 
introduced in 2003, which it reached last Sep -
tember.
The BLS data likewise show that, all other 
things being equal, the low general level of 
interest rates once again boosted demand. By 
contrast, the positive outlook for the housing 
market (including for anticipated residential 
property prices going forward), which respond -
ents had cited in the previous quarters as a key 
factor driving demand, played only a secondary 
role for the first time in around seven years. 
The BLS also revealed that unlike in the previ -
ous quarters, consumer confidence was no 
longer a notable source of demand- side stimu -
lus. However, the view expressed on the whole 
by the bank managers surveyed in the BLS 
– that demand for loans for house purchase 
had eased somewhat overall in the second 
quarter of 2017 – can mainly be put down to a 
number of respondents having lost market 
share to competitors within and outside the 
sample. On balance, the banks participating in 
the BLS left their credit standards for loans for 
house purchase unchanged.
Consumer credit also increased markedly in the 
reporting quarter. This is consistent with the 
BLS data showing at least a slight rise in de -
mand for this type of lending in the second 
quarter of 2017, which the bank managers 
respond ing to the survey attributed to con -
sumers’ increased propensity to purchase, 
strong consumer confidence and the low gen -
eral interest rate level. The respondent banks 
did not change their credit standards in this 
segment.
In addition to loans to households, lending to 
non- financial corporations also recorded 
marked inflows. With an annual growth rate of 3.2% at the end of June, this credit segment is 
now even slightly outpacing loans to house -
holds, which expanded at a rate of 3.0%. In 
terms of maturities, non- financial corporations 
in Germany continued to show a stronger pref -
erence for long- term loans. Unlike in the previ -
ous quarters, there was also demand from 
non- financial corporations for shorter- dated 
loans on balance, albeit on a much smaller 
scale. Besides the exceptionally low interest 
rates, German enterprises’ greater interest in 
long- term loan contracts on the whole can 
probably be explained by the generally upbeat 
underlying economic and business expect -
ations. For their short and medium- term ex -Fresh inflows for 
consumer creditRenewed increase in lending  to non- financial corporations 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017–10+1+2+3+4Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
32101234
–––++++Non-financial corporations 1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholdsUp to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
35

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as 
the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume 
of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of re-
spondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents report-ing “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “nar-rowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2017 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 20171.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30+60–300+30+60
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 171.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
3003060
–++
300306090
–+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over 
    €1 million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to households
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
36

penditure, German enterprises are likely to 
have access to ample internal resources and/ or 
alternative sources of funding, such as intra-  
group loans, trade credits and loans from 
shadow banks.
The latest BLS results generally underpin this 
assessment, with the respondent banks report -
ing only a moderate rise in demand in this 
credit segment during the second quarter of 
2017. At the same time, they identified the vast 
scope for internal financing available to enter -
prises as a major factor dragging on demand. 
By contrast, according to BLS data, demand for 
loans was especially supported by funding 
needs for refinancing, restructuring and re -
negotiation purposes, as well as by the low 
general level of interest rates. For example, at 
the end of June, domestic enterprises paid 
interest amounting to 2.5% for small- volume 
and 1.1% for large-  volume loans in the short-  
term segment, while interest on long- term 
loans stood at 1.8% and 1.6%, respectively, of 
late. The surveyed banks reported that they 
had left their credit standards for lending to 
enter prises virtually unchanged.The BLS conducted in July contained additional 
questions on banks’ financing conditions, the 
impact of regulatory and supervisory activities 
relating to requirements for capital adequacy, 
leverage ceilings or liquidity, as well as the 
banks’ participation in the TLTRO I and TLTRO II 
operations. Against the backdrop of conditions 
in the financial markets, German banks re -
ported a marginal improvement in their fund -
ing situation compared with the previous quar -
ter. With regard to regulatory and supervisory 
activities, the first half of 2017 saw the banks 
reducing their risk- weighted assets further, on 
balance, and strengthening their capital pos -
ition again. The fourth and final TLTRO II in 
March 2017 met with greater interest among 
the surveyed credit institutions than the previ -
ous TLTRO I and TLTRO II operations. They put 
their participation down to the attractive con -
ditions of the operations. Reportedly, the bor -
rowed funds were to be used chiefly for lend -
ing, in keeping with the objective of the mon -
etary policy measure. Overall, the participating 
banks’ financial situation improved markedly, 
although participation itself had no impact on 
their credit standards.German BLS 
banks show greater interest in final TLTRO II 
operationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
37

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Against the backdrop of firmer global eco -
nomic activity, developments in the inter -
national financial markets in the second quar -
ter of this year were mainly shaped by political 
factors and changing expectations about the 
course of monetary policy on both sides of the 
Atlantic. Reduced political uncertainty in the 
euro area, where elections in France and Italy 
did not yield a positive outcome for Eurosceptic 
parties, stood in contrast to major doubts 
about the prospects of implementing further 
planned economic measures in the United 
States following the failure of the healthcare 
reform. The hike in the US policy rate by the 
Federal Reserve (Fed) in June had been broadly 
anticipated on the markets, but because the 
likelihood of further interest rate increases this 
year has fallen, yields on ten- year US govern -
ment bonds have fallen by 20 basis points to 
2.2% since the end of March. In the euro area, 
too, GDP- weighted yields on long- term gov -
ernment bonds have fallen on balance, al -
though a speech by the ECB President at the 
end of June fuelled short- term market expect -
ations that the Eurosystem’s asset purchases 
might be phased out earlier than anticipated in 
response to the continued economic upturn. 
This led to a brief sharp increase in yields, par -
ticularly in Germany. On balance, yields on ten- 
year Bunds have gone up by 7 basis points to 
0.4% since the end of March. Buoyed by rising 
earnings expectations, US equity indices 
climbed to new all- time highs at the beginning 
of August, while shares in the euro area were 
burdened by the strength of the euro as well as 
by the spread of the diesel emissions scandal 
and allegations that German car manufacturers 
were running a cartel. The euro recorded 
signifi cant gains against the background of 
favour  able economic data in the euro area. 
Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro appreciated by 5.2% 
compared with the end of the first quarter.Exchange rates
The euro- dollar rate recorded slight gains be -
tween the end of March and mid- May 2017. 
This was attributable not only to the election 
result in France, but also to favourable eco -
nomic data from the euro area and uncertainty 
among investors concerning the developments 
in US domestic politics. Starting in mid- May, 
the single currency then fluctuated within a 
narrow corridor of between US$1.10 and 
US$1.13. During this period, negative factors, 
such as the prospect of a less expansionary 
monetary policy in the United States, were 
broadly balanced out by positive factors, such 
as further surprisingly up- beat economic data 
from the euro area. The Fed’s decision to raise 
its key policy rate in June had been largely an -
ticipated, with the result that it did not place 
the euro under sustained pressure.
Remarks by the President of the ECB at the 
Forum on Central Banking in Sintra on eco -
nomic and inflation developments in the euro 
area were interpreted as being quite confident, 
leading to the expectation among market par -
ticipants of a forthcoming departure from the 
Eurosystem’s highly accommodative monetary 
policy. The euro- dollar exchange rate rose in 
the next few days to US$1.14, which at the 
time was the highest level since May 2015. 
Other voices from the ECB quickly dampened 
investors’ expectations, tempering what would 
have been an even higher rise.
The euro- dollar rate was given further impetus 
by developments in the United States, includ -
ing the renewed failure of the healthcare re -
form and statements before the US Congress 
by the chair of the Federal Open Market Com -
mittee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve on the 
weak inflation trend in the United States. In -
vestors interpreted these statements as a sign 
that expansionary monetary policy in the 
United States might continue for longer. The Financial 
markets  driven by political developments and monetary policyEuro up markedly  against the US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
38

appreciation of the euro continued after the 
ECB Governing Council’s meeting in July, des -
pite no indications having been given of an 
early departure from the present monetary pol -
icy course. The euro received an additional 
boost when the FOMC kept the US policy rate 
stable at its meeting in July instead of once 
again increasing it. The single currency con -
tinued to make gains into August, at one point 
reaching US$1.19 – its highest level since Janu -
ary 2015. As this report went to press, the ex -
change rate stood at US$1.17. Overall, the 
euro- dollar exchange rate therefore appreci -
ated by 9.4% over the reporting period.
The single currency also appreciated consider -
ably against the yen on balance. While it re -
corded significant losses before the first round 
of the French presidential elections amid geo -
political uncertainty, it quickly made good on 
these. In the period thereafter, the euro- yen ex -
change rate was strengthened, above all, by 
statements from Japan’s central bank governor 
reaffirming the bank’s commitment to yield 
curve control and by the Japanese central 
bank’s interventions on the domestic bond 
market to ensure ten- year government bond 
yields remained on target. In addition, the Bank 
of Japan surprised market participants by again 
extending the timetable for achieving the infla -
tion target. The prospect of a prolonged phase 
of expansionary monetary policy led to further 
appreciation of the euro against the yen. As 
this report went to press, the euro was trading 
at ¥128.8, and thus 7.7% above its level at the 
beginning of the reporting period.
On balance, the euro made substantial gains of 
just under 6.2% against the pound sterling. 
From the end of March to mid- May 2017, the 
euro- sterling exchange rate initially came under 
slight pressure, among other things due to the 
announcement by the British Prime Minister 
that she would work to achieve free trade 
agreements with the EU. Subsequently, how -
ever, it was buoyed by surprisingly weak eco -
nomic data from the United Kingdom. In add -
ition, the UK  Prime Minister’s Conservative Party lost its absolute majority in the snap par -
liamentary elections held at the beginning of 
June. The resulting uncertainty regarding the 
EU exit negotiations subsequently led to a last -
ing weakening of the pound against the euro. 
By contrast, voices from the Bank of England 
calling for an increase in interest rates in the 
near future on account of the positive inflation -
ary developments in the United Kingdom only 
briefly dampened the euro’s upward trajectory, 
especially as the Governor made clear he was 
against such a move. The euro made further 
gains when the Bank of England decided not to 
raise the policy rate at the beginning of August, 
showing that some market participants had … against 
the yen …
… and against 
the pound sterling Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2016 20171.051.101.151.201.25
110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
9095100105Daily data, log scale
US$
£¥against the ...
... US dollar Launch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1
... yen
Launch exchange
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange
rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
39

clearly still expected a policy rate hike. As this 
report went to press, the euro was trading at 
£0.91.
On the other hand, the single currency depreci -
ated slightly against the Czech koruna, among 
others, after the Czech central bank discon -
tinued the koruna’s exchange rate floor to the 
euro. Measured against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners, the euro appreciated by 
5.2% on balance over the reporting period. 
When calculating the effective euro, recalcu -
lated trade weights were used for the first time 
(see the box on pages  41 to  43). The price 
competitiveness of euro area exporters deteri -
orated further due to the currency’s appreci -
ation. Since April 2015, when the real effective 
euro was at a multi- year low, a cumulative loss 
of competitiveness of around 10% has been 
calculated. However, in terms of the long- term 
average, the euro area’s competitive position 
can continue to be regarded as neutral.Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Bond market activity was determined, above 
all, by the changing expectations among some 
market participants concerning future monet -
ary policy. Up to and into June, the yields on 
long- term government bonds initially fell in 
many countries, as market participants, for the 
most part, expected the Eurosystem’s accom -
modative monetary policy to continue un -
changed and somewhat lowered their expect -
ations of a policy rate hike in the United States. 
However, comments at the Forum on Central 
Banking in Sintra, Portugal, at the end of June 
were – as mentioned above – interpreted by 
the markets as a sign of a forthcoming depart -
ure from the highly accommodative monetary 
policy in the euro area. This triggered a sharp 
rise in yields for a short time, though this par -
tially receded by the end of the reporting 
period. On balance, the GDP- weighted yield on 
ten- year government bonds in the euro area 
fell by 15 basis points to 1.0% over the entire 
reporting period, which started at the end of 
March.
Contrary to the European trend, the yield on 
ten- year Bunds since the end of March re -
corded a rise, on balance, of 7 basis points to 
0.4%. It is possible that the mounting market 
expectation of a scaling back of bond pur -
chases also led to a reduction in the scarcity 
premium on long-  dated Bunds. The revised 
communication on the deposit rate after the 
meeting of the ECB Governing Council in June, 
the US policy rate hike and the speeches in 
Sintra had no direct impact at the short end of 
the yield curve. This maturity spectrum con -
tinued to be dominated by signals of scarcity. 
Since 2014, the yield on two- year Federal se -
curities has fluctuated at a level close to the 
rate for overnight repo transactions for which 
Federal securities are used as collateral. The 
fact that the repo rate is significantly lower 
than the deposit rate is a sign that a special 
liquid ity premium (scarcity premium) is applied Euro has also 
appreciated significantly  in effective termsMonetary policy expectations impact yields on long- term government  bonds
Increase in long- 
term Bund yieldsYields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.7
–+++++++++% pa, weekly averages
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
40

Recalculated weights for indicators of the German 
economy’s  price competitiveness
Indicators of price competitiveness are nor-
mally calculated as the weighted average of 
a country’s relative price or cost develop-ment compared with major trading part-ners. The Bundesbank regularly calculates 
and publishes such indicators for Germany. 
Both conceptually and in the calculation procedure used, the indicators are in line 
with the real effective exchange rates pub-lished by the European Central Bank for the euro.
1 The individual trading partners are in-
cluded in the indicators with time- variable trade weights, which are adjusted every 
three years to refl  ect changes in direct and 
indirect trade fl  ows.2 These regular adjust-
ments aim to take account of current devel-opments in foreign trade. The same applies 
to the most recent recalculation. Prior to 
the latest adjustment, the trade weights for all indicator series from 2010 onwards were 
based on the data from the years 2010 to 
2012.3 By contrast, the recalculated indica-
tor values applying from 2013 use weights 
derived from trade links prevailing between 2013 and 2015.The table on page 42 presents the recalcu-lated weights that are used to calculate the 
indicator of the German economy’s price competitiveness against a broad group of 56 trading partners. The weights for both 
the narrow and the medium- sized group of 
countries can be determined by rescaling 
the weights calculated for the broad group.4
The current weights deviate in some cases 
markedly from those of the previous period (basis 2010 to 2012), refl  ecting shifts in Ger-
many’s trading relations. For instance, the weight assigned to Germany’s trade rela-tions with China has increased further to 
currently 12%. In terms of the indicators of 
Germany’s price competitiveness against 
the medium- sized and the broad group of 
countries, China therefore still has the high-est trade weight of all of Germany’s trading 
partners. The relative share of the United States, which was declining over an ex-
tended period of time, has gone up to just 
under 8½%. Thus, for the fi  rst time since the 2001-03 reference period, it is again greater than the relative share for France, 
1 The calculation procedure is described in detail in 
M Schmitz, M de Clercq, M Fidora, B Lauro and C Pin-
heiro (2012), Revisiting the effective exchange rates of the euro, ECB Occasional Paper No 134. The most re-cent adjustments to the methodology may be found in 
Adjustments in the calculation of effective exchange 
rates and indicators of price competitiveness, Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August 2013, pp 50-52.
2 Direct trade fl  ows refer to direct bilateral trade be-
tween two given countries; in the case of indirect trade fl  ows, two countries compete against one an-other not just in their respective markets but on a 
global level.3 The most recent regular adjustments to the weights are collated in Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August 2015, p 40.4 Rescaling is achieved by proportionately distributing 
the weights of the countries which do not belong to 
the group of economies in question to the weights of the remaining countries.Price competitiveness of theGerman economy
1 Inverted scale: a rising curve (decline in values) indicates an 
increase in price competitiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1782
85
88
91
9497
1001031999 Q1 = 100, monthly, log scale 1
Indicator based on consumer price indices 
against 56 trading partners
old weights
new weightsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
41

Weighting scheme for the price competitiveness indicator of the German 
 economy against a broad group of 56 trading partners
In thousandths
Group of countries/countryUp to 
1997 11998-20002001-20032004-20062007-20092010-2012From 2013
2
Narrow group of countries 778.5 770.5 744.9 709.9 677.7 634.7 624.3
Belgium 55.5 48.2 52.3 56.4 56.2 49.3 46.1
Estonia 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1
Finland 10.7 11.3 11.2 11.1 10.6 8.0 8.0
France 113.1 107.8 100.8 93.6 89.3 83.7 80.6
Greece 4.7 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 3.1 2.6
Ireland 9.8 15.7 16.0 12.5 10.8 9.6 10.1
Italy 86.5 80.0 75.6 72.4 70.2 63.0 57.9
Latvia 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0
Lithuania 1.0 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.9 1.9 2.1
Luxembourg 3.5 3.1 3.7 4.1 4.2 3.3 3.4
Malta 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4
Netherlands 65.2 65.3 63.7 67.5 70.0 69.0 67.8
Austria 43.9 42.5 41.4 42.1 42.2 41.0 39.2
Portugal 10.7 10.6 9.7 7.9 7.1 6.5 6.7
Slovenia 5.1 4.8 4.5 4.5 5.1 5.0 5.2
Spain 35.9 37.3 38.1 39.5 38.1 32.7 32.2
Cyprus 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.2
Denmark 15.5 14.0 14.4 13.4 13.3 11.1 11.0
Sweden 22.8 21.3 19.6 20.9 20.1 19.1 17.9
United Kingdom 82.3 81.2 76.5 70.2 60.0 54.8 56.1
Norway 7.0 6.0 5.7 5.3 5.7 5.1 4.7
Switzerland 43.4 38.3 38.3 35.9 36.2 37.5 37.1
Slovakia 5.4 6.9 9.0 10.3 11.6 13.1 14.4
Japan 55.9 51.7 42.1 36.6 32.9 32.8 27.0
Canada 7.9 8.7 9.0 8.3 7.5 7.5 7.5
USA 90.9 108.0 104.7 88.6 77.3 75.0 84.0
Medium-sized group 121.6 134.8 161.0 190.3 217.7 250.4 265.6
Bulgaria 1.1 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.4 2.5 2.9
Croatia 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.1 1.6 1.7
Poland 18.5 21.8 25.0 27.0 33.4 35.5 39.6
Romania 4.0 4.3 5.4 7.0 8.7 9.8 11.4
Czech Republic 16.9 20.9 26.3 26.0 30.3 31.8 33.2
Hungary 10.9 16.6 18.9 19.4 18.6 17.4 19.6
China 26.6 31.7 45.3 65.2 84.9 110.8 117.4
Hong Kong SAR 11.5 10.3 10.1 10.4 9.3 10.4 10.9
Korea, Republic of 15.9 13.5 14.3 18.8 17.7 19.1 18.5
Singapore 9.6 8.7 8.4 8.5 6.5 7.2 6.6
Australia 4.1 3.6 3.6 3.7 3.8 4.3 3.8
Countries additionally included 
in broad group 99.9 94.7 94.1 99.8 104.6 114.9 110.1
Iceland 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.3
Israel 4.2 4.3 3.9 3.2 3.1 3.3 3.2
Russia 12.4 9.8 11.9 16.0 19.5 20.4 16.7
Turkey 14.0 13.4 13.3 16.1 16.1 17.7 18.8
Algeria 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.8
Morocco 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.6
South Africa 5.7 5.7 6.1 6.6 6.0 6.5 5.7
Argentina 2.1 1.9 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.1 1.8
Brazil 8.1 7.3 6.4 7.1 8.1 8.7 7.2
Chile 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.2 1.7
Mexico 4.9 7.5 7.9 7.5 7.9 8.5 9.2
Venezuela 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.3
India 7.6 6.3 6.8 8.6 11.1 13.3 12.7
Indonesia 5.6 4.3 4.1 3.4 3.4 4.0 3.9
Malaysia 7.3 6.7 6.6 6.2 5.8 6.7 6.7
Philippines 2.6 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.1 2.1 2.6
Taiwan 13.7 14.1 12.0 10.3 8.7 9.5 9.5
Thailand 6.6 5.3 5.4 5.2 5.6 6.3 6.7
New Zealand 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.7
Total1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
1 Basis 1995 to 1997. 2 Basis 2013 to 2015.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
42

whose trade weight when calculating the 
indicators was down slightly on the previ-
ous three- year period. The relative share for 
Italy has shown a somewhat stronger de-cline; for the fi  rst time, its trade weight in 
the broad group of countries now stands at 
below 6%. By contrast, the trade weights 
of the central and eastern European coun-
tries have increased slightly, with Poland’s 
relative share seeing the strongest growth. 
The relative share of Japan has contracted 
again, having also decreased compared 
with the previous baseline periods. It is now 
only around 2½%. There were no major changes in the weights assigned to the 
other Asian countries.
To summarise, in the underlying three years, 
the weight of Germany’s relative trade 
fl  ows shifted away from the large EU part-
ner countries and Japan to the central and eastern European EU countries as well as, in particular, to the United States and China.
The recalculated indicators based on the consumer price indices show the German economy as having a somewhat stronger price competitiveness than on the basis of  the old weighting (see the chart on 
page 41). This was partly due to the higher weight of both the United States and China, 
whose currencies have appreciated against 
the euro on balance –  in nominal and in 
real terms – since the end of 2012. On the other hand, Japan’s somewhat smaller rela-
tive share meant that the depreciation of the yen against the euro since the end of 2012 has had a less detrimental effect on Germany’s price competitiveness than would have been the case using the old 
weighting.
The recalculated indicator of price competi-
tiveness against 56 countries based on the 
consumer price indices now shows a virtu-
ally unchanged price competitiveness on balance for the period from December 2012 
to July 2017. By contrast, using the old 
weights as a basis would have produced a 
marginal deterioration of ½%. For the 
medium- sized and the narrow group of countries, too, the recalculated indicator shows that Germany’s price competitive-ness has developed somewhat more fa-
vourably since the end of 2012 than on the 
basis of the old indicator (on balance, by 
around ½ percentage point in each case).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
43

to Federal securities, which is reflected in the 
yields on short- term maturities.1
Spreads between long- term Bunds and govern -
ment bonds from the rest of the euro area have 
narrowed significantly. In the GDP- weighted 
average, the difference has fallen by 36 basis 
points to 84 basis points since the end of 
March. This was partially attributable to the in -
crease in yields in Germany – as well as in Aus -
tria and Slovakia – and a decline in yields in all 
the other countries of the euro area. The main 
reason for this was that the political risks in the 
euro area which had weighed on the markets 
in the first quarter did not materialise. In Italy, Eurosceptic parties performed worse than pre -
dicted in municipal elections, and in France, the 
outcome of the parliamentary election gives 
the newly elected President the possibility to 
implement a reform agenda. For Greece, a new 
tranche of rescue funds was approved in June, 
and in July the country successfully issued its 
first government bond in three years.
The average market- based inflation expect -
ations for the coming years in the euro area 
has risen across all maturities, particularly for 
short horizons. However, the flattening of the 
inflation curve accompanying this increase has 
led to a rise in the five-  year forward inflation 
rates in five years derived from inflation swaps 
of only 4 basis points, on balance, to 1.6%. The 
probability of deflation over the next five years 
based on options data stood at a multi-  year 
low in August.
Yields on ten- year US Treasuries have fallen by 
20 basis points to 2.2% since the end of March, 
amid considerable fluctuations. The increase in 
the interest rate corridor by 25 basis points to 
between 1% and 1.25% in June had been 
broadly expected and therefore had no direct 
impact on the yield development following the 
FOMC meeting. Nevertheless, the future path 
of the policy interest rates expected by the 
market shifted downwards, placing pressure on 
yields. In addition, the Federal Reserve outlined 
the start of a gradual shrinking of its balance 
sheet. The exact form that this will take is still 
unclear, however. Yield fluctuations on the US 
government bond market were additionally 
caused by differing statements by FOMC mem -
bers and persisting uncertainty about the im -Political risks in 
euro area have not materialised; yield spreads have narrowed significantlyRise in market- based inflation expectations, risk of deflation at lowest level for many years
US bond yields 
impacted by monetary and 
economic policyRepo rate and yield on short-dated 
Federal securities
1 Money market rate for overnight credit secured by German 
government bonds. Source: repofundsrate.com. 2 Yield on a 
two-year zero-coupon bond from the German yield curve.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20172.01.51.00.50
––––% pa, daily data
Repo rate 1
Two-year yield 2
Memo item
Deposit facility rate
– 4.9Yield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.4
––––++
Residual maturity in years17 August 2017
31 March 2017%
1 In contrast to the short- term yield on Federal securities, 
over the past year the yield on bonds of the same maturity 
issued by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) has 
hovered, with minor fluctuations, close to the deposit facil -
ity rate at its current level of -40 basis points. KfW has an 
explicit guarantee of the Federal Republic of Germany. Its 
bonds are therefore regarded as comparably default- free as 
Federal securities. The spread between KfW bonds and 
Bunds reflects the special advantages Bunds have in terms 
of tradability and on the derivatives market and is therefore 
a widely used liquidity measure.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
44

plementation of major projects of US economic 
policy.
Given the possibility of a tightening of monet -
ary policy in response to the strong pattern of 
inflation, the yield on ten- year UK government 
bonds rose at the end of June, in some cases 
significantly. In August, however, this trend was 
reversed when the Bank of England revised its 
economic projection downwards. By contrast, 
the outcome of the parliamentary election had 
no direct impact on yields. By the end of the 
reporting period, at 1.1%, the yield on ten- year 
government bonds stood 5 basis points below 
its level at the end of March. In Japan, the cen -
tral bank’s adherence to yield curve control en -
sured that yields on ten- year government 
bonds remained virtually unchanged at 0.1%.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
with a maturity of seven to ten years have con -
tinued to decrease since the end of March. 
Bonds issued by non- financial corporations re -
corded a decline of 10 basis points, delivering a 
yield of 1.4% as this report went to press, while 
yields on bonds issued by financial corporations 
fell by more than ½ a percentage point to 
2.1%. This downward trend was only briefly 
interrupted following the speech by the Presi -
dent of the ECB in Sintra, when yields in both 
corporate sectors temporarily rose by almost 
20 basis points within a matter of days. Overall, 
yield spreads in both the financial and non-  
financial corporate sector over German govern -
ment bonds nonetheless fell by 71 and 20 basis 
points respectively in the course of the report -
ing period. Compared with their five- year aver -
age, financing conditions for enterprises there -
fore remain highly favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
amounted to €265 billion in the second quarter 
of 2017 and was therefore well below its 
previous- quarter level (€333 billion). After de -
ducting redemptions and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, net sales of debt securities came to €12 
billion. In addition, foreign borrowers placed debt securities worth €18½ billion in the Ger -
man market. On balance, the total outstanding 
volume of bonds in Germany thus climbed by 
€30½ billion in the quarter under review.
The public sector issued bonds in the amount 
of €9½ billion net in the second quarter, com -Monetary policy 
also dominates bond market activity in the United Kingdom and Japan
Decline in yields 
on bonds issued 
by financial 
corporations 
Net issuance 
in the German bond marketForward inflation rates and expectations in the euro area
Sources: Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. 1 Derived from the fixed cash flow arising 
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual 
inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco) realised over the next five or ten years. Weekly averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017Five-year 
forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swaps 1%
1.21.41.61.82.0Consensus inflation expectations
in six to ten years
Spreads of ten-year government bonds over German Federal bonds
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 201702004006008001 000 1 0001 200 1 2001 400 1 4001 600 1 6001 800 1 800Basis points, daily data
Italy
SpainIreland Portugal
FranceGreeceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
45

pared to net redemptions totalling €3 billion 
one quarter earlier. These figures include issues 
by resolution agencies set up for German 
banks, which are ascribed to the public sector 
for statistical purposes. For its part, the Federal 
government mainly issued ten- year and 30-year 
bonds (for €13½ billion and €4½ billion re -
spectively). This contrasted with net redemp -
tions of Federal notes (Bobls) totalling €7 bil -
lion. In the quarter under review, state and 
local governments redeemed their own bonds 
to the tune of €½ billion net.
Domestic credit institutions continued the 
trend of the previous quarter by increasing 
their capital market borrowing by €8 billion 
(compared to €25½ billion in the first quarter). 
On balance, only debt securities of specialised 
credit institutions were placed in the market 
(€17 billion). This contrasted with net redemp -
tions of other bank debt securities which can 
be structured flexibly (€5½ billion), public 
Pfandbriefe (€3 billion) and mortgage Pfand -
briefe (€½ billion).
In the second quarter, domestic enterprises re -
deemed debt securities worth €5 billion net, 
compared with net issuance totalling €6½ in 
the previous quarter. These redemptions were 
predominantly attributable to other financial 
intermediaries (€3 billion) and insurers (€1½ bil -
lion), while non- financial corporations only 
redeemed  a very small volume of debt secur -
ities. All in all, the overwhelming majority of 
redemp tions made over this period consisted 
of bonds with an original maturity of more 
than one year.
The Bundesbank was the predominant buyer in 
the German bond market in the second quarter 
of 2017, adding a net €38½ billion worth of 
paper to its portfolio, mainly under the Euro -
system’s asset purchase programmes, and with 
a strong emphasis on domestic securities is -
sued by the public sector (€32 billion). Domes -
tic non- banks purchased debt securities (€7 bil -
lion), focusing primarily on foreign securities 
(€18 billion), and disposed of domestic instru -Increase in 
public  sector capital market debt
Net issuance 
by credit institutions 
Fall in 
enterprises ’ capital  market debt
Purchases of 
debt securitiesYield spreads of corporate bondsin the euro area
*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 66.2 60.0 32.1
Credit institutions – 19.7 – 20.8 – 13.6
of which
Foreign debt securities –  4.2 –  8.1 0.9
Deutsche Bundesbank 50.8 52.6 38.4
Other sectors 35.1 28.2 7.2
of which
Domestic debt securities 8.1 13.7 – 10.9
Non-residents – 26.6 – 22.4 –  1.4
SharesResidents 10.0 15.9 0.9
Credit institutions 1.9 2.1 3.1
of which
Domestic shares 0.8 0.5 6.7
Non-banks 8.2 13.8 –  2.2
of which
Domestic shares 5.1 8.0 –  3.2
Non-residents –  5.2 2.7 –  2.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 19.8 21.4 9.3
Investment in open-end funds 5.8 7.9 7.6
of which
Equity funds 0.8 1.4 1.1
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
46

ments (€11 billion). By contrast, domestic credit 
institutions and foreign investors offloaded 
bonds worth €13½ billion and €1½ billion net 
respectively.
For the most part, the international equity mar -
kets developed positively during the period 
under review. In particular, following price 
gains at the beginning of the year, US and Jap -
anese share prices continued to rise. Bolstered 
by favourable quarterly results and increased 
earnings expectations, the US S&P 500 index 
was up by a total of 2.8% on its end- of- March 
level, chalking up one all- time high after an -
other in the interim period. Notwithstanding 
this increase, valuations, as measured by the 
price/ earnings ratio, remained almost un -
changed, but they are still high when viewed in 
a multi- year comparison. At 4.2%, price gains 
on the Japanese Nikkei 225 were even higher, 
although the index initially posted significant 
losses in the period up to mid-  April. The British 
flagship FTSE 100 likewise recorded losses at 
the beginning of the second quarter, but it 
quickly recovered from this setback, going up 
by 0.9% overall in the reporting period. Devel -
opments in the euro area were even more sub -
dued. The broad Euro Stoxx index was not 
quite able to maintain the distinct price gains 
seen for a while and was up by 0.8% as this 
report went to press. The price/ earnings ratio 
has declined slightly, but remains above its 
average level of the past five years. The Ger -
man CDAX index was down by 1.1%, with 
sector- specific factors and probably also the 
strong euro playing a key role.
The negative share price movements in Ger -
many were chiefly attributable to the automo -
tive sector which, in international terms, consti -
tutes a relatively large share of the market as a 
whole. In addition to the diesel emissions scan -
dal, which has weighed on the entire sector, 
German enterprises have recently faced allega -
tions of running a cartel. Given the threat of 
fines and compensation claims, share prices of 
German car manufacturers have dropped, in 
some cases substantially.By contrast, the prospect of higher dividend 
payments and improved profitability in the 
medium  term meant that bank shares recorded 
broad gains on a global level. The increase in 
the price of bank shares on this side of the 
Atlantic  even exceeded the 1.2% gain seen in 
the United States. The UK banking sector re -
corded a 4.8% increase, while bank shares in 
the euro area were up by a total of 5.4%. 
Among the euro area countries, the prices of 
Portuguese, Italian and French bank shares 
went up by double- digit percentages. The main 
reason for this above- average performance is 
likely to be that, with the takeover and reso -Global equity 
markets post gains overall
Sector- specific 
factors: automotive  industry under pressure …… whereas bank shares buoyantEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Im-
plied equity risk premiums determined using dividend discount 
models  on  the  basis  of  earnings  and  dividend  expectations 
(I/B/E/S).
Deutsche BundesbankLin scaleRisk premiums on
the stock market
 1Bank indices
%
2015 2016 2017Beginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
Overall market indicesWeekly averages
60708090100110120130
48121690100110120130Euro area (Euro Stoxx 300)
United Kingdom (FTSE All-Share)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
total total
banks banksEuro Stoxx 300 S&P 500Euro area
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
47

lution of three banks in Spain and Italy, uncer -
tainty in the market was reduced.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
was muted in the second quarter. Domestic 
enter prises issued €1 billion worth of new 
shares. The outstanding volume of foreign 
equities in the German market dropped by 
€2½ billion in the same period. Equities were 
purchased by domestic credit institutions (€3 
billion) which shifted their focus from foreign 
to domestic shares on balance. By contrast, 
both domestic non- banks (€2 billion) and for -
eign investors (€2½ billion) sold domestic 
equity instruments.2
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €17 
billion, after raising funds totalling €29½ billion 
in the previous three- month period. Specialised 
funds reserved for institutional investors (€9½ 
billion) as well as retail funds (€7½ billion) saw 
fresh inflows of funds. Among the asset classes, 
mixed securities- based funds attracted the 
most inflows (€6½ billion), though equity funds 
and open- end real estate funds (€3 billion in 
each case) and funds of funds (€2½ billion) 
also sold new fund shares. Foreign funds traded 
in the German market attracted inflows total -
ling €4½ billion net in the second quarter of 
2017. Domestic non- banks were the main 
buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth €21½ 
billion to their portfolios. German credit institu -
tions purchased investment fund shares for 
€1½ billion, while foreign investors sold mutual 
fund shares worth €1½ billion.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €25½ billion 
in the second quarter of 2017, net capital 
exports  were likewise recorded in the field of 
direct investment; these amounted to €12½ 
billion.Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund shares
Direct 
investment  sees capital exportsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I Current account + 70.0 + 65.8 + 54.6
1 Goods 1 + 77.9 + 67.2 + 67.2
2 Services 2 –  4.0 –  3.3 –  4.1
3 Primary income +  0.6 + 15.9 +  4.2
4 Secondary income –  4.4 – 14.0 – 12.8
II Capital account +  1.1 +  0.5 +  0.0
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 62.6 + 64.4 + 61.5
1 Direct investment – 21.2 + 20.3 + 12.6
Domestic investment 
abroad +  6.1 + 49.0 + 22.6
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 27.3 + 28.7 + 10.0
2 Portfolio investment + 67.5 + 51.7 + 25.6
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 33.6 + 31.0 + 20.4
Shares
3 +  4.8 +  5.5 –  2.4
Investment fund shares 4+  8.0 + 16.9 +  4.4
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  1.3 +  6.3 –  4.4
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 25.6 +  5.3 + 19.1
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 17.2 +  6.0 + 13.1
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  4.7 +  3.2 –  0.6
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 33.9 – 20.8 –  5.2
Shares 3 –  5.6 +  1.5 –  2.4
Investment fund shares –  1.7 +  0.1 –  1.4
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 34.2 – 12.5 +  0.2
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 39.5 – 21.2 –  2.2
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  7.6 –  9.9 –  1.6
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  4.2 +  0.0 +  2.6
4 Other investment 10 + 11.5 –  7.3 + 20.3
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 – 30.1 – 35.0 –  7.7
Enterprises and  households
12 +  2.6 – 13.0 +  4.3
General government –  6.9 –  1.7 –  1.8
Bundesbank + 45.8 + 42.5 + 25.6
5 Reserve assets 13 +  0.8 –  0.4 +  0.4
IV Errors and omissions 14 –  8.5 –  1.9 +  6.9
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 For further details, see Direct investment on pp 48-49.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
48

Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises came to €22½ billion net in the period 
from April to June 2017, with domestic invest -
ors augmenting their equity capital by a total of 
€16 billion. This was achieved, in equal shares, 
by means of equity capital in the narrower 
sense and reinvested earnings (€8 billion in 
each case). German enterprises also stepped 
up their intra- group lending by €6½ billion. In 
this context, an increase in financial credits by 
€7½ billion contrasted with a decrease in trade 
credits in the amount of €1 billion. Countries 
receiving substantial direct investment from 
Germany in the second quarter of 2017 in -
cluded the Netherlands (€6½ billion), the United States (€3½ billion) and Luxembourg 
(€3 billion). By contrast, domestic enterprises 
disinvested in China to the tune of €2½ billion.
Non- resident enterprises boosted their invest -
ment in Germany in the months April to June 
2017 by €10 billion, relying exclusively on intra- 
group lending to do so. This mainly occurred 
on the back of loans from foreign subsidiaries 
to their German parent companies. In regional 
terms, German firms saw large- scale inflows 
from the Netherlands (€5½ billion) and the 
United Kingdom (€2 billion). By contrast, Italian 
investors withdrew capital from Germany (€2 
billion).German direct 
investment abroad
Foreign direct investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
49

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy continued to experience 
rapid growth in the second quarter of 2017. 
According to provisional data from the Federal 
Statistical Office, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the second quarter grew by a season -
ally and calendar adjusted 0.6% compared 
with 0.7% in the preceding three- month 
period.1 GDP growth was therefore much 
faster than potential output in both quarters 
and overall capacity utilisation, which was 
already  significantly above average, showed a 
further marked rise. Exceptionally upbeat senti -
ment among both enterprises and consumers 
along with the positive order situation in indus -
try suggests that the German economy is also 
likely to continue to grow with strong momen -
tum in the current quarter. The fairly brisk 
underlying pace of economic growth last year owing to buoyant domestic activity accelerated 
further towards the end of the period under 
review owing to a more favourable external 
environ ment. Overall, GDP growth in the cur -
rent year could even be somewhat stronger 
than expected in the June projection.2
As in the first quarter, the strong economic 
growth in the second quarter of 2017 was due 
mainly to the buoyant upturn in industry and 
construction. After some ups and downs last 
year, industrial output moved onto a clear 
growth path at the turn of the year. This also 
had a knock- on impact on business- related 
services  sectors, such as the wholesale trade 
sector. The boom in the construction sector 
continued and there was a further considerable 
increase in output.
Looking at demand, the recovery continued to 
be broadly based. Exports were still on the rise, 
mainly thanks to stimuli from the other euro 
area countries. In addition, there was a further 
expansion in investment in machinery and 
equipment. The fact that this overcame its sus -
tained period of sluggishness is probably due 
chiefly to increasing capacity utilisation in the 
industrial sector and the positive outlook for 
sales. Private consumption is also likely to have 
made a major contribution to growth in GDP .
Following their strong showing in the fourth 
quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017, 
German exports continued to grow at a some -
what slower pace in the second quarter. 
Accord ing to the figures available up to May, 
stimuli from the other euro area countries were German econ-
omy continued on strong growth path in Q2
Industry and construction as key drivers
Demand 
impulses broadly based
Further rise 
in exportsOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017102104106108110112114
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%
Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1
1 GDP growth was revised upwards by 0.1  percentage 
point in the first quarter of 2017. Following the usual mid- 
year revision of previous years’ data, GDP growth was 
revised  upwards by 0.3 percentage point in 2014 and by 
just under 0.1 percentage point in 2016.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Outlook for the German 
economy – macroeconomic projections for 2017 and 2018 
and an outlook for 2019, Monthly Report, June 2017, 
pp 11-27.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
50

a key factor in this. The ongoing and robust 
economic recovery in these countries was re -
flected in a considerably higher demand for 
German products. By contrast, growth in sales 
to non- euro area countries was comparatively 
modest. In terms of value, significantly more 
goods were exported, especially to central and 
east European countries, the United Kingdom, 
the OPEC countries and Japan. There was a 
marked fall in exports to the United States and 
China, however. German exporters’ trade with 
Russia was moving somewhat towards a nor -
mal level again following the quite significant 
rise in the previous quarter, but was still very 
strong compared with the final quarter of 
2016. This reflects the fact that the Russian 
economy has overcome its severe recession of 
recent years.
Private investment in machinery and equip -
ment appears to have recovered from last 
year’s cyclical lull and has taken on a some -
what brisker pace since the turn of the year. 
Enterprises are also likely to have significantly 
stepped up their investment in machinery and 
equipment in the second quarter of 2017. The 
value of sales of capital goods producers in 
Germany and capital goods imports both 
showed a further increase in the second quar -
ter. Furthermore, the higher number of motor 
vehicle registrations indicates that commercial 
owners have been building up their fleets sig -
nificantly. The greater amount of investment in 
machinery and equipment by enterprises is 
likely to have been due, above all, to the 
marked strengthening in industrial activity at 
the end of the period under review and the 
high and increasing level of capacity utilisation 
in manufacturing.
Construction investment, too, is likely to have 
risen again sharply in the second quarter of 
2017 on a broad front. The turnover figures for 
the main construction sector, which are avail -
able up to May, show that, along with the very 
dynamic activity in housing construction, com -
mercial non- residential construction and public 
sector construction picked up perceptibly.Private consumption is likely to have increased 
noticeably in the second quarter. Consumers 
were in an exceptionally positive spending 
mood owing to very high income and eco -
nomic expectations. Real retail sales (excluding 
motor vehicles) posted a sharp increase and 
thus rose considerably more strongly than in 
the previous quarters. All major categories of 
goods benefited from the buoyant consumer 
demand. Online shopping and mail order sales 
showed especially sharp growth. The signifi -
cant increase in trade in information and com -
munication technology (ICT) equipment also 
stood out given the already fairly substantial 
rise in the previous quarter. By contrast, there Investment in 
machinery and equipment on expansionary course
Construction 
investment still very buoyantPrivate consumption  benefited from buoyant con-sumer spending100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Apr-
May 100110120130
Apr-
May
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1110120130140
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
51

was a tailing- off in demand for motor vehicles. 
At all events, the number of private passenger 
car registrations decreased. It is not possible at 
present to say with any certainty how far this 
was due to uncertainty among buyers resulting 
from the diesel emission problems of a number 
of German car manufacturers, which was al -
ready increasingly being talked about in the 
second quarter. Measured by the total number 
of registrations, foreign group brands gained 
further market shares in Germany, thus con -
tinuing a trend that has been observable for 
roughly two years now.
Imports rose steeply in the second quarter of 
2017 after adjustment for seasonal variations. 
The increase was driven by strong domestic 
demand  as well as by the rise in exports, as the 
exported products contain a large share of im -
ported intermediate goods. In terms of value, 
the increase was not quite as sizeable. This was 
due to energy prices, which declined quite 
signifi cantly during the reporting period. In re -gional terms, non- euro area countries –  ac -
cording to the figures available up to May – 
benefited in particular from the strong demand 
for imports. By contrast, the sharp rise in im -
ports from the euro area witnessed in the pre -
vious quarter gradually levelled off. The value 
of imports of Chinese products, which rose 
quite considerably in the second quarter, stood 
out in particular. Japanese products were also 
sought after. Demand for goods from the 
United States was stagnating, however. Im -
ports from the United Kingdom failed to main -
tain their upward movement of the first quarter 
and even posted a marked decline. The value 
of imports from Russia also fell, probably as a 
result of the cheaper energy imports towards 
the end of the period under review.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output in Germany in the second 
quarter of 2017 was able to build on the 
marked increase in its pace of growth since the 
beginning of the year. In quarter- on- quarter 
terms, industrial output recorded a further 
sharp seasonally adjusted rise following the 
rather  muted increase of recent years. Manu -
facturers of computers, electronic and optical 
products benefited particularly strongly from 
the buoyant economic activity, while growth in 
the mechanical engineering sector tended to 
be modest. All in all, manufacturers of capital 
goods were able to expand their production by 
roughly the same amount as consumer goods 
manufacturers. The increase was somewhat 
higher still in the case of intermediate goods.
According to Ifo Institute data, the level of cap -
acity utilisation of tangible fixed assets in manu -
facturing, which was already higher than aver -
age, went up significantly and reached its high -
est level in almost a decade (86½%). Producers 
of capital goods reported a marked increase in 
capacity utilisation, whereas it declined slightly 
in the intermediate and consumer goods indus -
try.Import demand 
broadly basedStrong growth in industrial output
Further rise 
in industrial capacity  utilisation Output in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Industry
105110115
100105110115120125130135140
Construction1Main 
construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
52

The construction sector is still experiencing a 
boom. Construction output in the second quar -
ter of 2017 showed strong growth on the 
quarter after adjustment for seasonal vari -
ations. While output in the finishing trades 
contracted slightly, it showed very strong 
growth in the main construction sector. Here, 
building construction and civil engineering 
grew at similarly strong rates. According to the 
Federal Statistical Office, however, the high 
rate of growth in the main construction sector 
is to be seen against the backdrop of the ex -
ceptionally sharp expansion at the beginning of 
the year in the number of construction firms 
required to report, which also had a positive 
impact on the result of the second quarter.3
The services sectors are also likely to have ex -
panded again significantly overall in the second 
quarter. Price- adjusted wholesale sales in -
creased again sharply owing to buoyant indus -
trial activity. In line with this, the assessment of 
the business situation in this sector has, accord -
ing to the Ifo Institute, meanwhile reached its 
highest level since 1991. Retail trade (excluding 
motor vehicles) was also flourishing. By con -
trast, motor vehicle sales gained little momen -
tum. According to the figures available up to 
May, motor vehicle sales were down slightly 
following their fairy strong result in the previ -
ous quarter, whereas the number of new pas -
senger car registrations showed a further in -
crease. Other services, excluding trade, are 
likely to have undergone a marked expansion 
in the second quarter as well after their strong 
upward movement in the first quarter. Enter -
prises in these sectors recently rated their busi -
ness situation more positively than at any other 
time since records began.Boom in the 
construction sector still holding  strong
Services sector 
driven by strong industrial activity Demand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017100110120
–100+10+20
100110120
100110
Apr-
MayApr-
May
100110120130140
–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scaleYear-on-year change 
1Main construction orders%
%
3 Although the adjustment to the reporting group was 
already  made at the beginning of 2017, the fact that the 
increase in the number of hours worked, and thus also in 
output, is concentrated on February is – according to the 
Federal Statistical Office – “for technical reasons” resulting 
from the way that data are collected. For more informa -
tion, see Federal Statistical Office, Anpassungen beim 
Produktionsindex für das Bauhauptgewerbe, May 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
53

Labour market
In the second quarter, the situation in the 
labour  market remained very favourable. 
Employ  ment rose sharply, even though it was 
not possible to maintain the extremely rapid 
pace of growth seen in the final quarter of 
2016 and the first quarter of 2017. This positive 
development in employment continued to be 
driven mainly by the creation of new jobs sub -
ject to social security contributions. As in previ -
ous quarters, however, there was a contraction 
in the low- paid part- time employment segment 
as well as in the number of self- employed per -
sons. Registered unemployment fell signifi -
cantly in quarter- on- quarter terms. The outlook 
for the next few months remains upbeat.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany rose by 138,000, or 0.3%, in 
the second quarter of 2017. Although this in -
crease was still strong, it was nonetheless more 
moderate than in the first quarter (+0.5%). This 
is likely to have been due, at least in part, to 
the comparatively minor weather- related re -
strictions in the winter and the particularly early 
spring pick- up, which began as soon as the first 
quarter. Employment subject to social security 
contributions, which is the main driver of over -
all employment, was also growing more mod -
erately of late. According to initial estimates by 
the Federal Employment Agency for April and 
May, employment subject to social security 
contributions was 0.4% higher than the aver -
age of the winter months.
Employment growth was broadly based across 
all sectors. The only exceptions here were the 
financial and insurance industries, which are 
still undergoing a process of adjustment, and, 
over the past few months, also temporary 
agency employment. The latter could be a 
response  to legislative changes, as a number of 
amendments to the Act on Labour Leasing 
(Arbeitnehmerüberlassungsgesetz)  came into 
force on 1 April 2017. These included regula -
tions on the maximum period of labour leasing 
and the implementation of the equal pay prin -Labour market: 
situation and outlook still very buoyant
Gratifying rise 
in employment 
in Q2
Employment 
growth broadly based across sectorsLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017July41.542.042.543.043.544.044.5
28.529.029.530.030.531.031.532.00+500+1,000
2.53.03.5
–5000+500JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Apr-
MayMillion
Million400500600700Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change 1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
54

ciple.4 The legal provisions can, however, be 
modified by means of collective labour agree -
ments. Answering the question of the extent to 
which temporary agency work, as a particularly 
flexible labour market segment, will be ham -
pered by the new regulations will depend on 
how employment in this sector continues to 
develop. The greatest increase in jobs subject 
to social security contributions was in business- 
related services (excluding temporary agency 
employment) and in the health and social work 
sector, as well as in the information and com -
munication sector. By contrast, there was a 
rather   average increase in the manufacturing 
and construction sectors. In view of the favour -
able orders situation in these sectors, a lack of 
suitably qualified workers might possibly have 
been the reason why employment was not ex -
panded further.
Employment was supported throughout the 
report ing period by strong immigration. The 
number of non- German nationals in jobs sub -
ject to social security contributions rose by 
331,000 on the same month last year, which 
itself corresponds to almost half of the total in -
crease. The east European EU member states 
were still the most significant region of origin. 
There was also a substantial year- on- year rise 
of 50,000 in the number of employees subject 
to social security contributions from the eight 
most significant countries of origin of asylum 
seekers. This represented an increase of as 
much as 51% over the past 12 months.5
Registered unemployment fell significantly in 
the second quarter of 2017 in seasonally ad -
justed terms. On an average of the reporting 
period, the registered unemployment figure 
was 40,000 lower than in the first quarter. The 
unemployment rate contracted by as much as 
0.2 percentage point to 5.7%.6 The unemploy -
ment figure showed a further fall in July. The 
positive underlying cyclical trend is, however, 
masked somewhat by the fact that more per -
sons were registered as unemployed in the 
context of forced migration (+44,000 in July 
compared with the same month last year).According to the leading labour market indica -
tors, employment is likely to expand over the 
next few months to much the same extent as 
the period under review. The Ifo employment 
barometer and the labour market barometer of 
the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) 
both remain stable at a very high level, and the 
Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job index is 
climbing from one record high to another. This 
is mainly due to the rising number of reported 
vacancies for jobs subject to social security 
contributions, while the turnover in jobs tends 
to be stagnating or even declining. There has 
been a particularly strong increase in the num -
ber of vacancies in manufacturing and in 
business- related services. This is a further indi -
cation that it is the labour supply and not the 
demand for labour which is restricting employ -
ment growth in some sectors. The unemploy -
ment subcomponent of the IAB labour market 
barometer is still above the neutral threshold. 
The IAB expects that, in the coming months, 
refugees will enter the labour market in grow -
ing numbers after finishing their integration 
courses and that registered unemployment 
could thus show a smaller decline than that 
seen recently.7
Wages and prices
Notwithstanding the positive labour market 
situation and the favourable economic situ -Immigration 
supports employment growth
Further 
significant  decline in unemploymentPositive employment  
developments 
likely to 
continue , but 
decline in 
unemployment 
at a slower pace
4 With the legislative amendment, a maximum period of 
18 months was introduced for the leasing of labour to 
other firms, after which, temporary workers must be taken 
on as regular employees if they are to continue working for 
the firm. Moreover, after no later than nine months, tem -
porary workers are to receive the same salary as compar -
able regular employees.
5 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/ Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung (2017): Migrations- Monitor Arbeitsmarkt 
– Eckwerte Deutschland  (July). The Middle East countries of 
Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as the 
African countries of Eritrea, Nigeria and Somalia, are 
classed as being among the most significant countries of 
origin of asylum seekers.
6 One factor in this development was that the Federal 
Employ ment Agency adjusted the calculation of the un -
employment rate, as is usual in the second quarter, and, in 
this connection, the labour force in the denominator was 
increased significantly.
7 See the IAB press release of 27 July 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
55

ation, wage growth in the second quarter of 
the year remained moderate. In the second 
quarter of 2017, negotiated wage rates includ -
ing additional benefits and one- off payments 
were up by only 2.1% on the year and were 
thus distinctly weaker than in the first quarter. 
By contrast, after adjustment for special fac -
tors, the increase in basic negotiated rates of 
pay, at 2.4%, almost matched that in the previ -
ous quarter.8 What was striking in this context 
was the smaller growth in the services indus -
tries, which was clearly below the larger in -
crease in industry. Months with a pay freeze 
agreed in recent pay negotiations in the larger 
industries and the low phased increases deriv -
ing from agreements in the previous year are 
leaving their mark on wage dynamics in the 
services sector. The rise in actual earnings may 
have been somewhat more pronounced than 
the increase in negotiated rates of pay.
Recent pay agreements in the services sector 
do not point to distinctly stronger wage 
growth, either. The wage increases agreed in 
the wholesale sector and foreign trade as well 
as in the initial pay settlement in the retail sec -
tor were moderate at an annualised figure of 
just over 2%. It was only in the automotive in -
dustry that a somewhat stronger increase of 
just over 2½% was agreed.In the upcoming wage negotiations, most of 
which will affect the services sector, the social 
partners in some industries will not just be de -
liberating on higher wages, but also addressing 
other aspects such as the implications of digi -
talisation or enhanced arrangements for mak -
ing working hours more flexible. Such compon -
ents can increase labour costs directly or indir -
ectly but, viewed in isolation, are likely to at 
least dampen the agreed rise in negotiated 
wages.
The second quarter of 2017 saw a further rise 
in consumer prices as measured by the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). The 
quarter- on- quarter increase, at a seasonally ad -
justed 0.3%, was not as marked as in the pre -
vious quarter (0.5%), however. This was due 
chiefly to falling energy prices on the back of 
crude oil prices that were lower in euro terms. 
Moreover, there was no further increase in 
food prices. By contrast, prices excluding en -
ergy and food were accelerating more notice -
ably than before. The prices of services, in par -
ticular, were going up more strongly again, 
after upward pressure on prices had been 
eased somewhat at the beginning of the year 
by the latest reform of long- term care services. 
The continuing marked increase in rents played 
a part in this. Prices of industrial goods (exclud -
ing energy) were rising at roughly the same 
pace as in the first quarter. In this respect, there 
is likely to have been a time lag in the impact of 
the depreciation of the euro in the final quarter 
of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017.
The price differential, as measured by the HICP , 
narrowed overall from 1.9% to 1.6% in year-  
on- year terms.9 This was also due in part to a 
base effect arising from the steep rise in energy 
prices in the second quarter of 2016. If food 
and energy are excluded, however, the annual Only moderate 
wage growth in spite of very favour labour market
Wage 
agreements  with mainly moderate  wage growth so farWage bargain-ing also shaped by other components  in addition to pay
Significant rise in 
consumer prices 
excluding 
energy and food 
in Q2
Core inflation 
rate above long- term average in year- on- year termsNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding  additional  benefits  and  lump-sum  payments  (eg 
holiday pay, bonuses).
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay, total
Basic pay 1
H1
8 In arithmetical terms, one- off and special payments 
across much of the production sector in the second quarter 
of 2016 result in negative base effects in the annual rate of 
change for the second quarter of 2017.
9 The annual figure as measured by the national consumer 
price index (CPI) fell from +1.9% to +1.7%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
56

rate went up quite significantly from 1.0% to 
1.4%, which – given above- average aggregate 
capacity utilisation – was above its long- term 
average of 1.0%. The increase is likely to be 
slightly overstated as, unlike in 2016, Easter fell 
in the second quarter this year and there was a 
quite clear rise in the prices of clothing and 
footwear as well as travel services, which are 
often subject to strong fluctuations. Even if 
these volatile goods and services are excluded, 
however, the average rate of inflation at the 
end of the period under review was above its 
longer- term average.
After adjustment for seasonal variations, prices 
in July were clearly up on the month. The de -
cline in crude oil prices in June was still having 
a slight impact on consumer prices for energy. 
By contrast, food prices were going up again. 
Prices of industrial goods (excluding energy) 
were slightly up on the month and prices of 
services were, in fact, quite substantially higher 
than in the previous month on account of 
travel services. Annual inflation stood at 1.5% 
in June in terms of both headline inflation and 
inflation excluding energy and food.10
Headline inflation is likely to be characterised 
by volatility in the coming months, but the core 
rate is likely to accelerate gradually. This is 
mainly due to the very upbeat economic situ -
ation in Germany. Domestic producer prices for 
all goods excluding energy were increased in 
the second quarter, too. By contrast, foreign 
price pressure is likely to diminish. Import prices 
at the end of the period under review fell over -
all as well as when excluding energy. This re -
flects mainly the recent appreciation of the 
euro, which is likely to increasingly feed through 
to consumer prices in the period ahead.
Orders received and outlook
The strong economic growth in the German 
economy is expected to continue in the third 
quarter. Industrial output is likely to go on play -
ing a major role, sustained by a considerable expansion in exports. With sentiment in manu -
facturing at an all- time high, the robust orders 
situation and the large stock of orders that is 
still being processed suggest that industrial 
output will increase significantly in the current 
quarter, too. According to the Ifo Institute, the 
debate on imposing bans on older diesel cars in 
some German cities has so far had hardly any 
effect on sentiment among enterprises in the 
automotive sector. This may, however, also be 
due to the fact that the latest survey was al -
ready largely complete before the court in Further clear 
price rise in July
Core inflation 
likely to rise gradually in coming months
Economic 
activity  likely to 
remain buoyant in Q3Einfuhrpreise
Export pricesImport, export, producer and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201795100105110
100105110
95100105
0123
+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
%
July100105110
JulyImport prices
10 Annual headline CPI inflation rose from +1.6% to 
+1.7%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
57

Stuttgart backed the bans and before anti- trust 
complaints were made against a number of car 
manufacturers.11 It therefore remains to be 
seen how events unfold. The favourable sales 
outlook and increasing manufacturing capacity 
utilisation are also likely to ensure the continu -
ing buoyancy of business investment. Business- 
related services should likewise benefit from 
the ongoing favourable level of industrial activ -
ity. By contrast, after very strong growth of 
late, recent order book developments indicate 
that the construction sector might generate 
significantly fewer stimuli for aggregate eco -
nomic activity. The labour market environment 
and the outlook for consumers’ incomes should 
also remain favourable over the summer 
months, however, and continue to bolster pri -
vate consumption.
Sentiment in the German economy is distinctly 
ebullient. Enterprises estimate the current busi -
ness situation in particular as extremely favour -
able. In fact, the assessment of the current situ -
ation in both the manufacturing sector and the 
construction industry reached new record 
highs, according to the Ifo Institute. This was 
also the case for services excluding retail trade. 
Although business expectations fell short of 
their peak levels, they were nevertheless at a 
high level in all sectors. Furthermore, bearing in 
mind that the expectations are to be viewed in the context of the excellent business situation, 
the latest results suggest that the buoyant eco -
nomic activity will continue.
Industrial orders were also signalling a steep 
rise in economic output. In the second quarter 
of 2017, they were up significantly on the quar -
ter, although relatively few large orders were 
received. Excluding such orders, there was 
markedly stronger growth in the inflow of new 
orders. This new impetus is therefore likely to 
be felt in the near future. In regional terms, de -
mand from abroad was dominant. There was a 
strong inflow of orders from the euro area in 
particular. By contrast, the volume of orders 
from non- euro area countries suffered from a 
lack of large contracts and remained at the 
same level as in the previous quarter. Growth in 
domestic orders was relatively moderate, which 
meant that the extremely high level of the final 
quarter of 2016 was not yet exceeded again. 
Survey indicators also paint a favourable pic -
ture of the orders situation in German industry. 
According to the Ifo Institute, for example, the 
last time enterprises made such an optimistic 
assessment of their order books was in 2011. In 
line with this, the reach of the order books 
was, in fact, at its highest level for almost a 
decade.
The outlook for the construction sector is still 
more than averagely favourable for the third 
quarter of 2017, although this sector is likely to 
have made a smaller contribution to aggregate 
growth than in the recent past. In April and 
May – statistics are available up to then – new 
orders in the main construction area were con -
siderably down on the very strong first quarter 
of 2017. Major stimuli were provided only by 
public building construction. On the other 
hand, the inflow of orders in other areas, and 
particularly in residential construction, declined 
considerably. According to the Ifo Institute, 
there was also a contraction in the reach of the Ebullient 
sentiment  in German economy Quite substantial new orders despite  fewer large orders
Peak of the 
construction  boom reached?1991 95 00 05 10 15 172005 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100105110115120125Business situation and expectations for trade and industry
*
Source: Ifo Institute. * Includes the manufacturing, main con-
struction and wholesale and retail trade sectors.
Deutsche BundesbankSituation
Expectations
11 See the Ifo Institute, ifo Konjunktur- Perspektiven, July 
2017, p 1.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
58

order books in the main construction sector to 
roughly the level seen in mid-2016.
Private consumption is likely to have remained 
a sound pillar of the economy in the third quar -
ter, too. In the light of the favourable labour 
market environment and continuing positive in -
come growth, households’ spending is likely to have risen in the third quarter of 2017 as well. 
According to the consumer climate index of 
the Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK), 
consumer sentiment is at its highest level for 
one- and- a- half decades. Despite the recent 
more intense debate on pollution from older 
diesel car emissions, consumers’ propensity to 
purchase is also not far from its record level.Consumption 
likely to be sound pillar of economy  in third quarter, tooDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
59

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances are continuing to 
benefit from the highly favourable underlying 
economic conditions. As a result, a marked sur -
plus is expected once again this year in spite of 
various burdens (2016: 0.8% of gross domestic 
product (GDP)). On the one hand, positive eco -
nomic developments are easing the strain on 
public coffers, while the extremely favourable 
financing conditions at all levels of government 
are causing interest expenditure to fall further. 
On the other hand, the nuclear fuel tax repay -
ments to be made in line with a Federal Consti -
tutional Court ruling are having a negative im -
pact.1 Furthermore, the fiscal policy stance is 
expansionary on the whole. Additional funding 
has been earmarked for areas such as infra -
structure, the armed forces and long- term care, 
in particular. Spending on pensions and health -
care is likewise set to rise relatively sharply. On 
the revenue side, favourable tax developments 
are on the horizon – despite the slight damp -
ening effect of the income tax cut. In addition, 
the raising of the contribution rate to the long- 
term care insurance scheme is generating add -
itional receipts, which are to be used to finance 
a large part of the benefit increases introduced 
under the latest long- term care reform. All in 
all, the tax and social contributions ratio looks 
set to increase further. The debt ratio fell in the 
first quarter of 2017 to 66.9% (end-2016: 
68.3%). In view of the surpluses recorded by 
central, state and local government and of 
nominal GDP growth in the ratio’s denomin -
ator, it will probably maintain its downward 
trajectory.2
As things currently stand, the setting for Ger -
man public finances will remain favourable in 
the medium term. Provided there is no change 
in policy, further sizeable surpluses are to be 
expected, and the debt ratio could fall back 
below the 60% threshold in 2019. That said, 
many of the measures being discussed in the run- up to the German general election would 
put pressure on the budget.
In principle, moderate structural surpluses seem 
entirely appropriate for Germany. The debt 
ratio is still high, and the financial burdens that 
are set to arise from demographic develop -
ments – particularly in the areas of pensions 
and long- term care, but also healthcare – will 
have an impact on public finances in the future 
and will need to be addressed. These effects 
will remain limited in the medium term, with 
the economic situation and highly favourable 
interest rate level bringing about a temporary 
period of calm. However, it is precisely in good 
times that long- term challenges should be kept 
in mind. Most of these burdens will not materi -
alise until some years down the road when the 
baby boomer generation retires from the 
labour  force. It is therefore important when 
assess ing public finances or pension issues to 
take into account significantly longer time hori -
zons.3
It is also recommended that central and state 
government draw up budgets that factor in 
safety margins below the budget ceiling de -Surplus again 
this year despite burdens, …
… and debt 
ratio continues to fall
Current fiscal 
policy stance to lead to sizeable surpluses even in medium term, yet budget- consuming measures under discussionModerate structural  sur-pluses helping to address demographic developments and …
… improve 
resilience of 
public finances
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting 
on the budgets of central, state and local government and 
of the social security funds pursuant to available data is 
based on the figures as defined in the government finance 
statistics (which are generally in line with the budget ac -
counts).
1 See p 61f. Tax refunds owing to court rulings, and the 
interest that goes with them, are recorded in the national 
accounts as spending (capital transfers); however, in the 
government finance statistics, these payments are de -
ducted from tax revenue. Temporary burdens could also 
arise, in particular, in connection with the remaining state 
government guarantees issued for HSH Nordbank (roughly 
€8 billion).
2 Generally speaking, there is uncertainty surrounding the 
further portfolio reduction and scaling- back of correspond -
ing liabilities at government- owned bad banks. As in the 
past few quarters, developments could be volatile due, 
inter alia, to increases or reductions in cash collateral in 
connection with derivatives transactions.
3 For example, the time horizon in current sustainability 
reports runs until 2060.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
60

fined by the debt brake. Moderate structural 
surpluses provide leeway, making it possible to 
take account of unexpectedly adverse budget -
ary developments. As a result, there is no need 
to resort to adopting short- term and, where 
appropriate, procyclical consolidation measures 
or to relaxing the debt brake, which would 
compromise its effectiveness and credibility. 
The current low- interest- rate environment is 
taking considerable pressure off those state 
and local governments with very high levels of 
debt, in particular. However, the current highly 
favourable financing conditions and the result -
ing relatively low interest expenditure should 
not obscure the fact that high debt levels will 
place a strain on future budgets. To this end, a 
more ambitious fiscal policy stance is particu -
larly warranted, not least so as to be equipped 
to deal with interest rates returning to normal.4
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
The year- on- year decline in tax revenue5 came 
to ½% in the second quarter of 2017 (see the 
chart above and the table on page 62). The de -
cline is due to the fact that, following a ruling 
by the Federal Constitutional Court,6 central 
government was required to repay the €6½ bil -
lion collected in nuclear fuel tax payments since 
2011 to the operators of nuclear power plants. 
Without these repayments, revenue would 
have risen by 3%. At 6½%, growth in wage tax 
receipts was considerable, though the income 
tax cut at the start of the year had a slightly 
dampening effect. On the other hand, the rate 
of growth was elevated by the fact that child 
benefit, which is deducted from revenue, rose 
only moderately. Growth in assessed profit-  
related taxes remained buoyant. Receipts from 
withholding tax on interest income and capital 
gains were up significantly, which is likely to be 
mainly attributable to capital gains. By contrast, 
revenue from non- assessed taxes on earnings, the main component of which is investment in -
come tax payments on dividends, decreased 
considerably. However, this appears to be 
linked to some extent to dividend payments, 
which are now made later over the course of 
the year, meaning that a turnaround can be ex -
pected by the end of the year. Turnover tax rev -
enue, which is quite volatile per se,  increased 
by a rather modest 3%. While tobacco tax re -
ceipts decreased, this was probably largely 
driven by a (temporary) revenue- boosting one- 
off effect in the same period a year earlier.7
According to the official tax estimate from May, 
tax revenue (including local government taxes) 
is expected to rise by 4% in 2017 as a whole. 
Adjusted for the aforementioned ruling by the 
Federal Constitutional Court on nuclear fuel Slight decline 
in tax revenue in Q2 due to nuclear fuel tax repaymentsGrowth of 3% expected for 2017 as a whole even in face of nuclear fuel tax repaymentsTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of govern -
ment interest expenditure in Germany and other euro area 
countries, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp 33-68.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
6 See Federal Constitutional Court, Order of the Second 
Senate of 13 April 2017 (2 BvL 6/ 13). The order was pub -
lished on 7 June 2017.
7 The entry into force on 20 May 2016 of the Regulation 
Governing the Implementation of the EU Tobacco Products 
Directive (Verordnung zur Umsetzung der Richtlinie über 
Tabakerzeugnisse) is likely to have increased tax revenue in 
the first half of 2016 before lowering it in the second half 
of 2016. Pursuant to the regulation, measures to be taken 
include putting images of diseases caused by smoking on 
packaging.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
61

tax,8 which was not published until after the 
tax estimate had been prepared, this corres -
ponds to an increase of 3%. It is assumed here 
that profit- related taxes will rise significantly, 
and at a greater rate than could be expected 
solely on the basis of macroeconomic assump -
tions and the financial impact of legislative 
changes and court rulings. This was also ob -
served for the first half of the year, at least. By 
contrast, projected growth will be curtailed by 
further, greater tax refunds owing to court rul -
ings, some of which were made some time 
ago. Repayments are expected later in the year 
and primarily concern revenue from profit-  
related taxes.9
Central government budget
Central government recorded a surplus of only 
€1½ billion in the second quarter of 2017 com -
pared with €14 billion a year earlier. Revenue 
fell considerably (by 7%, or -€6 billion). This was mainly due to the nuclear fuel tax repay -
ments (see page 61). In addition, the deduc -
tions for transfers to the EU budget were up on 
the year by €1½ billion. At the same time, total 
expenditure rose sharply (by 8½%, or +€6½ 
billion). The largest expenditure increase was 
recorded for higher transfers (+€3 billion), par -
Surplus largely 
depleted in Q2, primarily owing to nuclear fuel tax repaymentsTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2017 1,2Q2
2016 2017 2016 2017
Year-on-year changeYear-on-
year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 317.0 326.4 + 9.4 +  3.0 + 2.9 162.1 161.0 – 1.1 –  0.7
of which
Wage tax 87.9 93.6 + 5.7 +  6.5 + 5.1 45.3 48.3 + 2.9 +  6.5
Profi  t-related taxes 3 57.4 61.6 + 4.2 +  7.4 + 3.7 29.2 29.9 + 0.7 +  2.6
Assessed income tax 27.5 31.8 + 4.3 + 15.7 + 6.8 12.9 14.8 + 1.9 + 14.5
Corporation tax 15.8 16.4 + 0.6 +  3.9 – 1.3 7.3 7.9 + 0.5 +  7.4
Investment income 
tax4 14.1 13.4 – 0.7 –  5.1 + 2.4 8.9 7.2 – 1.7 – 18.9
Turnover taxes 5 107.1 111.7 + 4.6 +  4.3 + 4.8 52.7 54.2 + 1.5 +  2.9
Other consumption-  
related  taxes641.3 42.0 + 0.7 +  1.6 + 0.8 21.9 22.1 + 0.1 +  0.7
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2017, adjusted for nuclear 
fuel tax repayments. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. Nuclear fuel tax repayments are included here for 2017. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, 
electricity, spirits, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer, fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 Interest payments will also be made to the operators in 
this connection in future, but the amount of these pay -
ments is not yet known. These are not taken into account 
here. However, including them is not likely to paint a very 
different picture. Another factor not taken into consider -
ation is that the payments to the enterprises – and, where 
appropriate, additional dividend payments – are subject to 
profit- related taxes, which are deducted with a time lag in 
some cases. The original nuclear fuel tax payments were 
deductible from their assessment bases. It thus stands to 
reason that the net burden on government coffers will 
shrink in future.
9 For the impact of the court rulings on the tax estimate, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Re -
port, May 2017, p  63. Unlike the cash receipt develop -
ments described here, the impact of these court rulings is 
recorded in the national accounts at the time of each ruling 
as increasing expenditure rather than being deducted from 
tax revenue. The burden is therefore distributed over 
several  years (2011 and 2013 to 2017) in the national 
accounts , with tax revenue rising at a significantly sharper 
rate this year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
62

ticularly to the social security funds (most not -
ably the statutory pension insurance scheme) 
and state governments. Transfers to the latter 
include central government’s increased contri -
bution to accommodation costs for recipients 
of unemployment benefit II (means- tested 
benefit), which is to be passed on to local gov -
ernment. However, spending on unemploy -
ment benefit II itself was up significantly (by 
6%, or +€½ billion). This is largely due to the 
growing number of refugees who are now eli -
gible for basic allowance benefits, which are 
financed by central government. Another sig -
nificant item was the €1½ billion increase in 
interest expenditure. Of particular note in this 
regard were rapidly declining premiums,10 
which nevertheless reached an amount of just 
over €1 billion, and higher payments to the 
precautionary fund for inflation- linked Federal 
securities.
In the first half of the year, the central govern -
ment budget therefore recorded a surplus of 
€5 billion, which fell significantly short of the 
€11½ billion surplus recorded a year earlier. For 
the year as a whole, however, a deficit of €7 
billion is budgeted, amounting to a deterior -
ation of €13 billion on the actual figure for 
2016. Compared with the budget estimates, 
there will be revenue shortfalls as a result of 
the ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court 
on nuclear fuel tax (€6½ billion plus interest) 
and of a €2 billion drop in the Bundesbank’s 
profit. In addition, the budget plan still contains 
a €3 billion global cut in expenditure. However, 
more favourable fundamental tax develop -
ments are expected (+€7 billion on the basis of 
the May tax estimate), and several further im -
provements vis- à- vis the budget estimates are 
on the horizon. All things considered, the cen -
tral government budget is expected to develop 
more favourably than planned, despite the 
negative effects described here. The deficit and 
withdrawal from the reserve in order to achieve 
a “black zero”, ie a balanced budget without 
net borrowing, are thus likely to be lower than 
the estimated €7 billion (see the table on 
page 65).11In addition to the result recorded for the cen -
tral government budget, the deficits of three 
off- budget entities – the flood relief fund, the 
fund to promote municipal investment, and the 
energy and climate fund – are taken into ac -
count in the context of the debt brake. The 
total of their deficits is likely to be somewhat 
lower than the estimated €3 billion, and, over -
all, the central government budget looks set to 
safely comply with the debt brake limit for the 
structural balance of -0.35% of GDP (-€10½ 
billion). This remains the case when – in con -
trast to the Federal Ministry of Finance’s ap -
proach – looking at the financial balance (def -
icit) of the core budget rather than borrowing. 
As it is currently implemented, the option under 
the national debt brake of central government General govern-
ment deficit, and thus recourse to reserve, for year as a whole probably lower than plannedDissolution of reserve to pay down debt advisableCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4105051015
––+++
–10–50+5+10+15
201720162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201520172016€ billion
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Distortive accounting of 
premiums and discounts in the Federal budget, Monthly 
Report, July 2017, pp 43-44.
11 Forming and dissolving reserves has no effect on the 
balance of revenue and expenditure (ie surplus or deficit). 
However, in the event of an existing deficit, it is possible to 
avoid borrowing by dissolving reserves.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
63

(and some state governments) of complying 
with fiscal rules by dissolving reserves is a sig -
nificant deviation from the European rules. As 
the national rules should, not least, ensure 
compliance with European requirements, this 
inconsistency gives cause for concern. For ex -
ample, it may give rise to a situation in which 
compliance with the limits set under national 
debt brakes is accompanied by non- compliance  
with European rules. Against this background, 
but also because it is clear that expenditure re -
lating to refugee immigration can be financed 
without – as was originally intended – making 
use of the reserve, it would make sense to dis -
solve the reserve to pay down debt in the 
budget.12 As a general rule, the Stability Coun -
cil (in which central government and all state 
governments are represented) reviews compli -
ance with the European rules on the general 
government deficit. It is important that detailed 
information on budgetary developments at the 
level of both central government (and the 
social   security funds) as well as individual 
state governments (and the sum of their local 
authorities) are available, together with the 
corresponding plans. In this way, the Stability 
Council can also identify risks relating to com -
pliance with the European rules at an early 
stage – risks that, in spite of compliance with 
the debt brake requirements, can result, inter 
alia, from differences in the treatment of re -
serve withdrawals or premiums – and initiate 
the necessary budgetary adjustments.
At the end of June, the Federal Cabinet adopted 
a draft budget for 2018. This is likely to be re -
vised when the new government takes up of -
fice following the general election in Septem -
ber, but is probably the starting point for fur -
ther planning. Once again, the budget contains 
no net borrowing. In particular, expenditure for 
the broadly rule- based payments to the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme, but also for the 
financing of the energy and climate fund and 
the military, is set to increase distinctly. Further -
more, interest expenditure is expected to rise 
(+€2½ billion) – mainly to provide for later final 
payments for inflation- indexed Federal secur -ities. On the revenue side, growth in tax rev -
enue is to be subdued as transfers to the EU 
budget are estimated to be much higher, and 
additional tax revenue is assigned  to the state 
and local governments on a lasting basis as 
part of the €5 billion municipal relief package. 
As in the 2017 budget, the Bundesbank’s profit 
is forecast to be €2½ billion, with the Bundes -
bank announcing burdens resulting from fur -
ther risk provisioning. The estimated global rev -
enue shortfall of just over €2 billion may repre -
sent a certain amount of provisioning, as long 
as this is not used to cover other imminent bur -
dens, such as the lump-  sum refugee payment 
to the federal states (2017: just over €1 billion). 
After factoring in a global spending cut of €4 
billion, which eases the budgetary burden, €8 
billion is to be withdrawn from the refugee re -
serve. After deduction of coin seigniorage, 
therefore, the draft budget contains a deficit of 
€8½ billion (see the table on page 65).
The debt brake limits the structural result for 
2018 to -€11 billion. The Federal Ministry of 
Finance  is basing its budgetary plans on a net 
borrowing of €0 for the core budget and a 
total deficit of €2½ billion for the relevant off- 
budget entities. A small revenue surplus (€½ 
billion) is envisaged for financial transactions 
(which are to be factored out of the calcula -
tions). Applying an approach where the cyclical 
impact is taken to be negative increases (im -
proves) the structural balance, thus leaving lee -
way of just over €8 billion to the upper limit 
overall. If instead of net borrowing, the deficit 
of the core budget were included in the calcu -
lations (meaning that withdrawals from the re -
serve, in particular, were not included), there 
would no longer be any leeway. Furthermore, 
the economic situation in the coming year, es -
pecially also in light of the low unemployment 
rate, is generally being classified as good and 
budget- relieving, rather than as a burden on 
public finances. It would thus appear more ap -
propriate to figure in cyclical relief for the cen -2018 draft 
budget: recourse to refugee reserve masks planned deficitEstimated cyclical  budgetary  burden  unconvincing 
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Re -
port, May 2017, p 65.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
64

tral government budget. Based on the budget 
estimates presented, the structural deficit 
would therefore exceed the upper limit of €11 
billion. However, actual budgetary develop -
ments in some areas are likely to be better than 
estimated in the draft budget, meaning that all 
in all, from today’s perspective, the deficit 
would still remain under the upper limit, even if 
this line of thought is followed. Nevertheless, 
the gap would be significantly lower than indi -
cated in the draft budget.
The medium- term fiscal plan for 2019 to 2021 
retains a balanced budget. Taking this and the 
remainder of €4 billion in the refugee reserve 
into account, the Federal Ministry of Finance 
indicates that there is room for manoeuvre 
(global revenue shortfalls) in the amount of €15 
billion in cumulative terms. No concrete policy 
intentions for these funds have yet been estab -
lished in the plans for the period after the elec -
tion. Measures such as tax cuts or higher trans -
fers to expand benefits in the statutory pension insurance scheme are being mooted in the 
election campaign. There have also been hints 
at NATO agreements regarding increased de -
fence expenditure. However, the favourable 
economic situation and the very advantageous 
financing costs underlying the plans continue 
to ease the pressure on the budget. This puts 
the aim of no net borrowing into perspective. 
Furthermore, moderate structural surpluses still 
seem sensible. In addition to remaining within 
a safety margin to the debt brake budget limit, 
fiscal policy would then be making provisions 
for gradually emerging demographic burdens 
and a possible increase in capital market rates.
In the second quarter of 2017, as in the previ -
ous year, a net surplus of €2 billion was re -
ported for central government’s off-  budget 
entities  covered by the Federal Ministry of 
Finance ’s quarterly overviews (excluding, in 
particular, bad banks and other entities keeping 
commercial accounts). Significantly increased 
central government transfers to the precaution -No net borrow-
ing in fiscal plan up to 2021, but post- election intentions disregarded Off- budget entities record unchanged result in Q2 …Central government’s medium-term fi  scal planning for 2017 to 2021 and structural net borrowing under the debt brake
€ billion
ItemActual
2015Actual2016Target2017Draft2018Fiscal plan
2019 2020 2021
Expenditure
1 311.4 317.1 329.1 337.5 348.2 349.4 356.8
of which
Investment 29.6 33.2 36.1 36.4 37.1 32.6 33.0
Revenue 1, 2 311.4 317.1 329.1 337.5 348.2 349.4 356.8
of which
Tax revenue 1 281.7 289.0 301.0 308.8 321.8 327.1 341.6
Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) – – – – – – –
Transfers to (–)/withdrawals from (+) reserves – 12.1 –  6.5 6.7 8.2 3.8 – –
Fiscal balance 3 11.8 6.2 –  7.0 –  8.4 –  4.1 –  0.3 –  0.3
Cyclical component 4 –  2.5 –  0.0 –  1.6 –  0.4 –  0.2 0.0 0.0
Balance of fi  nancial transactions 1.9 0.6 –  0.7 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.9
Balance of relevant off- budget entities
Energy and climate fund 1.9 0.0 –  1.5 –  0.3 . . .
Relief fund (2013 fl  ood) –  0.9 –  2.3 –  1.0 –  0.8 . . .
Fund to promote municipal investment 3.5 3.4 –  0.8 –  1.4 . . .
Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 5 5.1 0.4 –  0.9 –  2.8 . . .
Structural fi  scal balance 5 16.9 6.6 –  8.0 – 11.2 . . .
Memo item
Ceiling – 18.6 – 10.2 – 10.6 – 11.0 – 11.3 – 11.7 – 12.0
1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation assistance to Federal states from 2011, including transfers to/withdrawals from reserves. 2 Includ-ing coin seigniorage. 3 Corresponds to the difference between the revenue and expenditure of the core budget as defi  ned in the govern-
ment fi  nance statistics and equals net borrowing/repayment less transfers to/withdrawals from reserves and less coin seigniorage. 4 Not-
withstanding legal requirements, data for all years taken from the Federal Government’s 2017 spring forecast. 5 Meaning of structural: plus the balance of relevant off- budget entities less the cyclical component and less the balance of fi  nancial transactions.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
65

ary fund for final payments for inflation- indexed 
Federal securities offset the absence of a repay -
ment to the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund. 
At the beginning of the second half of the year, 
the operating companies of nuclear power 
plants in Germany made a one- off payment of 
€24 billion to a newly established state fund, 
which will consequently assume the permanent 
burdens arising from the disposal of nuclear 
waste. Against this background, a one- off very 
high overall surplus is expected for the year as 
a whole, taking into account all the off- budget 
entities of central government.13 However, for 
the entities covered thus far in the quarterly re -
ports, the surplus might be only slightly up on 
the year (2016: +€½ billion). In 2016, the retro -
active forwarding of revenue from the Euro -
pean bank levy burdened the budget, and the 
flood relief fund paid back €1½ billion to the 
central government budget. Additionally, there 
was an inflation- indexed bond to be repaid last 
year, and central government transfers to the 
precautionary fund for final payments for inflation- indexed Federal securities are pushed 
up by inflation. In contrast to last year, how -
ever, no further revenue is likely to be produced 
by topping up the fund to promote municipal 
investment or repaying bank aid at the current 
juncture.
State government budgets14
After a strong start to the year, the surplus in 
the state government budgets decreased by €2 
billion on the year in the second quarter of 
2017 to €2½ billion. Revenue rose by only 3% 
(just over €2½ billion), which was primarily due 
to the significantly subdued increase in tax re -
ceipts (+3½%, or just over €2 billion). However, 
at 5½% (just over €4½ billion), expenditure 
rose at a considerably stronger pace than rev -
enue. Personnel costs increased steeply by just 
over 5%. In addition to the rapid rise in civil 
servants’ pension benefits, the wage agree -
ment in spring and adjustments to civil ser -
vants’ pay rates, in particular, were responsible 
for this. Substantial growth was also recorded 
for investment expenditure (+8½%). By con -
trast, interest expenditure and other operating 
expenditure, which was exceptionally high in 
the previous year as a result of the additional 
refugee- related expenditure, continued to de -
cline (by around -8% in both cases).
As the year progresses, the growth in tax rev -
enue is expected to slow down once more due 
to the lagged effects of previous court rulings, 
while the growth in other operating expend -
iture should return to normal. Viewed as a 
whole, however, following the very favourable 
development at the beginning of the year, only 
a limited decline in the surplus is to be ex -
pected for 2017 as whole (2016: €9 billion). As … and only 
slightly higher surplus for year as whole, excluding nuclear waste disposal payments Declining surplus  in Q2 amidst large increase in expenditure
Further surpluses expected this year and in the medium termState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
0246810
2017
20162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20152017
2016€ billion
13 Nevertheless, this inpayment, which is counterbalanced 
by the assumption of future burdens, retains a neutral bal -
ance effect in the national accounts.
14 The development of local government finances in the 
first quarter of 2017 was analysed in the short article of the 
July 2017 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data 
available. The data on state government budgets are based 
on the monthly cash statistics on the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
66

was the case last year, this situation contrasts 
with the plans of state governments, which 
currently envisage a deficit of €5½ billion, not 
least due to earlier less favourable tax esti -
mates. In the absence of any substantial policy 
changes and on the basis of the tax estimate 
from May of this year, further surpluses can be 
expected in the years to come. From 2020, the 
state governments will then profit from add -
itional central government transfers as part of 
the reformed financial equalisation scheme. 
Given the favourable starting position and in -
creased central government transfers, consider -
ably increased investments can be expected.
Against the backdrop of an overall positive pic -
ture, the Stability Council established at its June 
meeting that all recipient federal states had ful -
filled the requirements for the granting of con -
solidation assistance in 2016. However, Bremen 
and Saarland only undershot the established 
respective deficit ceilings by a small margin. 
The budgetary recovery procedures15 for Berlin 
and Schleswig- Holstein were successfully com -
pleted. Nevertheless, additional consolidation 
measures are still deemed necessary for Bremen 
and Saarland, and an extension of the recovery 
procedure to the end of 2020 is planned. Under 
the reform of federal financial relations, Bremen 
and Saarland are each to receive budgetary re -
covery assistance from central government to 
the tune of €400 million on an annual basis 
from 2020 onwards. However, the repayment 
obligations for these payments are relatively 
reasonable in comparative terms.16
Social security funds17
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a surplus of just under €1 billion in the 
second quarter of 2017, which nearly matched 
the previous year’s level. Revenue continued to 
rise steeply at 4½% on the year. This was 
largely attributable to the ongoing favourable wage and employment developments, but also 
to the removal of a reduction factor in the cen -
tral government grant. Expenditure increased 
by just under 5%. This was mainly due to the 
high pension increase in the middle of last year 
(by 4.25% in western Germany and 5.95% in 
eastern Germany).
In comparison with the first half of the year, 
considerably smaller increases in expenditure 
are to be expected in the remainder of the 
year, with a continued stable rise in revenue. A 
distinctly lower deficit than in the previous year 
(2016: just over €2 billion) is therefore on the 
cards for the year as a whole. This is largely at -
tributable to the removal of the reduction fac -
tor (just over €1 billion) in the central govern -
ment grant mentioned above. Furthermore, 
growth in contribution receipts could be some -
what higher than that of pension expenditure. 
As in the previous year, annual average pension 
growth stands at 3½%.18 However, since the 
number of pensions is rising somewhat more Stability Council 
plans to extend budgetary recovery proced-ures for Bremen and Saarland
Surplus broadly 
unchanged in Q2Interim peak in 
statutory pen-
sion insurance 
scheme, but 
high demo-
graphic burdens 
in the longer 
term
15 In the context of regular fiscal surveillance, budgetary 
recovery procedures were initiated from 2012 for federal 
states deemed to be at risk of budgetary hardship. With 
the exception of Saxony-  Anhalt, this affected the federal 
states in receipt of consolidation assistance. The recovery 
programmes, which in principle last five years and which 
do not involve financial assistance, are assessed by the Sta -
bility Council on a regular basis.
16 Pursuant to section 2 (2) of the budgetary recovery as -
sistance law, these federal states are committed to redu -
cing their debt levels. To this end, they are, in principle, 
committed to (1) repaying debts amounting to at least one- 
eighth (ie €50 million) of the total assistance granted, on a 
yearly basis, and (2) repaying one- fifth of the total assis -
tance granted (ie €400 million) over a period of five years. 
Adherence is reviewed at two- yearly or five- yearly intervals 
by the Federal Ministry of Finance. In the event of an unex -
cused overall undershooting of (1) in the previous two 
years, the outstanding amount of repayment is retained 
from the budgetary recovery assistance until this outstand -
ing amount is repaid, whilst in the case of failure to meet 
condition (2), the annual repayment obligation of one-  
eighth of the assistance granted is increased by one- fifth of 
the outstanding repayment amount for each year of the 
subsequent five- year period.
17 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the first quarter 
of 2017 was analysed in the short articles of the July 2017 
Monthly Report. These are the most recent data available.
18 In mid-2017, the pension increase (an average of +2½% 
for Germany as a whole) was substantially lower than a 
year earlier, meaning that pension expenditure is set to rise 
considerably more slowly in the second half of the year. For 
more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi -
nances, Monthly Report, May 2017, p 68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
67

slowly from the current perspective, total pen -
sion expenditure is also likely to increase slightly 
less strongly than in the previous year (+4%). At 
the end of the year, the reserve is expected to 
be slightly lower than at end-2016, amounting 
to 1.5 times the scheme’s monthly expenditure. 
This would therefore still place it at the upper 
end of the envisaged range of variation. This 
should not, however, be viewed as scope for 
expanding benefits in the statutory pension in -
surance scheme. The reserve will gradually be 
depleted in the medium term. As the “baby 
boomers” enter retirement and life expectancy 
continues to rise, funding pressures on the 
statutory pension insurance scheme will mount considerably in the future, and in the absence 
of benefit increases, significant rises in the con -
tribution rate are already expected in the longer 
term.19
Federal Employment Agency
In the second quarter of 2017, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency posted a surplus of €1½ bil -
lion in the core budget,20 which was somewhat 
higher than a year ago. An exceptionally high 
transfer was made to the civil servants’ pension 
fund (as in the first quarter), which reduced the 
Federal Employment Agency’s operating profit 
by almost €½ billion.21 This was the main 
reason  for the 2% increase in expenditure, 
whereas the decrease in unemployment bene -
fit continued in the light of the favourable 
labour  market situation (almost -3½%) and 
spending on active labour market policies 
matched the level of the previous year. The lat -
ter, however, was attributable to the temporary 
and non- insurance- related financing of lan -
guage courses for refugees. Revenue rose by 
4%, with an even greater increase in contribu -
tion receipts (+5%).
The Federal Employment Agency’s finances are 
also likely to benefit from the favourable labour 
market situation as the year progresses, and no 
further special transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund have been planned. Even if active 
labour market policy expenditure were to in -
crease by a somewhat larger amount, an even 
higher surplus would therefore be expected for 
the year as a whole compared to the previous 
year (2016: €5½ billion). This would then sig -
nificantly exceed the budgeted amount (€1½ 
billion) once more, and the reserve for the core Basic financial 
situation distinctly  improved in Q2
Considerable 
surplus expected again for year as wholeFinances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q443210123
––––+++
–5–4–3–2–10Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
20162015
20172015 2016 170123456
2015 2016 170123456Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
19 For more on the longer- term outlook, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pension developments, 
Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 68-77.
20 Excluding consolidation with the civil servants’ pension 
fund, thus including surplus- reducing transfers to this fund.
21 These special transfers are connected with low interest 
rates and resultant additional capital requirements to cover 
future pension expenditure, particularly for civil servants. 
These amounted to a total of almost €1 billion in the first 
half of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
68

budget (end-2016: €11½ billion) would again 
be topped up by much more than originally 
planned.22
The favourable labour market developments 
are set to continue in the next few years, ac -
cording to current forecasts, benefiting the 
Federal Employment Agency’s finances on both 
the revenue and expenditure sides. Assuming 
that expenditure on active labour market policy 
measures reaches a stable level, therefore, sur -
pluses would rise further, and the reserve for 
the regular operational business as a whole 
would continue to increase strongly. Such an 
environment opens up the possibility of redu -
cing the contribution rate. From the current 
perspective, surpluses could still be achieved if 
the rate was cut moderately, and the antici -
pated reserve level could even accommodate a 
sharper downturn without drawing on central 
government loans.Reduced contri-
bution rate appropriate, given favourable labour market situationFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
2016
2015
20172015 2016 17–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2015 2016 17963036912
–––++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
22 The reserve value reported here refers to the Federal 
Employment Agency’s free reserves and does not include 
the winter compensation reserve, insolvency benefit or 
pension reserve.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
69

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
70

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
 3 General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV Banks
 1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
 3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
 4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
 10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
 11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
 12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
 13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
 3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
 5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
 4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
 5 Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX Financial accounts
 1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
 3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X Public finances in Germany
 1 General government: deficit/surplus  and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
 2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
 3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59 •
 4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
3•

 5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
 6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
 7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
 9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
 10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
 11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
 12 Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
 13 General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
 14 Central, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64 •
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65 •
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66 •
 3 Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67 •
 4 Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68 •
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68 •
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69 •
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70 •
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71 •
 9 Negotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71 •
 10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72 •
 11 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74 •
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75 •
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76 •
 4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77 •
 5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77 •
 6 Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77 •
 7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78 •
 8 External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  79 •
 9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80 •
 10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81 •
 11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81 •
 12 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2017
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2015         Oct 11.5 5.4 5.3 5.1 2.3 0.9 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 10.8 5.1 5.0 5.0 2.6 1.1 − 3.2 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.5 5.2 4.7 4.9 2.3 0.6 − 3.0 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016         Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 5.0 2.8 1.1 − 3.2 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.4 5.5 5.1 5.2 3.3 1.2 − 3.2 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.3 5.6 5.2 5.0 3.2 1.1 − 3.1 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.2 4.8 5.0 3.5 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 3.7 1.4 − 2.2 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.8 5.1 5.1 5.1 4.0 1.5 − 2.0 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July 8.6 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.9 1.3 − 2.3 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.9 1.6 − 2.1 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.4 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.0 1.9 − 2.1 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.8 4.3 2.2 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.9 4.7 4.7 4.4 2.2 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 4.8 4.7 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017         Jan 8.4 4.7 4.8 4.8 4.5 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.4 4.8 4.6 4.9 4.3 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 9.1 5.1 5.3 4.9 4.8 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr 9.3 5.1 4.9 5.0 4.5 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         May 9.3 5.2 4.9 4.9 4.3 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 9.7 5.4 5.0 ... 4.1 2.8 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2015         Oct + 32,383 + 33,336 + 74,629 + 19,215 + 15,321 + 12,759 + 33,343 − 6,009 1.1235 93.0 88.8
         Nov + 32,908 + 32,338 − 15,745 − 53,574 + 31,729 + 21,227 − 17,589 + 2,462 1.0736 90.5 86.3         Dec + 43,696 + 31,440 + 71,903 + 50,450 + 63,279 + 22,109 − 72,062 + 8,126 1.0877 91.9 87.5
2016         Jan + 12,677 + 14,092 − 4,558 − 18,730 + 76,162 + 15,198 − 76,032 − 1,155 1.0860 93.0 88.3
         Feb + 17,372 + 27,934 + 21,437 + 51,803 + 33,713 + 13,598 − 78,738 + 1,061 1.1093 94.2 89.2         Mar + 38,593 + 39,332 + 40,164 + 22,709 − 10,005 + 364 + 26,034 + 1,063 1.1100 93.6 88.8
         Apr + 38,078 + 36,110 + 35,155 − 8,623 + 135,565 − 21,749 − 68,421 − 1,617 1.1339 94.4 89.5
         May + 21,293 + 32,849 + 17,859 + 21,695 + 4,954 − 14,064 + 2,164 + 3,110 1.1311 94.6 89.9         June + 41,490 + 39,488 + 33,384 − 40,683 + 29,638 − 9,821 + 53,558 + 692 1.1229 94.4 89.7
         July + 36,757 + 33,631 + 27,319 + 26,559 + 59,757 + 13,337 − 71,456 − 878 1.1069 94.6 89.8
         Aug + 27,438 + 25,222 + 44,998 + 55,713 + 48,555 + 6,884 − 67,968 + 1,813 1.1212 94.9 90.1         Sep + 38,742 + 33,117 + 58,692 + 52,885 + 4,414 + 3,715 − 9,112 + 6,789 1.1212 95.1 90.1
         Oct + 27,016 + 27,955 + 7,799 + 35,516 + 52,876 + 6,220 − 82,862 − 3,951 1.1026 95.1 90.3
         Nov + 33,177 + 33,457 + 1,272 − 7,430 − 23,847 + 2,868 + 27,224 + 2,458 1.0799 94.6 89.6         Dec + 40,300 + 32,737 + 74,673 − 10,826 + 63,837 + 6,080 + 9,510 + 6,073 1.0543 93.7 88.9
2017         Jan − 80 + 7,656 − 12,475 − 12,326 + 11,539 + 2,211 − 8,822 − 5,077 1.0614 93.9 89.1
         Feb + 25,133 + 26,221 + 22,018 + 32,437 + 55,657 + 8,057 − 76,114 + 1,981 1.0643 93.4 88.8         Mar + 44,723 + 37,941 + 43,523 + 16,588 + 9,313 + 5,214 + 11,845 + 563 1.0685 94.0 89.2
         Apr + 22,783 + 24,767 + 14,111 + 20,183 + 50,209 + 1,013 − 52,780 − 4,514 1.0723 93.7 p 89.0
         May + 18,267 + 28,949 + 22,660 + 4,134 + 8,287 + 3,222 + 5,615 + 1,402 1.1058 95.6 p 90.5         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1229 96.3 p 91.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1511 97.6 p 92.4
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp
81−82   2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2014 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.8 − 0.6 0.9 0.4 8.3 0.1 2.1
2015 2.0 1.5 1.7 1.4 0.0 1.1 − 0.2 25.6 0.8 2.7
2016 1.8 1.2 1.9 1.6 1.9 1.2 0.0 5.1 0.9 2.0
2016         Q1 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.4 − 0.8 2.5 1.0 2.4
         Q2 1.7 1.2 3.3 0.7 1.8 1.8 0.0 5.4 1.1 2.3
         Q3 1.7 1.2 1.7 1.3 2.2 0.6 2.1 2.7 0.9 0.5
         Q4 1.9 1.1 1.3 2.7 2.0 0.9 − 1.3 9.9 0.4 2.6
2017         Q1 1.9 1.7 3.2 4.4 3.8 1.5 0.8 6.1 2.1 4.0
         Q2 2.2 ... 0.8 ... ... 1.1 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2014 0.8 1.0 1.4 4.3 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.9
2015 2.1 0.0 0.8 0.1 − 1.2 1.7 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.6
2016 1.4 4.3 1.0 1.8 2.3 0.3 2.6 0.7 1.7 4.9
2016         Q1 1.3 4.6 1.5 − 2.0 − 0.7 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.2 1.6 3.8
         Q2 1.1 3.4 0.5 − 1.2 3.6 0.5 5.3 0.7 0.2 4.4
         Q3 1.0 4.8 0.6 3.0 2.6 − 0.6 2.0 − 0.8 1.6 1.4
         Q4 2.3 4.5 1.4 7.6 3.2 0.4 4.0 3.2 3.6 9.8
2017         Q1 1.4 1.5 1.0 10.6 1.7 0.9 9.7 − 6.0 1.6 8.6
         Q2 e 2.5 ... p 3.0 12.6 2.9 1.9 3.1 p − 1.1 3.0 9.3
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2016         Q2 81.5 79.3 84.6 73.8 78.0 82.8 67.8 − 76.5 73.0
         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.8 67.8 − 76.0 71.8
         Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.6 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
2017         Q1 82.5 80.7 85.9 74.4 81.0 84.6 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
         Q2 82.6 81.4 86.0 76.4 82.1 84.3 68.1 − 76.0 74.8
         Q3 83.2 82.0 86.7 73.9 82.6 84.4 72.0 − 77.0 74.5
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.9
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 7.9 11.7 9.6
2017         Feb 9.5 7.6 3.9 5.6 8.8 9.6 22.6 6.8 11.4 8.9
         Mar 9.4 7.6 3.8 5.6 8.8 9.6 22.0 6.6 11.5 8.5
         Apr 9.2 6.8 4.1 6.3 8.8 9.5 21.7 6.4 11.1 8.3
         May 9.2 ... 3.8 6.9 8.8 9.6 ... 6.4 11.3 8.2
         June 9.1 ... 3.7 ... 8.7 9.6 ... 6.3 11.1 8.3
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.4 ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017         Feb 2.0 3.3 2.2 3.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 0.3 1.6 3.2
         Mar 1.5 2.5 1.5 3.0 0.9 1.4 1.7 0.6 1.4 3.3
         Apr 1.9 2.7 2.0 3.6 1.0 1.4 1.6 0.7 2.0 3.3
         May 1.4 1.9 1.4 3.5 0.9 0.9 1.5 0.0 1.6 2.7
         June 1.3 1.5 1.5 3.1 0.9 0.8 0.9 − 0.6 1.2 3.1
         July 1.3 1.8 1.5 3.9 0.6 0.8 0.9 − 0.2 1.2 2.6
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 1.6
2015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.7 0.1 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 2.7 − 1.3
2016 − 1.5 − 2.6 0.8 0.3 − 1.9 − 3.4 0.7 − 0.6 − 2.4 0.0
 
General government debt 8
 
2014 92.0 106.7 74.9 10.7 60.2 94.9 179.7 105.3 131.8 40.9
2015 90.3 106.0 71.2 10.1 63.7 95.6 177.4 78.7 132.1 36.5
2016 89.2 105.9 68.3 9.5 63.6 96.0 179.0 75.4 132.6 40.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Offic e.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
    
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.5 5.6 8.3 1.4 0.6 0.9 2.6 3.1 1.4 − 1.5 20141.8 4.0 7.3 2.3 1.0 1.6 3.8 2.3 3.2 1.7 20152.3 4.2 5.0 2.2 1.5 1.4 3.3 2.5 3.2 2.8 2016
2.3 3.1 6.3 1.7 1.7 1.0 3.4 2.2 3.6 2.6 2016          Q1
1.8 4.6 4.5 2.3 1.5 1.1 3.8 2.7 3.5 2.8          Q21.6 5.0 4.4 2.4 1.3 1.5 3.0 2.5 3.2 2.9          Q33.4 4.1 4.9 2.4 1.6 1.9 3.0 2.6 2.6 3.0          Q4
4.1 4.0 4.2 3.2 2.5 3.0 3.1 5.3 3.0 3.4 2017          Q1
... ... ... 3.3 2.2 ... 3.3 ... ... ...          Q2
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
0.3 4.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 1.0 1.8 3.6 1.7 1.3 − 0.7 20144.6 0.9 6.3 − 3.4 2.2 1.7 7.4 5.1 3.4 3.4 20152.8 − 0.1 − 3.5 2.2 2.1 1.0 4.8 7.8 1.8 8.0 2016
5.5 1.9 − 5.0 − 2.7 1.8 0.9 4.5 7.2 2.9 10.3 2016          Q1
− 0.3 0.7 − 4.3 3.4 1.8 0.8 7.5 6.6 1.3 8.7          Q2
3.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 3.4 1.0 0.4 2.8 7.9 0.9 6.1          Q33.1 − 2.8 − 1.7 5.6 3.6 1.9 4.1 9.3 1.8 7.1          Q4
5.9 − 6.3 5.7 2.2 3.1 3.0 7.8 6.6 1.9 8.6 2017          Q1
6.3 ...
p 1.6 p 1.5 ... 0.7 1.2 p 7.7 2.3 ...          Q2
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 201474.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
76.1 76.1 78.9 81.7 84.0 80.8 83.0 83.1 77.8 63.9 2016          Q2
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7          Q376.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6          Q4
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2017          Q1
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6          Q277.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5          Q3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
10.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.6 8.0 19.6 13.0 2016
7.9 6.1 4.3 5.3 5.8 9.9 8.5 7.3 18.2 12.5 2017          Feb 
8.1 6.0 4.2 5.1 5.7 9.7 8.3 7.1 18.0 12.1          Mar 
7.5 6.0 4.1 5.1 5.4 9.5 8.2 7.1 17.6 11.3          Apr 
7.3 6.0 4.1 5.1 5.2 9.2 8.0 7.1 17.3 11.0          May7.2 6.0 4.1 4.9 5.2 9.0 7.6 7.1 17.1 10.8          June
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          July
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
3.2 2.7 1.2 1.7 2.4 1.6 1.2 2.5 3.0 1.4 2017          Feb 
3.2 2.5 1.2 0.6 2.1 1.4 1.0 2.0 2.1 1.5          Mar 
3.5 2.6 1.1 1.4 2.3 2.4 0.8 1.7 2.6 2.1          Apr 
3.2 1.9 1.1 0.7 2.1 1.7 1.1 1.5 2.0 0.9          May3.5 1.5 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.6 0.9          June
4.1 1.8 1.2 1.5 2.0 1.0 1.5 1.2 1.7 − 0.1          July
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 0.7 1.4 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 8.8 2014− 0.2 1.4 − 1.3 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.1 − 1.2 2015
0.3 1.6 1.0 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 4.5 0.4 2016
 
General government debt 8
 
40.5 22.4 64.3 67.9 84.4 130.6 53.6 80.9 100.4 107.1 201442.7 21.6 60.6 65.2 85.5 129.0 52.5 83.1 99.8 107.5 201540.2 20.0 58.3 62.3 84.6 130.4 51.9 79.7 99.4 107.8 2016
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. latest data publication under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat).
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical Off ice and Bundesbank
Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2015         Nov 89.6 49.1 2.0 40.5 48.5 4.0 − 15.6 − 19.6 − 4.2 − 13.6 − 1.7 − 4.6 15.7
         Dec − 108.7 − 70.7 − 2.0 − 38.0 − 32.9 − 3.4 − 190.9 − 187.4 − 7.4 4.1 − 0.6 − 27.1 16.1
2016         Jan 157.6 45.9 6.0 111.8 96.6 − 45.5 129.0 174.5 − 25.3 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 18.3 1.4
         Feb 87.9 45.1 − 0.5 42.8 51.7 − 81.6 32.3 113.9 − 13.7 11.2 − 1.2 − 24.0 0.2
         Mar 64.6 22.2 − 5.6 42.3 43.1 26.4 − 86.1 − 112.4 − 10.3 − 6.5 − 0.9 3.9 − 6.8
         Apr 96.8 47.7 27.7 49.1 43.9 − 61.4 119.0 180.5 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 5.4
         May 70.8 20.7 12.9 50.2 56.4 − 0.7 62.0 62.7 3.7 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 9.3
         June 55.6 5.1 − 7.0 50.5 62.1 31.3 − 23.2 − 54.4 − 7.3 − 20.8 − 0.8 − 10.3 24.6
         July 54.5 29.5 14.7 25.0 24.1 − 85.0 56.9 141.9 − 23.9 − 7.1 − 0.5 − 23.8 7.5
         Aug 17.3 16.9 27.1 0.4 9.0 − 39.7 7.8 47.5 2.4 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 8.2
         Sep 41.8 26.6 − 7.3 15.2 19.4 − 17.0 − 69.0 − 52.0 − 22.8 − 12.2 − 0.5 − 19.6 9.5
         Oct 83.4 35.9 4.5 47.5 45.1 − 45.7 153.2 198.9 − 4.8 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 8.8 10.4
         Nov 106.5 56.1 16.1 50.3 62.3 4.1 − 21.2 − 25.3 − 1.8 − 8.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 8.7
         Dec − 58.0 − 50.3 − 8.3 − 7.7 − 0.9 38.6 − 155.0 − 193.5 − 11.6 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 13.8 6.6
2017         Jan 132.5 44.6 31.3 87.9 70.0 − 10.7 234.4 245.1 − 21.5 − 10.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 − 6.9
         Feb 46.0 30.8 4.0 15.2 35.3 − 47.4 52.7 100.1 15.3 − 6.3 − 0.5 − 3.1 25.2
         Mar 151.1 92.3 24.9 58.8 62.7 − 5.4 − 51.5 − 46.1 − 2.1 2.5 − 0.5 − 22.3 18.3
         Apr 53.8 27.1 23.1 26.7 24.2 − 41.3 78.2 119.5 − 28.2 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 15.4
         May 46.9 21.7 12.3 25.2 35.8 − 1.7 − 4.7 − 3.0 19.3 − 5.8 − 0.3 16.3 9.1
         June 25.0 30.2 2.1 − 5.3 − 5.4 59.1 − 107.2 − 166.3 − 16.9 − 12.3 − 0.2 − 10.0 5.5
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2015         Nov 28.6 21.2 7.8 7.4 12.0 − 13.0 − 35.9 − 22.9 − 11.4 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 4.0 − 2.5
         Dec − 19.0 − 11.6 − 5.8 − 7.4 − 1.9 5.2 − 52.1 − 57.3 − 23.1 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.2 3.9
2016         Jan 21.1 5.7 − 3.0 15.4 11.8 − 21.1 24.7 45.8 0.3 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.6 0.5
         Feb 17.2 10.9 − 4.2 6.3 6.3 − 29.3 7.2 36.5 − 10.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 8.0 0.8
         Mar 14.0 4.4 0.6 9.6 9.9 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 2.7 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.3 1.5
         Apr 25.7 12.3 0.7 13.4 8.8 − 40.1 13.6 53.7 0.6 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.6 3.3
         May 24.8 16.2 4.9 8.6 11.9 1.5 1.1 − 0.4 7.5 0.8 − 1.0 4.7 3.0
         June 4.7 1.7 0.5 2.9 8.6 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.5 6.2
         July 30.2 13.3 1.6 16.9 13.8 − 18.4 7.1 25.5 − 6.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.4 1.1
         Aug 11.1 8.9 1.5 2.2 4.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.8 3.9 0.6
         Sep 24.6 13.2 3.4 11.4 12.6 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 0.9
         Oct 21.5 11.8 2.6 9.6 6.5 − 3.2 42.4 45.7 7.1 2.2 − 0.8 5.8 − 0.2
         Nov 28.1 18.4 4.4 9.7 14.4 − 22.4 − 25.7 − 3.3 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.6 0.8
         Dec − 10.1 − 8.1 0.4 − 2.1 8.4 19.6 − 9.5 − 29.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 2.7
2017         Jan 23.6 15.0 2.3 8.6 8.5 − 24.4 31.8 56.2 9.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 15.9 − 2.3
         Feb 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8
         Mar 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
         Apr 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 18.8 − 7.2 11.7 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
         May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.5 − 12.7 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4
         June 11.8 11.4 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.3 16.7 − 5.5 5.9 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 17.0 60.5 − 54.3 55.7 58.5 5.7 52.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 3.3 15.9 0.6 2015          Nov 
− 71.4 − 38.0 − 4.8 54.1 44.2 14.4 29.7 9.0 0.9 − 28.3 − 22.2 − 10.8          Dec 
87.7 − 19.7 − 69.5 38.2 36.3 − 11.1 47.4 − 8.4 10.4 21.8 11.0 7.6 2016          Jan 
− 14.1 0.3 − 33.9 15.2 21.7 1.2 20.5 − 11.7 5.2 44.5 − 1.3 7.0          Feb 
31.8 31.7 − 37.7 55.9 42.6 3.7 38.9 11.0 2.3 − 6.2 − 13.0 1.7          Mar 
− 35.9 − 29.4 − 100.7 75.3 92.7 4.6 88.2 − 17.2 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 2.7          Apr 
20.1 12.5 − 33.8 35.2 47.5 2.3 45.3 − 20.2 7.9 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 2.0          May60.5 14.9 − 18.9 31.3 34.6 8.4 26.2 − 1.9 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.6 5.9          June
− 29.0 − 74.1 − 96.6 73.6 67.1 10.1 57.0 6.1 0.5 − 22.7 15.6 5.0          July
− 54.7 40.8 − − 10.9 − 8.9 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.6 − 2.5          Aug 
2.7 42.5 − 2.4 18.3 23.7 2.2 21.5 1.4 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.8 − 5.9          Sep 
− 3.0 14.3 − 31.2 16.3 52.1 2.8 49.3 − 29.7 − 6.2 − 16.9 18.0 0.8          Oct 
5.1 17.9 − 89.4 84.7 95.4 1.7 93.6 − 8.7 − 1.9 − 1.8 7.0 1.2          Nov 
− 48.2 − 15.0 − 55.4 76.0 94.2 16.2 78.0 − 24.6 6.4 4.0 − 6.0 − 7.4          Dec 
62.7 52.6 − 28.1 6.5 − 6.4 − 11.9 5.5 3.0 9.9 − 17.5 11.5 − 0.9 2017          Jan 
− 18.4 − 28.3 − 29.9 31.0 30.9 3.0 27.9 − 2.0 2.1 − 8.6 − 4.1 6.5          Feb 
24.2 16.7 − 107.0 92.6 93.4 4.3 89.1 − 6.1 5.3 13.9 11.9 − 0.6          Mar 
− 5.3 − 12.1 − 58.1 74.3 103.0 6.8 96.2 − 31.2 2.5 − 5.8 − 3.9 − 14.9          Apr 
13.5 − 13.3 − 25.8 28.0 41.9 0.5 41.4 − 21.0 7.1 − 10.9 − 5.9 3.1          May20.6 30.3 − 50.1 76.5 83.7 9.6 74.1 − 9.8 2.6 − 16.2 − 20.0 1.8          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1 2015          Nov 
10.3 15.2 2.6 2.3 − 16.2 − 21.3 6.3 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.8 − 24.2 − 0.7 − 1.9 24.7 27.8 − 5.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.9 2016          Jan 
7.1 − 24.0 0.6 0.4 15.2 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.7 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.8 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4          June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6          July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4          Aug 8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5          Sep 
− 8.8 18.6 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8          Oct 
6.9 − 48.2 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7          Nov 
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 12.6 − 27.2 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2017          Jan 
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0          Feb 
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0          Mar 
− 6.7 − 8.8 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8          Apr 
7.7 − 8.3 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8          May7.1 1.2 4.7 0.9 19.8 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2015         May 26,685.3 16,472.1 12,762.9 10,681.9 1,276.3 804.8 3,709.2 1,138.4 2,570.8 5,413.2 4,800.0
         June 26,127.5 16,435.2 12,728.4 10,683.9 1,254.0 790.5 3,706.8 1,136.8 2,570.1 5,275.2 4,417.0
         July 26,346.9 16,514.6 12,785.5 10,682.8 1,301.0 801.7 3,729.1 1,135.4 2,593.7 5,296.1 4,536.2
         Aug 26,196.6 16,494.0 12,735.6 10,646.0 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,247.5 4,455.1
         Sep 26,145.1 16,526.0 12,714.3 10,639.8 1,303.0 771.4 3,811.8 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,164.7 4,454.4
         Oct 26,337.3 16,576.0 12,732.6 10,661.8 1,288.0 782.8 3,843.4 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,251.2 4,510.1
         Nov 26,653.4 16,691.7 12,803.5 10,716.5 1,295.5 791.5 3,888.3 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,314.1 4,647.6
         Dec 25,850.7 16,541.4 12,703.0 10,627.4 1,296.3 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.2 2,728.2 5,034.5 4,274.8
2016         Jan 26,414.5 16,689.5 12,731.2 10,656.8 1,306.9 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,149.6 4,575.4
         Feb 26,749.2 16,774.6 12,771.5 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.1 1,118.6 2,884.5 5,228.2 4,746.4
         Mar 26,406.8 16,825.5 12,776.3 10,709.9 1,312.0 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,030.7 4,550.7
         Apr 26,557.6 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,173.9 4,474.7
         May 26,807.0 16,993.9 12,842.5 10,733.4 1,341.3 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.1
         June 27,072.9 17,041.3 12,829.2 10,732.4 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.4
         July 27,135.0 17,093.6 12,852.6 10,737.6 1,359.6 755.3 4,241.1 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.7
         Aug 27,037.8 17,105.6 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.0 778.2 4,239.1 1,102.9 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.7
         Sep 26,973.2 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.3
         Oct 27,051.8 17,205.1 12,925.5 10,787.5 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.5 1,101.1 3,178.4 5,422.5 4,424.3
         Nov 27,164.5 17,298.2 12,986.1 10,832.8 1,383.3 770.0 4,312.1 1,089.1 3,223.1 5,452.3 4,414.0
         Dec 26,679.5 17,237.4 12,928.0 10,774.6 1,372.1 781.3 4,309.3 1,079.6 3,229.7 5,208.1 4,234.0
2017         Jan 26,763.7 17,320.2 12,959.1 10,779.3 1,393.4 786.4 4,361.1 1,097.5 3,263.6 5,378.1 4,065.4
         Feb 27,023.9 17,381.2 12,997.0 10,809.6 1,398.3 789.0 4,384.2 1,076.4 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,144.9
         Mar 26,986.1 17,513.8 13,079.7 10,866.0 1,423.8 789.9 4,434.1 1,072.9 3,361.2 5,418.3 4,054.1
         Apr 27,073.5 17,560.3 13,096.8 10,861.0 1,432.8 803.1 4,463.5 1,075.6 3,387.9 5,451.1 4,062.1
         May 26,985.7 17,596.2 13,109.4 10,861.0 1,450.1 798.3 4,486.8 1,062.4 3,424.4 5,360.4 4,029.1
         June 26,656.6 17,573.1 13,095.0 10,857.2 1,437.4 800.3 4,478.1 1,063.1 3,415.0 5,195.3 3,888.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2015         May 6,140.7 3,771.0 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.8 370.7 428.1 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.9 3,767.4 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 800.1 367.0 433.1 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.5 3,803.2 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.2 368.0 442.2 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.9 3,813.3 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 817.2 364.9 452.3 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,042.0 3,824.3 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 828.1 364.5 463.6 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.8 3,832.3 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.7 368.4 469.2 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.8 3,865.0 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.5 363.9 481.6 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,925.1 3,840.1 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.5 358.3 478.2 1,166.4 918.6
2016         Jan 6,057.8 3,858.2 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.4 362.0 491.4 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.3 3,874.9 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.9 362.0 498.9 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.6 3,885.5 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.9 361.6 508.3 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,050.2 3,908.3 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 882.1 366.1 515.9 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,091.2 3,934.7 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.7 362.8 528.9 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,221.2 3,939.7 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.2 357.3 540.0 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.6 3,968.5 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 914.2 360.3 553.8 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
         Nov 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8
         Dec 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2017         Jan 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
         Feb 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0
         Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
         June 6,106.4 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.4 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,006.4 11,370.9 10,644.8 10,742.7 5,049.9 999.5 364.6 2,124.5 2,121.9 82.3 2015          May
1,017.1 11,390.8 10,645.9 10,747.1 5,096.4 976.4 361.0 2,110.1 2,122.0 81.2          June
1,031.3 11,391.9 10,681.7 10,796.9 5,135.0 983.0 358.9 2,119.8 2,119.7 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,375.8 10,678.2 10,788.2 5,137.0 981.5 353.8 2,114.8 2,122.1 79.1          Aug 1,026.5 11,410.5 10,694.5 10,796.3 5,162.5 977.4 350.6 2,110.9 2,116.6 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,498.5 10,739.4 10,848.4 5,244.5 972.9 349.1 2,092.0 2,112.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,524.1 10,774.1 10,869.8 5,288.4 970.8 343.9 2,081.4 2,109.6 75.7          Nov 1,048.9 11,486.5 10,813.7 10,922.5 5,325.7 981.5 343.8 2,083.3 2,112.9 75.2          Dec 
1,037.7 11,611.6 10,852.2 10,953.0 5,365.0 973.3 344.1 2,074.6 2,121.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.9 11,620.9 10,871.7 10,975.9 5,385.0 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,124.1 73.1          Feb 1,042.5 11,686.3 10,916.6 11,007.0 5,418.7 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,126.7 72.3          Mar 
1,047.1 11,715.5 10,978.0 11,072.8 5,504.2 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,126.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.3 11,766.7 11,005.8 11,092.4 5,545.0 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0          May1,057.7 11,829.0 11,001.2 11,089.1 5,565.0 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,849.4 11,053.6 11,133.5 5,614.9 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,783.3 11,037.6 11,120.7 5,611.2 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1          Aug 1,066.5 11,788.7 11,032.3 11,130.4 5,636.9 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep 
1,069.3 11,797.2 11,047.7 11,134.5 5,680.6 936.0 307.1 2,019.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct 
1,071.1 11,882.7 11,108.1 11,212.7 5,780.1 926.6 303.3 2,014.3 2,121.9 66.6          Nov 1,087.3 11,890.7 11,172.6 11,282.5 5,869.9 910.5 294.0 2,014.0 2,128.5 65.6          Dec 
1,075.4 11,946.0 11,152.4 11,267.2 5,867.4 912.6 286.6 1,997.4 2,138.2 65.0 2017          Jan 
1,078.4 11,953.8 11,171.2 11,290.8 5,892.1 917.8 284.4 1,991.6 2,140.2 64.6          Feb 1,082.7 12,064.3 11,241.6 11,384.3 5,988.6 908.6 285.3 1,992.6 2,145.1 64.1          Mar 
1,089.5 12,104.1 11,286.9 11,420.0 6,066.8 884.6 278.6 1,978.7 2,147.6 63.7          Apr 
1,089.9 12,116.3 11,304.9 11,409.4 6,088.9 858.6 273.0 1,970.2 2,156.7 62.0          May1,099.5 12,177.3 11,348.0 11,447.3 6,158.2 852.1 265.8 1,949.8 2,159.5 61.9          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1 2015          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb 247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar 
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr 
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.6 3,482.0 3,340.0 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eu rosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“ ).5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2015         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 331.0 324.4 459.3 2,450.8 1,723.4
         June 309.5 334.2 157.2 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 312.2 308.7 443.0 2,438.7 1,708.9
         July 266.4 328.6 149.2 100.3 13.3 38.8 22.3 4.9 301.3 298.1 465.7 2,410.6 1,685.1
         Aug 251.6 335.9 155.2 100.4 13.3 38.8 23.4 4.8 305.4 300.3 464.3 2,379.6 1,675.5
         Sep 280.6 333.7 153.5 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 304.5 296.9 459.3 2,344.0 1,660.4
         Oct 315.5 334.6 157.4 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 297.6 288.1 481.2 2,337.6 1,640.5
         Nov 298.5 355.7 168.0 108.4 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 301.4 296.2 497.1 2,367.2 1,646.3
         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 272.8 270.9 475.1 2,318.6 1,633.5
2016         Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 294.5 292.9 485.5 2,300.6 1,614.2
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 484.2 2,287.2 1,596.9
         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 471.7 2,270.6 1,589.5
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 489.1 2,275.1 1,585.5
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 489.2 2,283.2 1,574.6
         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 479.7 2,280.5 1,568.0
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 494.8 2,256.9 1,542.4
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,251.9 1,533.2
         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,225.8 1,515.8
         Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.1 19.8 44.7 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 511.8 2,224.8 1,502.0
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.6 98.9 21.2 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.9 264.2 518.8 2,242.8 1,504.8
         Dec 253.1 355.1 169.8 93.9 21.5 43.3 21.4 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,229.1 1,501.3
2017         Jan 316.8 362.0 170.7 99.5 21.3 43.4 21.7 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.2 2,208.1 1,485.9
         Feb 299.0 364.1 176.2 96.3 20.2 44.1 21.9 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,219.8 1,492.1
         Mar 323.1 357.0 166.6 96.5 21.5 44.6 22.3 5.4 255.6 254.9 532.0 2,192.5 1,478.9
         Apr 317.8 366.2 177.7 92.4 23.7 44.7 22.2 5.5 249.6 248.9 528.2 2,165.7 1,464.5
         May 331.3 375.5 182.9 94.5 25.3 45.2 22.9 4.7 238.4 237.7 522.0 2,170.1 1,488.5
         June 352.0 378.0 182.5 95.7 26.6 45.8 22.7 4.7 222.1 221.4 501.6 2,149.2 1,474.2
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2015         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016         Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017         Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
         Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 541.8 266.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
54.3 42.4 2,354.1 3,951.4 2,550.2 − 67.3 4,632.6 − 6,302.5 9,940.0 10,600.5 7,156.1 110.0 2015          May
58.9 44.9 2,334.9 3,781.9 2,532.6 − 59.5 4,270.7 − 6,361.2 9,973.5 10,602.0 7,104.7 112.4          June
46.2 45.2 2,319.2 3,881.1 2,531.6 − 66.9 4,400.5 − 6,408.3 10,027.7 10,676.1 7,094.6 114.8          July
35.8 47.5 2,296.3 3,875.9 2,530.1 − 65.8 4,301.9 − 6,416.1 10,032.4 10,672.4 7,063.8 116.3          Aug 32.7 46.5 2,264.8 3,799.5 2,534.0 − 52.8 4,319.4 − 6,438.2 10,040.3 10,667.2 7,032.2 117.3          Sep 
32.6 47.2 2,257.9 3,852.5 2,560.1 − 75.9 4,356.8 − 6,525.2 10,113.8 10,775.7 7,031.7 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,286.9 3,906.0 2,565.3 − 77.1 4,534.8 − 6,592.2 10,180.4 10,841.2 7,053.7 121.9          Nov 22.9 47.8 2,247.9 3,652.9 2,549.2 − 49.3 4,095.9 − 6,631.5 10,228.1 10,840.6 6,999.9 123.0          Dec 
28.9 50.6 2,221.0 3,800.6 2,573.0 − 76.5 4,387.6 − 6,665.8 10,264.0 10,908.3 6,987.8 123.6 2016          Jan 
33.4 54.2 2,199.6 3,912.4 2,609.9 − 98.0 4,554.5 − 6,688.2 10,278.2 10,942.3 7,012.9 122.8          Feb 37.2 51.9 2,181.5 3,725.0 2,592.4 − 93.9 4,379.8 − 6,721.4 10,322.5 10,968.2 6,968.3 121.3          Mar 
41.7 50.0 2,183.4 3,912.6 2,604.3 − 98.9 4,285.0 − 6,815.2 10,399.0 11,070.4 6,976.4 122.7          Apr 
39.9 49.2 2,194.1 4,018.6 2,600.8 − 82.8 4,363.2 − 6,867.4 10,440.7 11,110.5 6,979.2 126.6          May49.8 47.2 2,183.5 3,941.2 2,664.9 − 61.7 4,560.3 − 6,901.2 10,471.8 11,131.3 7,012.8 127.7          June
54.6 47.8 2,154.5 4,072.1 2,678.7 − 104.2 4,521.0 − 6,967.5 10,542.8 11,225.3 6,989.9 131.5          July
53.9 46.2 2,151.8 4,114.1 2,676.2 − 84.0 4,435.5 − 6,961.8 10,533.2 11,214.1 6,979.1 131.4          Aug 48.7 46.1 2,131.0 4,069.2 2,698.3 − 44.0 4,388.4 − 6,984.4 10,550.7 11,216.1 6,967.9 131.3          Sep 
53.5 43.6 2,127.7 4,275.5 2,683.2 − 30.1 4,253.7 − 7,043.2 10,566.2 11,248.1 6,947.8 131.8          Oct 
54.7 42.8 2,145.3 4,318.1 2,662.6 − 54.3 4,257.8 − 7,145.5 10,659.5 11,345.6 6,938.1 136.4          Nov 48.1 42.0 2,139.1 4,036.5 2,658.4 − 39.4 4,035.2 − 7,238.3 10,732.2 11,397.8 6,925.4 135.4          Dec 
44.1 45.8 2,118.1 4,241.1 2,645.8 − 11.6 3,884.4 − 7,228.1 10,732.5 11,420.1 6,875.2 139.1 2017          Jan 
49.4 47.2 2,123.2 4,373.0 2,697.0 − 16.9 3,957.0 − 7,262.5 10,767.6 11,454.6 6,925.8 140.1          Feb 48.5 47.2 2,096.8 4,309.9 2,688.3 2.3 3,858.7 − 7,353.7 10,857.2 11,558.2 6,891.8 140.0          Mar 
37.6 43.3 2,084.8 4,395.5 2,674.1 1.8 3,865.0 − 7,452.1 10,925.4 11,610.0 6,851.5 142.1          Apr 
42.1 42.8 2,085.2 4,330.4 2,670.5 2.6 3,845.5 − 7,482.8 10,937.7 11,620.5 6,837.8 145.0          May42.8 41.3 2,065.0 4,131.6 2,636.7 9.5 3,729.1 − 7,562.6 11,008.9 11,662.2 6,763.9 146.3          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 − 2015          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 −          Nov 23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec 
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2017          Jan 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 −          Feb 19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar 
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr 
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.1 15.8 507.0 947.5 591.4 − 981.1 1,412.2 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.0 1,808.0 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central government s’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturiti es of over 2
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2015         Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.0 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016         Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2017         Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1 787.5 479.2 0.0 1 110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2 550.9
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1 905.3 550.0 0.0 1 118.4 182.0 378.8 1 081.1 2 749.4
         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1 995.0 593.7 0.0 1 126.0 163.6 397.4 1 178.7 2 898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2 076.1 595.3 0.0 1 136.3 229.8 379.4 1 169.2 2 900.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016         Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchang e swap operations.
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circu lation. In ac-
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem fo r the issue of
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulatio n are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+ 36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
− 12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
− 8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
− 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+ 8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
− 3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
− 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
− 1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit i nstitutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month  1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2016 Dec                  2 3,587.4 412.6 314.4 77.4 237.0 34.0 17.4 17.4 −
                                9 3,609.8 412.6 316.5 77.5 239.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              16 3,630.7 412.6 319.5 77.5 242.0 36.9 18.1 18.1 −
                              23 3,685.7 412.6 317.8 77.1 240.6 35.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              30 3,662.9 382.1 327.9 78.8 249.1 30.7 19.1 19.1 −
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 382.1 326.6 78.7 247.8 31.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              13 3,697.3 382.1 326.9 78.7 248.2 34.7 17.5 17.5 −
                              20 3,719.6 382.1 325.7 78.7 247.0 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              27 3,740.8 382.1 323.6 78.7 245.0 35.8 18.8 18.8 −
         Feb                  3 3,749.5 382.1 323.4 78.7 244.8 34.7 19.8 19.8 −
                              10 3,770.9 382.1 323.2 78.4 244.7 36.4 18.9 18.9 −
                              17 3,787.9 382.1 324.7 77.8 246.9 34.7 19.0 19.0 −
                              24 3,808.2 382.1 324.4 77.8 246.6 35.6 19.1 19.1 −
         Mar                  3 3,820.3 382.1 323.8 77.8 246.1 34.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              10 3,839.9 382.1 325.3 77.8 247.6 34.6 19.7 19.7 −
                              17 3,856.9 382.1 324.6 77.9 246.8 33.0 18.7 18.7 −
                              24 3,877.0 382.1 326.4 77.8 248.5 32.8 19.5 19.5 −
                              31 4,100.7 404.2 323.4 77.6 245.8 33.9 20.2 20.2 −
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 404.2 323.1 77.7 245.4 31.6 18.6 18.6 −
                              14 4,130.0 404.2 321.8 77.7 244.2 31.6 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 4,139.4 404.2 321.6 77.7 243.9 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              28 4,148.0 404.2 319.6 77.5 242.1 34.6 17.2 17.2 −
2017 May                 5 4,156.8 404.1 319.7 77.4 242.4 34.6 16.8 16.8 −
                              12 4,170.6 404.1 320.9 77.4 243.5 32.3 17.0 17.0 −
                              19 4,185.7 404.1 320.6 77.4 243.2 32.7 17.4 17.4 −
                              26 4,195.7 404.1 321.2 77.4 243.7 30.3 15.9 15.9 −
         June                 2 4,204.5 404.1 321.2 77.4 243.8 30.2 16.3 16.3 −
                                9 4,218.1 404.1 321.5 77.4 244.1 29.9 16.7 16.7 −
                              16 4,232.9 404.1 322.9 77.6 245.3 28.7 18.3 18.3 −
                              23 4,246.2 404.1 321.6 77.6 244.0 30.7 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 4,209.5 379.1 304.8 74.4 230.4 31.2 18.0 18.0 −
         July                 7 4,214.7 379.1 303.5 74.6 228.9 30.5 17.2 17.2 −
                              14 4,229.3 379.1 302.9 74.2 228.7 31.6 17.2 17.2 −
                              21 4,235.8 379.1 300.7 74.3 226.4 33.4 15.9 15.9 −
                              28 4,248.3 379.1 302.0 74.3 227.7 33.9 16.7 16.7 −
         Aug                  4 4,246.5 379.1 299.2 74.4 224.8 36.9 16.4 16.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0. 0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016         Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0. 0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0. 0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0. 0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0. 0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0. 7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0. 2−−−
         Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0. 3−−−
         Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
         Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 1 376.5 128.8 55.0 21.1 33.9 0.1 0.4 0.4 −
         Dec 1 392.7 119.3 56.5 21.5 35.0 1.8 0.4 0.4 −
2017         Jan 1 449.7 119.3 56.4 21.5 34.9 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
         Feb 1 484.8 119.3 56.2 21.2 35.0 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
         Mar 1 558.0 126.2 55.7 21.1 34.7 2.7 1.7 1.7 −
         Apr 1 582.8 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
         May 1 608.2 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
         June 1 616.4 118.2 53.1 20.0 33.0 1.3 2.1 2.1 −
         July 1 621.0 118.2 53.5 20.0 33.6 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The bal ance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrume nts are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
546.6 36.0 510.5 − − 0.2 − 83.1 1 932.3 1 608.1 324.2 26.4 220.6 2016 Dec                  2
546.5 35.8 510.5 − − 0.2 − 81.7 1 950.6 1 626.5 324.1 26.4 221.4                                 9
547.4 36.8 510.5 − − 0.1 − 79.8 1 967.1 1 644.0 323.1 26.4 222.9                               16
589.8 32.9 556.6 − − 0.4 − 71.7 1 982.3 1 659.5 322.9 26.4 231.3                               23
595.9 39.1 556.6 − − 0.2 − 69.1 1 974.9 1 654.0 320.9 26.5 236.8                               30
590.8 34.0 556.6 − − 0.2 − 70.9 1 987.0 1 666.1 320.9 26.5 238.5 2017 Jan                  6
589.1 32.3 556.6 − − 0.2 − 74.8 2 010.4 1 690.2 320.1 26.5 235.4                               13
589.0 32.3 556.6 − − 0.1 − 78.1 2 030.4 1 710.9 319.5 26.5 237.5                               20
588.7 34.0 554.5 − − 0.2 − 80.4 2 049.8 1 730.3 319.4 26.5 235.2                               27
586.3 31.6 554.5 − − 0.2 − 79.7 2 064.0 1 748.6 315.4 26.4 233.1          Feb                  3
584.7 29.6 554.5 − − 0.6 − 81.4 2 083.9 1 768.7 315.2 26.4 234.0                               10
583.1 28.0 554.5 − − 0.6 − 81.0 2 101.8 1 787.9 313.8 26.4 235.1                               17
584.7 30.8 553.8 − − 0.1 − 81.1 2 119.6 1 807.1 312.5 26.4 235.2                               24
579.3 25.3 553.8 − − 0.2 − 83.5 2 136.5 1 825.9 310.6 26.4 235.2          Mar                  3
578.1 23.9 553.8 − − 0.5 − 82.7 2 153.8 1 844.2 309.6 26.4 237.1                               10
580.5 26.5 553.8 − − 0.2 − 86.3 2 172.9 1 862.9 309.9 26.4 232.4                               17
586.8 32.7 553.8 − − 0.3 − 82.5 2 188.5 1 878.7 309.8 26.4 232.0                               24
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.3 − 69.8 2 192.8 1 887.1 305.7 26.4 245.9                               31
782.5 13.2 769.2 − − 0.1 − 81.4 2 211.3 1 906.3 305.0 26.4 237.4          Apr                  7
783.1 13.2 769.2 − − 0.7 − 80.7 2 225.9 1 921.4 304.5 26.4 236.5                               14
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.2 − 82.0 2 236.2 1 933.0 303.2 26.4 234.5                               21
782.1 14.4 767.3 − − 0.4 − 78.2 2 247.4 1 946.9 300.5 26.4 238.4                               28
782.0 14.4 767.3 − − 0.3 − 78.6 2 257.5 1 959.9 297.6 26.4 237.1 2017 May                  5
781.2 13.7 767.3 − − 0.2 − 79.6 2 271.4 1 974.7 296.8 26.4 237.6                               12
781.5 14.0 767.3 − − 0.2 − 78.6 2 285.2 1 989.0 296.2 26.4 239.3                               19
783.5 15.9 767.3 − − 0.2 − 75.9 2 299.1 2 002.4 296.7 26.4 239.3                               26
780.1 12.1 767.8 − − 0.3 − 74.5 2 311.0 2 015.2 295.8 26.4 240.7          June                  2
780.0 12.1 767.8 − − 0.1 − 73.7 2 325.6 2 029.8 295.9 26.4 240.3                                 9
779.1 11.0 767.8 − − 0.3 − 75.5 2 338.7 2 045.0 293.7 26.4 239.2                               16
779.6 11.5 767.8 − − 0.3 − 73.1 2 352.1 2 058.4 293.7 26.4 240.1                               23
779.3 11.6 767.3 − − 0.3 − 70.9 2 358.6 2 064.4 294.2 25.8 241.9                               30
775.7 8.3 767.3 − − 0.1 − 69.5 2 374.4 2 081.3 293.1 25.7 239.0          July                  7
774.6 7.1 767.3 − − 0.2 − 69.0 2 390.4 2 097.5 292.9 25.7 238.8                               14
774.3 6.8 767.3 − − 0.2 − 67.7 2 400.0 2 108.3 291.7 25.7 239.0                               21
776.3 7.4 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.3 2 411.3 2 119.2 292.1 25.7 240.0                               28
773.1 4.3 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.6 2 414.8 2 128.2 286.6 25.7 237.5          Aug                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2 2015          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0          Aug 55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1          Sep 
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2          Oct 
55.2 1.0 53.9 − − 0.3 − 4.8 345.4 345.4 − 4.4 782.3          Nov 65.5 1.8 63.5 − − 0.1 − 3.0 357.7 357.7 − 4.4 784.1          Dec 
64.0 0.6 63.4 − − 0.0 − 4.1 375.7 375.7 − 4.4 823.9 2017          Jan 
63.9 0.7 63.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 392.6 392.6 − 4.4 842.4          Feb 95.6 0.4 95.0 − − 0.2 − 3.9 408.8 408.8 − 4.4 859.0          Mar 
95.7 0.6 95.0 − − 0.1 − 4.2 421.4 421.4 − 4.4 872.8          Apr 
95.3 0.3 95.0 − − 0.0 − 4.0 434.3 434.3 − 4.4 886.4          May96.4 1.2 95.0 − − 0.1 − 3.9 445.8 445.8 − 4.4 891.3          June
95.5 0.5 94.9 − − 0.1 − 4.4 457.2 457.2 − 4.4 884.8          July
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month  1 liabilities lation  2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2016 Dec                  2 3,587.4 1,108.4 1,301.3 849.7 451.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 253.8 147.0 106.8
                                9 3,609.8 1,114.3 1,321.0 869.0 451.9 − − 0.1 3.4 − 249.0 144.9 104.1
                              16 3,630.7 1,117.4 1,298.1 879.7 418.4 − − 0.0 4.9 − 271.8 168.9 102.9
                              23 3,685.7 1,126.7 1,353.8 930.9 422.9 − − 0.0 8.8 − 238.0 133.1 104.9
                              30 3,662.9 1,126.2 1,313.3 889.0 424.2 − − 0.1 9.4 − 220.8 114.9 105.9
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 1,122.2 1,369.2 928.6 440.5 − − 0.0 8.9 − 213.8 110.2 103.6
                              13 3,697.3 1,115.5 1,396.8 935.3 461.4 − − 0.1 9.6 − 240.2 137.9 102.4
                              20 3,719.6 1,110.7 1,386.8 952.4 434.3 − − 0.2 9.7 − 281.8 177.7 104.0
                              27 3,740.8 1,109.0 1,385.7 978.9 406.7 − − 0.0 7.7 − 305.2 201.3 103.9
         Feb                  3 3,749.5 1,111.4 1,438.1 963.9 474.2 − − 0.0 10.0 − 237.5 130.5 107.0
                              10 3,770.9 1,110.9 1,451.1 955.3 495.8 − − 0.0 8.5 − 252.0 144.2 107.8
                              17 3,787.9 1,110.1 1,422.6 953.6 469.0 − − 0.0 9.5 − 293.9 185.6 108.3
                              24 3,808.2 1,110.8 1,434.8 957.4 477.4 − − 0.0 10.0 − 289.7 177.5 112.3
         Mar                  3 3,820.3 1,113.5 1,468.1 966.3 501.8 − − 0.0 11.5 − 254.5 140.4 114.0
                              10 3,839.9 1,113.8 1,491.9 966.3 525.5 − − 0.0 15.4 − 257.1 142.5 114.6
                              17 3,856.9 1,112.9 1,475.6 984.4 491.3 − − 0.0 15.3 − 297.9 178.4 119.4
                              24 3,877.0 1,111.2 1,455.1 946.2 508.9 − − 0.0 14.1 − 340.9 221.5 119.4
                              31 4,100.7 1,114.5 1,632.5 1,048.5 584.0 − − 0.0 15.1 − 304.8 178.9 125.9
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 1,119.2 1,721.1 1,132.9 588.2 − − 0.0 13.7 − 279.2 153.9 125.3
                              14 4,130.0 1,127.5 1,708.3 1,144.5 563.8 − − 0.0 13.2 − 298.1 164.7 133.4
                              21 4,139.4 1,121.6 1,682.0 1,123.0 559.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 344.2 209.5 134.7
                              28 4,148.0 1,125.3 1,709.1 1,132.6 576.4 − − 0.0 12.9 − 306.2 172.0 134.3
2017 May                 5 4,156.8 1,125.1 1,773.1 1,172.7 600.4 − − 0.0 12.4 − 256.0 114.2 141.8
                              12 4,170.6 1,124.7 1,766.3 1,165.6 600.7 − − 0.0 10.8 − 283.1 140.8 142.2
                              19 4,185.7 1,123.2 1,760.3 1,169.5 590.7 − − 0.0 9.6 − 314.5 177.1 137.4
                              26 4,195.7 1,124.1 1,748.4 1,159.5 588.9 − − 0.1 10.3 − 353.1 209.3 143.9
         June                 2 4,204.5 1,131.3 1,796.2 1,194.2 602.0 − − 0.0 11.3 − 299.9 157.7 142.2
                                9 4,218.1 1,130.5 1,800.6 1,199.2 601.3 − − 0.1 9.1 − 310.2 172.5 137.7
                              16 4,232.9 1,131.7 1,776.2 1,168.4 607.8 − − 0.0 7.4 − 351.7 209.7 142.1
                              23 4,246.2 1,131.3 1,735.3 1,158.1 577.2 − − 0.0 7.7 − 400.8 259.1 141.7
                              30 4,209.5 1,136.9 1,723.1 1,106.1 617.0 − − 0.1 9.2 − 347.6 210.1 137.5
         July                 7 4,214.7 1,140.0 1,787.3 1,166.6 620.7 − − 0.0 9.8 − 340.1 209.1 131.0
                              14 4,229.3 1,141.2 1,792.1 1,197.8 594.2 − − 0.1 9.8 − 360.2 230.7 129.6
                              21 4,235.8 1,140.4 1,764.1 1,186.9 577.2 − − 0.0 9.2 − 380.8 254.1 126.7
                              28 4,248.3 1,142.3 1,784.2 1,200.7 583.5 − − 0.1 9.6 − 369.8 239.3 130.5
         Aug                  4 4,246.5 1,144.7 1,867.3 1,245.9 621.3 − − 0.0 10.4 − 273.7 147.1 126.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016         Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5
         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
         Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9
         Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
         Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
         Nov 1 376.5 259.5 428.0 293.1 134.9 − − − 0.3 − 116.6 40.0 76.6
         Dec 1 392.7 264.9 411.4 284.9 126.4 − − − 0.5 − 105.8 32.5 73.4
2017         Jan 1 449.7 260.9 499.0 348.3 150.7 − − − 2.2 − 92.9 17.1 75.8
         Feb 1 484.8 261.3 507.1 347.0 160.1 − − − 1.7 − 97.3 12.4 84.9
         Mar 1 558.0 262.1 543.2 353.8 189.3 − − − 1.7 − 115.4 26.8 88.6
         Apr 1 582.8 264.7 591.2 402.7 188.5 − − − 4.1 − 88.9 20.0 68.9
         May 1 608.2 264.9 607.1 433.6 173.5 − − − 2.5 − 102.9 27.8 75.1
         June 1 616.4 267.4 586.1 418.6 167.5 − − − 3.4 − 112.9 40.0 72.9
         July 1 621.0 268.8 597.0 422.3 174.7 − − 0.0 3.8 − 112.2 40.8 71.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circu lation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this a djustment is
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
113.2 3.8 10.9 10.9 − 58.1 214.7 − 418.5 100.8 2016 Dec                  2
112.0 6.2 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.4 − 418.5 99.5                                 9
127.3 7.1 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.6 − 418.5 99.5                               16
145.7 7.0 10.4 10.4 − 58.1 219.0 − 418.5 99.5                               23
205.7 3.6 9.3 9.3 − 59.3 221.4 − 394.4 99.5                               30
167.4 5.7 10.7 10.7 − 59.3 221.3 − 394.4 99.8 2017 Jan                  6
138.8 7.7 13.4 13.4 − 59.3 221.7 − 394.4 99.8                               13
133.8 7.3 9.7 9.7 − 59.3 226.4 − 394.4 99.8                               20
133.0 9.2 10.5 10.5 − 59.3 227.0 − 394.4 99.8                               27
151.5 9.2 9.4 9.4 − 59.3 228.7 − 394.4 100.1          Feb                  3
144.8 8.5 11.9 11.9 − 59.3 229.6 − 394.4 100.0                               10
147.7 8.6 12.2 12.2 − 59.3 229.6 − 394.4 100.0                               17
159.9 9.5 11.0 11.0 − 59.3 228.2 − 394.4 100.6                               24
168.4 7.7 10.6 10.6 − 59.3 231.8 − 394.4 100.6          Mar                  3
157.0 6.0 12.8 12.8 − 59.3 231.7 − 394.4 100.6                               10
152.9 3.5 12.4 12.4 − 59.3 232.1 − 394.4 100.6                               17
153.5 5.0 12.0 12.0 − 59.3 231.0 − 394.4 100.6                               24
218.8 3.0 10.4 10.4 − 59.0 229.4 − 412.0 101.1                               31
168.5 3.9 11.6 11.6 − 59.0 226.6 − 412.0 101.4          Apr                  7
170.5 2.9 11.2 11.2 − 59.0 225.8 − 412.0 101.4                               14
169.1 3.0 10.5 10.5 − 59.0 225.7 − 412.0 101.4                               21
180.7 5.0 10.1 10.1 − 59.0 225.5 − 412.0 102.3                               28
175.2 4.1 11.4 11.4 − 59.0 226.3 − 412.0 102.3 2017 May                  5
170.5 3.7 11.1 11.1 − 59.0 227.2 − 412.0 102.2                               12
162.0 3.7 11.6 11.6 − 59.0 227.4 − 412.0 102.3                               19
145.5 2.9 11.1 11.1 − 59.0 226.9 − 412.0 102.3                               26
150.7 2.8 10.7 10.7 − 59.0 228.3 − 412.0 102.3          June                  2
152.7 2.8 10.8 10.8 − 59.0 228.1 − 412.0 102.3                                 9
149.0 3.0 11.0 11.0 − 59.0 229.5 − 412.0 102.3                               16
152.1 3.0 12.5 12.5 − 59.0 230.1 − 412.0 102.3                               23
222.5 4.1 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 224.4 − 371.9 102.3                               30
168.8 5.0 10.3 10.3 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3          July                  7
156.4 5.0 11.2 11.2 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3                               14
170.7 5.5 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 223.5 − 371.9 102.3                               21
169.3 6.2 12.7 12.7 − 56.7 223.2 − 371.9 102.3                               28
175.8 8.9 10.5 10.5 − 56.7 224.2 − 371.9 102.3          Aug                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0 2015          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0          Aug 70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0          Sep 
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0          Oct 
74.7 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.4 323.9 128.0 5.0          Nov 
117.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 15.4 24.7 327.3 119.7 5.0          Dec 
100.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.4 25.2 328.3 119.7 5.0 2017          Jan 
121.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.4 24.5 330.1 119.7 5.6          Feb 131.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.3 25.1 331.9 126.0 5.6          Mar 
125.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.3 335.2 126.0 5.6          Apr 
119.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.8 338.1 126.0 5.6          May140.4 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.7 26.2 342.8 115.8 5.6          June
130.0 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 14.7 26.4 345.0 115.8 5.6          July
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of e uro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem cla im/ liability
the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2015         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0
         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016         Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8
         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2
         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3
         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4
         Dec 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017         Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6
         Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
         Apr 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
         May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6
         June 7,849.9 27.3 2,245.8 1,831.0 1,548.9 282.2 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
 Changes 3
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2015         Oct 13.7 0.7 37.8 35.4 39.8 − 4.4 2.4 2.4 0.0 − 3.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 5.4
         Nov 59.5 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 252.6 3.6 − 88.7 − 87.4 − 56.1 − 31.3 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 26.5 − 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.5
2016         Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.5 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4
         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.0 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7
         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.2 1.5 8.4 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.6 10.0
         June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.5 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8
         Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
         Oct − 0.5 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 25.9 0.1 72.2 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.6 11.3 15.8 15.2
         Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2017         Jan 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5
         Mar − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
         Apr 40.1 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.3
         May 9.1 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.7 1.4 3.9 4.6 9.0 9.9
         June − 94.3 1.7 − 39.3 − 32.1 − 29.6 − 2.4 − 7.3 − 5.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 4.8 12.7 7.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8 2015          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1          Dec 
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan 
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb 294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar 
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5          Apr 
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5          May299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.2          June
Changes 3
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
− 7.1 1.3 2.8 − 1.5 − 3.2 − 2.1 0.3 − 1.1 0.8 − 1.9 − 12.9 − 15.3 − 8.4 2015          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.7 − 35.4 50.6          Nov 0.9 − 10.1 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 12.8 − 8.0 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 4.2 − 55.6 − 55.3 − 85.4          Dec 
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.7 90.5 2016          Jan 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.1 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 
0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 0.9 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5          June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.7 11.9 − 11.1          July
1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.3 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3          Sep 
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.7 44.1 − 56.4          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.7 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.4 − 11.4 − 38.8          Dec 
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2017          Jan 
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6          Feb 
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5          Mar 
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.0 − 7.3 1.4          Apr 
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.4 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.4 − 12.8 4.0          May
5.2 − 8.0 − 2.4 − 5.6 − 5.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 9.0 9.1 − 65.1          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2015         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5
         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016         Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5
         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7
         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4
         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4
         Dec 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017         Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7
         Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
         Apr 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
         May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2
         June 7,849.9 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.1 1,865.7 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
 Changes 4
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2015         Oct 13.7 12.7 20.0 − 7.3 8.7 12.7 25.1 − 12.4 − 4.4 0.1 1.3 − 2.9 − 2.5
         Nov 59.5 14.4 10.2 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 252.6 − 42.5 − 41.5 − 1.0 1.0 0.9 − 1.4 0.1 4.5 2.2 3.0 − 1.8 − 4.1
2016         Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.9 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.6 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0
         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3
         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.2 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
         June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.5 − 15.0 − 7.1 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3
         Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
         Oct − 0.5 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 25.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1
         Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2017         Jan 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5
         Mar − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
         Apr 40.1 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
         May 9.1 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6
         June − 94.3 − 23.2 − 24.8 1.6 14.5 10.4 17.0 − 5.6 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.6 0.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1 2015          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3          Dec 
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan 
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb 48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6          Mar 
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4          Apr 
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4          May59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,038.3 43.9 689.8 611.1 793.6          June
Changes 4
− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
− 0.4 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 4.5 4.4 − 1.3 0.0 − 10.5 2015          Oct 
− 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 3.9 2.3 − 16.9 − 6.7 51.1          Nov 
2.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 50.1 − 2.1 − 67.8 − 2.8 − 86.4          Dec 
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan 
− 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.2 1.6 11.7 13.1 65.8          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.3 7.2 − 48.8          Apr 
− 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.8 − 0.7 1.0 4.3 12.3          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7          June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5          Sep 
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.5          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 6.2 − 27.0          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2017          Jan 
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7          Feb 3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.2          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.1          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.7 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.3          May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 − 5.5 − 2.0 − 35.1 9.8 − 54.4          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2017         Jan 1,701 7,933.7 385.4 2,476.4 1,978.8 495.7 4,050.5 359.6 2,939.6 0.6 744.5 119.4 901.9
         Feb 1,699 7,989.3 387.7 2,502.2 2,004.8 495.0 4,061.0 362.0 2,948.9 0.6 742.5 114.4 924.0
         Mar 1,698 7,970.5 396.2 2,510.0 2,015.1 491.6 4,060.6 361.8 2,954.1 0.7 738.9 114.1 889.7
         Apr 1,696 7,999.0 442.7 2,488.5 1,995.4 490.0 4,063.3 366.4 2,959.3 0.7 731.1 113.7 890.8
         May 1,692 7,993.3 466.1 2,452.9 1,956.5 493.1 4,064.6 359.2 2,967.5 0.6 730.4 113.6 896.0
         June 1,689 7,897.4 465.0 2,434.6 1,942.6 488.4 4,053.0 351.9 2,965.4 0.6 727.7 113.2 831.6
Commercial banks 6
2017         May 263 3,259.5 298.9 1,049.7 966.1 82.7 1,209.0 196.3 782.0 0.4 226.8 51.3 650.7
         June 266 3,208.8 296.5 1,055.9 973.5 81.5 1,203.7 187.4 785.4 0.4 226.9 50.9 601.7
   Big banks 7
2017         May 4 1,857.4 145.0 555.4 519.5 35.7 499.5 111.5 282.3 0.1 103.9 45.8 611.8
         June 4 1,813.0 142.6 570.0 535.6 34.2 491.4 104.3 281.8 0.1 103.6 45.8 563.2
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2017         May 154 982.7 72.3 247.3 203.6 43.1 628.2 60.9 454.2 0.3 111.3 4.8 30.2
         June 155 978.7 66.6 246.3 202.1 43.5 632.0 59.5 458.3 0.3 112.2 4.4 29.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2017         May 105 419.4 81.6 247.0 243.1 3.9 81.3 23.9 45.5 0.0 11.5 0.8 8.8
         June 107 417.1 87.3 239.6 235.8 3.8 80.3 23.6 45.3 0.1 11.1 0.8 9.2
Landesbanken
2017         May 9 930.2 54.9 275.9 207.5 67.4 486.1 51.6 356.7 0.1 75.9 10.5 102.9
         June 9 913.0 55.3 263.4 195.7 66.7 484.1 52.4 353.7 0.1 76.0 10.5 99.6
Savings banks
2017         May 397 1,176.3 31.2 183.3 65.8 117.4 932.1 47.1 730.0 0.0 154.8 14.2 15.6
         June 397 1,174.4 30.9 179.1 62.1 116.9 933.9 47.9 731.1 0.0 154.7 14.2 16.3
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2017         May 968 864.1 17.1 167.3 59.3 107.5 645.1 31.8 507.8 0.0 105.3 16.2 18.5
         June 963 864.4 15.8 165.2 57.4 107.3 648.4 32.9 509.7 0.0 105.8 16.2 18.8
Mortgage banks
2017         May 15 265.9 2.9 44.7 31.4 13.3 210.2 2.8 171.7 − 35.7 0.1 8.0
         June 14 257.8 3.0 42.7 30.8 11.9 204.5 2.8 167.7 − 34.1 0.1 7.5
Building and loan associations
2017         May 20 228.1 1.0 58.9 41.8 17.1 163.2 1.3 137.1 . 24.8 0.3 4.7
         June 20 228.7 0.8 58.7 41.6 17.1 163.9 1.3 137.8 . 24.8 0.3 4.8
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2017         May 20 1,269.1 60.3 673.2 584.4 87.7 419.0 28.2 282.3 0.0 107.1 21.0 95.6
         June 20 1,250.3 62.6 669.5 581.4 87.0 414.4 27.2 280.0 0.0 105.5 20.9 82.8
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2017         May 140 1,122.1 128.6 419.4 377.4 41.3 479.1 68.5 301.2 0.3 106.9 4.2 90.8
         June 142 1,119.8 127.0 422.5 380.9 40.7 478.4 67.3 301.4 0.4 106.9 4.2 87.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2017         May 35 702.7 47.0 172.4 134.3 37.4 397.9 44.6 255.7 0.3 95.4 3.4 82.0
         June 35 702.7 39.7 182.8 145.0 36.9 398.1 43.7 256.1 0.3 95.8 3.4 78.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commerci al Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the C redit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung de r Kreditinstitute)
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statis tical Supplement
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I. 1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,798.7 589.5 1,209.1 3,593.0 1,938.1 305.2 695.2 73.0 596.4 544.6 58.1 1,140.0 487.9 914.0 2017          Jan 
1,819.8 622.1 1,197.6 3,599.6 1,946.2 305.1 694.2 76.4 596.5 545.3 57.6 1,151.0 488.0 930.9          Feb 1,845.9 625.5 1,220.4 3,580.4 1,930.7 303.1 695.3 57.8 594.6 543.8 56.8 1,147.8 491.8 904.7          Mar 
1,826.3 570.1 1,256.1 3,632.2 1,976.6 311.4 693.7 84.6 594.0 543.8 56.5 1,137.0 503.1 900.4          Apr 
1,811.9 606.0 1,205.9 3,637.8 1,986.3 307.4 694.9 83.3 593.5 543.7 55.6 1,140.2 505.2 898.2          May1,774.3 588.8 1,185.5 3,630.1 1,992.9 295.3 694.3 54.7 592.4 542.9 55.1 1,139.6 509.6 843.8          June
Commercial banks 6
879.8 434.8 445.0 1,431.2 879.7 179.8 244.5 62.8 102.8 93.6 24.4 167.8 175.2 605.5 2017          May
882.3 438.3 444.0 1,429.5 883.6 169.6 249.2 37.2 102.7 93.4 24.4 166.8 175.8 554.5          June
Big banks 7
445.0 199.9 245.1 625.5 357.0 112.7 87.6 62.8 62.2 60.8 6.0 134.7 104.1 548.1 2017          May
453.5 204.8 248.7 621.3 360.6 103.4 89.1 37.2 62.1 60.7 6.1 134.6 104.0 499.6          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
192.2 56.3 135.9 648.6 416.3 44.4 131.1 0.0 40.0 32.4 16.9 32.7 63.0 46.2 2017          May
188.3 57.5 130.8 650.9 416.1 43.4 134.6 0.0 40.1 32.4 16.7 31.9 63.6 44.0          June
Branches of foreign banks
242.6 178.5 64.1 157.1 106.5 22.8 25.9 − 0.5 0.3 1.5 0.4 8.1 11.1 2017          May
240.5 176.0 64.5 157.2 106.9 22.8 25.5 − 0.5 0.3 1.6 0.4 8.2 10.8          June
Landesbanken
272.8 68.6 204.1 296.7 122.9 62.1 98.6 17.0 12.7 9.8 0.5 208.1 53.3 99.2 2017          May
251.0 56.5 194.6 298.8 125.6 62.6 97.5 14.2 12.6 9.8 0.6 208.3 52.3 102.6          June
Savings banks
132.6 6.8 125.8 884.2 540.1 14.7 15.0 − 291.9 265.4 22.6 14.2 103.8 41.5 2017          May
131.3 7.0 124.3 881.8 539.0 14.6 14.8 − 291.2 265.1 22.2 14.1 107.3 39.8          June
 
Credit cooperatives
 
111.5 1.9 109.6 642.1 402.5 32.4 15.1 − 185.7 174.4 6.4 7.6 71.2 31.7 2017          May
111.8 2.6 109.2 641.5 402.4 32.6 14.8 − 185.4 174.3 6.3 7.7 73.9 29.5          June
Mortgage banks
51.9 5.1 46.8 103.2 4.7 6.6 91.8 − − − . 91.0 10.4 9.4 2017          May
50.4 4.4 46.0 99.0 4.3 6.1 88.6 − − − . 90.2 9.7 8.6          June
Building and loan associations
26.0 4.0 22.0 175.5 3.5 1.5 169.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.9 11.1 12.7 2017          May
26.5 4.5 22.0 175.4 3.5 1.5 169.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.9 11.0 12.9          June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
337.3 84.7 252.6 104.9 32.9 10.4 60.0 3.5 − − . 648.4 80.2 98.3 2017          May
320.9 75.5 245.4 104.1 34.4 8.4 59.7 3.3 − − . 649.5 79.8 96.0          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
414.7 246.0 168.7 539.1 374.3 57.6 77.0 8.3 21.2 20.7 9.0 21.9 49.5 96.9 2017          May
416.1 249.2 166.8 540.0 374.5 57.9 77.4 8.1 21.2 20.7 9.0 22.8 49.4 91.6          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
172.0 67.5 104.6 382.0 267.9 34.8 51.2 8.3 20.7 20.4 7.5 21.5 41.4 85.7 2017          May
175.5 73.2 102.3 382.7 267.6 35.1 51.9 8.1 20.6 20.4 7.5 22.4 41.2 80.7          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerisc he Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking  categories. 
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2016         Jan 16.2 170.9 1,368.7 1,086.0 0.0 2.0 280.8 1.6 3,238.7 2,771.0 0.4 0.7 466.5
         Feb 15.9 164.3 1,379.8 1,098.3 0.0 1.8 279.7 1.6 3,248.0 2,781.4 0.4 1.5 464.7
         Mar 17.2 166.6 1,358.5 1,076.3 0.0 2.0 280.2 1.6 3,247.2 2,785.9 0.3 1.2 459.7
         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8
         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
         July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
         Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5
         Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
         Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
         Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6
         Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017         Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
         Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1
         Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.4 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
         Apr 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
         May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6
         June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
Changes *
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2016         Jan − 3.1 + 15.9 + 22.2 + 23.4 − + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 6.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.4
         Feb − 0.3 − 6.5 + 11.9 + 13.1 − − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.7
         Mar + 1.3 + 2.3 − 21.3 − 22.1 − + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.0
         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
         July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6
         Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
         Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
         Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
2017         Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
         Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2
         Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         Apr + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
         May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7
         June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 20.3 90.0 1,066.1 145.0 921.1 0.0 6.0 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 596.1 54.8 29.3 2016          Jan 
− 20.2 89.8 1,061.7 151.8 909.9 0.0 5.9 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 596.4 54.6 29.3          Feb − 19.9 90.3 1,058.6 147.9 910.7 0.0 5.9 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 594.5 54.4 29.1          Mar 
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6          July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7          Aug − 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6          Sep 
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6          Oct 
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6          Nov − 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8          Dec 
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2017          Jan 
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5          Feb − 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4          Mar 
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3          Apr 
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4          May− 19.7 88.5 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8          June
Changes *
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 13.9 − 13.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 2016          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.1 + 7.0 − 10.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.2 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 −          Nov − + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2          Dec 
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2017          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          May− − 0.4 + 0.1 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2016         Jan 0.3 1,080.5 844.9 570.2 274.8 1.9 233.6 1.0 766.7 440.2 101.3 338.8 8.9 317.6
         Feb 0.3 1,095.3 854.5 580.2 274.3 3.1 237.8 1.0 765.9 445.3 102.6 342.7 10.2 310.3
         Mar 0.3 1,057.4 816.6 551.7 264.9 3.0 237.8 1.0 754.4 427.1 87.9 339.2 9.1 318.2
         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7
         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
         July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
         Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0
         Sep 0.3 1,046.8 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.4 1.0 751.0 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.3
         Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
         Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3
         Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017         Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
         Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3
         Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 1.9 230.0 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
         Apr 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
         May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8
         June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
Changes *
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2016         Jan − 0.0 + 16.1 + 16.8 + 15.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 18.2 + 18.2 + 18.6 − 0.4 + 1.3 − 1.3
         Feb + 0.0 + 14.9 + 9.6 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 1.1 − 7.1
         Mar − 0.0 − 26.3 − 26.5 − 22.8 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 13.6 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 9.3
         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9
         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
         July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3
         Sep − 0.0 − 44.3 − 42.2 − 42.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 5.3 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.5
         Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
         Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1
         Dec + 0.0 − 20.7 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 9.1 − 13.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 1.2
2017         Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
         Apr + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
         May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6
         June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
13.2 29.6 637.8 352.2 285.7 201.3 84.3 0.1 237.7 129.1 108.6 60.5 48.2 0.8 2016          Jan 
13.2 29.0 644.4 357.8 286.6 201.8 84.8 0.1 246.4 137.2 109.2 61.8 47.5 0.8          Feb 13.3 28.9 623.4 349.6 273.8 192.0 81.8 0.0 218.8 119.8 99.0 52.9 46.1 0.8          Mar 
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7          July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7          Aug 13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7          Sep 
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7          Oct 
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7          Nov 13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7          Dec 
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2017          Jan 
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7          Feb 12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 124.0 72.2 51.8 0.7          Mar 
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7          Apr 
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6          May12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6          June
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
+ 0.1 − 0.9 + 27.6 + 29.5 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.2 − + 36.9 + 26.4 + 10.6 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 2016          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.0 − 5.4 − 8.6 − 6.7 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 25.6 − 16.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 1.2 + 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0          Nov − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0          Dec 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2017          Jan 
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 15.9 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 −          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          May− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2016         Jan 3,238.7 2,771.4 259.0 208.1 207.7 0.4 50.9 50.5 0.3 2,979.7 2,452.5
         Feb 3,248.0 2,781.8 266.3 214.3 213.6 0.7 52.0 51.2 0.8 2,981.7 2,456.1
         Mar 3,247.2 2,786.3 271.4 218.7 217.9 0.8 52.6 52.2 0.4 2,975.9 2,454.1
         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7
         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.8 217.8 216.8 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.3 2,472.8
         July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
         Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1
         Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
         Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
         Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5
         Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017         Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
         Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5
         Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
         Apr 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
         May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8
         June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.4 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
Changes *
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2016         Jan + 4.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1
         Feb + 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.6 + 6.4 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6
         Mar − 0.8 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 6.0 − 2.2
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7
         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.2
         July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2
         Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
         Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
         Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0
         Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
2017         Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
         Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2
         Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
         Apr + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
         May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8
         June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 20072,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,235.3 257.1 1,978.3 217.2 18.2 527.2 277.8 27.7 250.1 249.4 − 2.1 2016          Jan 
2,240.2 257.4 1,982.8 215.9 18.0 525.6 276.8 27.7 249.1 248.8 − 2.1          Feb 2,240.5 257.3 1,983.2 213.5 17.9 521.8 275.6 27.5 248.1 246.2 − 2.0          Mar 
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May2,256.9 258.7 1,998.2 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8          July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8          Aug 2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8          Sep 
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8          Oct 
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8          Nov 2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8          Dec 
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2017          Jan 
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7          Feb 2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7          Mar 
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7          Apr 
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7          May2,346.1 267.7 2,078.4 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6          June
Changes *
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 3.0 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2016          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 1.0 + 3.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Feb + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6 − − 0.1          Mar 
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May+ 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Aug + 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0          Nov + 3.4 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2017          Jan 
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0          May+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.1 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 5.4 − − 0.1          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2015 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016         June 2,473.6 1,235.1 1,248.0 996.2 251.8 1,332.0 345.8 131.5 101.7 62.7 125.4 50.9 59.0 133.7
         Sep 2,497.2 1,248.2 1,264.5 1,007.6 256.9 1,341.1 350.5 130.3 103.0 63.2 126.9 51.2 57.4 136.4
         Dec 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017         Mar 2,533.8 1,267.0 1,283.2 1,022.4 260.8 1,364.4 356.6 129.4 105.2 66.9 131.5 50.5 55.9 141.0
         June 2,559.7 1,279.7 1,297.8 1,033.3 264.4 1,377.6 360.9 131.5 108.2 65.7 130.8 51.0 54.7 141.5
 Short-term lending
2015 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2016         June 216.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 184.7 4.3 37.0 4.7 13.1 42.1 4.2 5.1 27.2
         Sep 213.8 − 7.6 − 7.6 181.6 4.1 34.3 4.6 13.0 42.6 4.1 4.7 28.5
         Dec 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2017         Mar 211.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 181.3 3.7 33.6 4.5 13.6 44.8 3.8 4.2 28.6
         June 213.6 − 6.7 − 6.7 183.3 3.5 34.7 4.7 13.7 43.3 4.0 4.6 28.1
 Medium-term lending
2015 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2016         June 258.7 − 34.7 − 34.7 182.1 13.2 23.7 5.1 10.5 16.6 4.5 11.1 40.4
         Sep 261.0 − 34.8 − 34.8 183.4 13.4 24.3 5.7 10.5 16.5 4.6 11.0 41.1
         Dec 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2017         Mar 264.4 − 34.0 − 34.0 186.8 13.4 23.3 4.9 11.4 17.9 4.4 10.8 43.0
         June 267.7 − 34.1 − 34.1 188.6 13.3 23.3 5.0 10.9 18.2 4.4 10.7 44.3
 Long-term lending
2015 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2016         June 1,998.2 1,235.1 1,205.5 996.2 209.3 965.3 328.3 70.7 91.9 39.1 66.8 42.1 42.8 66.0
         Sep 2,022.5 1,248.2 1,222.1 1,007.6 214.5 976.1 332.9 71.7 92.7 39.7 67.8 42.4 41.6 66.9
         Dec 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2017         Mar 2,057.6 1,267.0 1,242.4 1,022.4 220.0 996.2 339.6 72.5 95.8 41.9 68.7 42.3 40.9 69.4
         June 2,078.4 1,279.7 1,257.0 1,033.3 223.6 1,005.7 344.0 73.5 98.5 41.1 69.3 42.6 39.4 69.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2016         Q2 + 17.4 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 3.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 3.3
         Q3 + 24.5 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 10.9 + 5.1 + 10.2 + 4.2 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.6 + 2.7
         Q4 + 14.4 + 9.1 + 12.4 + 8.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.2
2017         Q1 + 21.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 0.7 + 16.8 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 3.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.2
         Q2 + 23.3 + 12.4 + 14.0 + 11.1 + 2.9 + 11.1 + 4.3 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.2
 Short-term lending
2016         Q2 − 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.6
         Q3 − 2.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9
2017         Q1 + 6.3 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4
 Medium-term lending
2016         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3
         Q3 + 3.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6
         Q4 + 2.4 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7
2017         Q1 + 0.2 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.1
         Q2 + 3.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3
 Long-term lending
2016         Q2 + 15.1 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 0.4
         Q3 + 24.2 + 12.4 + 16.2 + 10.9 + 5.3 + 10.7 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.8
         Q4 + 19.6 + 9.1 + 13.3 + 8.4 + 4.9 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.6
2017         Q1 + 15.1 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8
         Q2 + 18.1 + 12.4 + 14.2 + 11.1 + 3.1 + 6.9 + 4.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5 2015
667.2 198.4 34.6 178.1 399.4 46.9 1,127.6 898.7 228.9 159.6 9.8 14.0 3.5 2016          June
672.7 201.4 34.8 180.8 401.1 46.8 1,142.0 910.5 231.5 162.3 9.8 14.2 3.5          Sep 680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6          Dec 
684.0 206.2 38.8 179.7 403.8 46.3 1,154.8 922.9 231.9 165.5 9.2 14.6 3.7 2017          Mar 
694.2 209.8 39.6 183.6 408.0 48.5 1,167.5 933.2 234.4 168.2 8.9 14.5 3.8          June
Short-term lending
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0 201551.2 8.6 6.1 10.7 25.5 5.9 31.6 3.6 28.1 1.8 9.8 0.5 0.0 2016          June
49.9 8.5 5.9 11.1 24.7 5.7 31.6 3.4 28.2 1.7 9.8 0.5 0.0          Sep 47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0          Dec 
48.2 8.4 6.6 9.1 24.5 5.7 29.8 3.2 26.7 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2017          Mar 
50.1 9.0 6.5 9.7 24.5 5.7 29.7 3.1 26.6 1.8 8.9 0.5 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0 201570.1 10.6 7.3 19.0 33.0 3.6 76.0 21.4 54.6 49.3 − 0.6 0.0 2016          June
69.7 10.7 7.3 18.9 33.0 3.7 77.1 21.4 55.7 50.3 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
71.1 11.3 8.6 17.8 32.7 3.6 77.1 20.6 56.5 51.7 − 0.5 0.0 2017          Mar 
72.0 11.5 8.8 18.6 32.7 3.6 78.5 20.8 57.8 53.0 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5 2015545.8 179.2 21.2 148.5 340.9 37.4 1,019.9 873.7 146.2 108.6 − 13.0 3.4 2016          June
553.1 182.1 21.6 150.8 343.4 37.4 1,033.3 885.7 147.6 110.2 − 13.1 3.5          Sep 560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5          Dec 
564.7 186.5 23.6 152.7 346.5 37.1 1,047.9 899.2 148.8 112.1 − 13.4 3.7 2017          Mar 
572.1 189.2 24.3 155.3 350.7 39.2 1,059.3 909.3 150.0 113.4 − 13.5 3.7          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 7.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 11.8 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q2
+ 6.4 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 14.1 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 7.1 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
+ 6.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 10.6 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 3.4 + 2.2 + 12.2 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 2016          Q2
− 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q2
+ 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 5.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 11.4 + 9.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q2
+ 7.4 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 6.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 6.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 7.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2016         July 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 238.0 658.8 44.5 614.3 589.1 52.7 28.6 19.3 1.0
         Aug 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 234.7 658.3 45.0 613.3 588.4 52.2 28.7 19.0 0.7
         Sep 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 239.5 657.2 45.5 611.7 587.2 51.8 28.6 18.8 1.3
         Oct 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 229.9 658.8 45.8 613.1 586.6 51.3 28.6 18.7 1.1
         Nov 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 233.6 658.8 46.5 612.4 586.2 50.9 28.6 18.6 0.8
         Dec 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017         Jan 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 241.0 654.9 46.8 608.0 588.5 49.5 30.6 18.1 2.5
         Feb 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 237.3 654.1 46.5 607.6 588.5 49.0 30.5 17.6 1.5
         Mar 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 237.8 653.1 47.8 605.3 586.7 48.2 30.4 17.2 0.9
         Apr 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 229.2 652.6 50.3 602.3 586.2 47.8 30.3 17.3 0.8
         May 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 229.3 654.1 52.3 601.8 585.7 47.0 30.4 17.1 0.4
         June 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 226.4 643.4 53.5 589.9 584.7 46.6 29.8 16.9 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2016         July + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Aug + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Sep + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7
         Oct + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 9.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.3
         Dec − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1
         Mar − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.6
         Apr + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 8.5 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         June + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.2 − 2.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2016         July 203.8 60.1 135.8 84.5 51.3 13.3 38.0 3.9 4.1 27.2 2.6 0.2
         Aug 206.1 62.4 135.6 83.6 52.1 13.7 38.4 4.0 4.1 27.3 2.6 0.0
         Sep 202.6 59.6 134.8 82.4 52.4 14.1 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 0.2
         Oct 199.1 58.8 132.1 78.9 53.2 14.9 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 −
         Nov 207.0 61.7 137.0 82.6 54.4 16.2 38.3 3.9 4.4 27.2 2.6 −
         Dec 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017         Jan 202.2 55.1 138.7 84.7 54.1 16.4 37.7 3.8 4.5 26.7 2.5 −
         Feb 205.7 61.4 136.0 81.8 54.2 15.8 38.4 3.7 4.6 26.8 2.5 −
         Mar 204.0 58.9 136.8 81.4 55.4 16.5 38.9 3.7 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
         Apr 203.1 59.1 135.6 77.9 57.7 18.7 39.0 3.6 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
         May 209.7 61.1 140.3 80.4 59.9 20.4 39.5 3.7 4.6 26.4 2.5 −
         June 209.9 58.1 143.5 81.8 61.8 21.8 40.0 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2016         July − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Sep − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Oct − 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 7.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Dec − 7.2 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
2017         Jan + 2.4 − 2.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Feb + 3.5 + 6.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.7 − 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 6.7 + 1.9 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June − 0.1 − 3.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.22015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2016         July 3,071.8 1,677.0 761.1 153.6 607.5 31.2 576.3 585.2 48.6 1.4 16.7 0.8
         Aug 3,076.0 1,686.1 757.4 151.1 606.3 31.4 574.9 584.4 48.1 1.4 16.4 0.6         Sep 3,081.1 1,688.4 761.8 157.0 604.8 31.4 573.3 583.2 47.6 1.4 16.1 1.2
         Oct 3,095.6 1,709.2 756.7 151.1 605.6 30.9 574.8 582.7 47.0 1.4 16.0 1.1
         Nov 3,121.9 1,737.6 755.5 151.1 604.4 30.3 574.1 582.3 46.5 1.5 15.9 0.8         Dec 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2017         Jan 3,144.2 1,757.4 757.1 156.3 600.8 30.4 570.3 584.7 45.0 3.8 15.6 2.5
         Feb 3,139.8 1,755.2 755.4 155.5 599.9 30.6 569.2 584.8 44.4 3.7 15.1 1.5         Mar 3,138.8 1,758.1 754.1 156.3 597.8 31.3 566.4 583.0 43.6 3.7 14.8 0.9
         Apr 3,157.2 1,785.2 746.3 151.4 594.9 31.6 563.3 582.6 43.1 3.7 14.8 0.8
         May 3,158.7 1,791.1 743.1 148.9 594.2 31.9 562.4 582.0 42.4 4.0 14.6 0.4         June 3,160.3 1,811.1 726.2 144.6 581.6 31.7 549.9 581.0 41.9 3.9 14.5 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.22016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.9
2016         July + 15.9 + 16.4 + 1.0 + 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.3 + 9.1 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2         Sep + 5.4 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 5.9 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 14.5 + 20.8 − 5.1 − 6.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 26.4 + 28.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec + 5.0 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 17.2 + 17.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 4.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar − 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Apr + 18.4 + 27.0 − 7.8 − 5.0 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 1.4 + 5.9 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4         June + 11.0 + 19.9 − 7.5 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2016         July 1,027.0 506.7 499.6 98.2 401.4 17.5 384.0 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.6 0.8
         Aug 1,030.7 512.7 497.2 96.9 400.2 17.7 382.5 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.3 0.6         Sep 1,035.0 512.9 501.4 103.0 398.4 17.8 380.7 7.3 13.4 1.3 13.1 1.2
         Oct 1,040.1 523.5 496.0 96.5 399.5 17.2 382.2 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.1 1.1
         Nov 1,043.0 527.1 495.6 96.6 399.0 17.0 382.0 6.9 13.3 1.3 13.0 0.8         Dec 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2017         Jan 1,048.4 532.9 495.6 102.1 393.6 17.6 376.0 6.9 13.0 2.9 12.8 2.5
         Feb 1,033.8 520.4 493.6 100.5 393.1 18.0 375.1 6.8 13.0 2.8 12.4 1.5         Mar 1,034.5 522.7 492.1 101.3 390.8 18.4 372.4 6.8 12.9 2.8 12.1 0.9
         Apr 1,035.4 530.1 485.4 97.5 387.9 18.6 369.2 6.9 13.0 2.8 12.1 0.8
         May 1,033.4 531.1 482.6 95.8 386.8 18.8 368.1 6.8 12.9 2.9 12.0 0.4         June 1,032.3 545.0 467.6 92.9 374.7 18.8 355.9 6.8 12.9 2.8 11.9 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.22016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.9
2016         July − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Aug + 3.8 + 6.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         Sep + 4.7 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 6.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 5.0 + 10.6 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 3.0 + 3.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec − 10.6 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 3.2 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017         Jan + 16.0 + 14.6 + 1.6 + 3.8 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.7
         Feb − 14.2 − 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar + 0.7 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
         Apr + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.6 − 3.8 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         May − 2.0 + 1.0 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.4         June + 8.3 + 14.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017         Jan 2,095.7 1,224.5 1,189.6 211.3 828.3 150.0 34.9 261.5 248.0 24.9 181.8 41.3
         Feb 2,106.0 1,234.9 1,199.9 212.0 837.0 150.9 34.9 261.8 247.2 24.6 181.5 41.1
         Mar 2,104.3 1,235.4 1,200.2 208.2 841.4 150.5 35.2 262.0 247.1 25.1 181.5 40.5
         Apr 2,121.9 1,255.1 1,220.2 211.6 856.4 152.2 35.0 260.9 246.1 24.8 180.6 40.7
         May 2,125.3 1,260.1 1,223.9 213.8 857.9 152.2 36.2 260.5 245.5 24.4 180.6 40.5
         June 2,128.0 1,266.1 1,230.1 211.0 866.2 152.9 36.0 258.6 244.3 24.1 180.2 39.9
Changes*
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2017         Jan + 1.2 + 2.5 + 2.7 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.4 + 10.3 + 0.7 + 8.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar − 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Apr + 17.5 + 19.8 + 20.0 + 3.4 + 14.5 + 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.3
         May + 3.4 + 4.9 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2
         June + 2.7 + 6.0 + 6.3 − 2.7 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are no t specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017         Jan 202.2 6.9 3.5 1.1 2.2 0.1 13.5 48.7 13.3 17.7 16.6 1.1 12.8
         Feb 205.7 7.7 3.6 1.6 2.3 0.1 13.6 49.0 13.5 17.9 16.6 1.0 12.9
         Mar 204.0 7.9 3.6 1.9 2.3 0.1 13.5 51.0 13.4 20.0 16.6 1.0 12.8
         Apr 203.1 7.6 3.7 1.5 2.3 0.1 13.5 49.2 12.3 19.2 16.6 1.1 12.8
         May 209.7 7.8 3.7 1.6 2.4 0.1 13.5 48.3 11.2 18.8 17.1 1.1 12.7
         June 209.9 7.9 3.5 2.0 2.3 0.1 13.2 50.7 11.5 20.6 17.4 1.1 12.6
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2017         Jan + 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar − 1.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Apr − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1
         June − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.3 + 2.4 + 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Ent erprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 201413.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
13.5 54.3 207.2 12.9 194.3 577.8 569.4 8.4 31.9 0.9 2.8 − 2017          Jan 
14.6 55.1 206.7 12.6 194.1 578.0 569.7 8.4 31.3 0.9 2.7 −          Feb 15.0 55.1 207.0 12.9 194.1 576.2 567.9 8.3 30.7 0.9 2.7 −          Mar 
14.8 53.9 207.0 13.0 194.0 575.8 567.4 8.3 30.1 0.9 2.7 −          Apr 
14.9 53.1 207.4 13.1 194.3 575.3 567.0 8.3 29.5 1.1 2.6 −          May14.3 51.7 206.9 12.9 194.0 574.2 566.0 8.2 29.0 1.1 2.5 −          June
Changes*
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2017          Jan 
+ 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
− 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Apr 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 −          May− 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 201452.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
49.4 25.4 8.4 10.0 5.7 0.4 97.2 13.0 57.5 25.2 1.5 − 2017          Jan 
53.1 28.9 8.3 10.2 5.7 0.4 95.9 15.4 54.0 25.0 1.5 −          Feb 51.7 27.1 8.2 10.7 5.7 0.4 93.4 14.7 51.4 25.8 1.5 −          Mar 
51.7 27.5 7.8 10.8 5.7 0.4 94.5 15.6 49.4 28.1 1.5 −          Apr 
57.0 31.6 8.4 11.3 5.8 0.2 96.5 14.5 51.5 29.1 1.4 −          May54.4 28.8 8.3 11.5 5.8 0.0 96.9 14.2 50.8 30.5 1.4 −          June
Changes*
+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016
− 6.6 − 6.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.6 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2017          Jan 
+ 3.7 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb − 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 5.3 + 4.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 2.2 + 1.1 − 0.1 −          May− 2.6 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017         Feb 596.5 588.5 538.4 354.9 50.2 36.6 8.0 6.9 0.1 57.6 49.0 34.9 8.6
         Mar 594.6 586.7 537.0 351.5 49.7 36.2 7.9 6.8 0.1 56.8 48.2 34.4 8.6
         Apr 594.0 586.2 537.0 351.6 49.2 35.8 7.8 6.8 0.1 56.5 47.8 34.1 8.7
         May 593.5 585.7 536.9 349.1 48.9 35.3 7.8 6.8 0.1 55.6 47.0 33.6 8.6
         June 592.4 584.7 536.2 347.5 48.5 34.9 7.7 6.7 0.1 55.1 46.6 33.3 8.5
Changes*
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2017         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Mar − 1.9 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.5 −
         Apr − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0
         May − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1
         June − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017         Feb 1,118.1 174.2 27.2 409.5 88.5 108.1 4.7 40.1 6.1 969.9 0.8 0.2 32.9 0.5
         Mar 1,114.6 172.2 29.0 405.1 87.3 108.0 4.7 40.1 6.2 966.6 0.8 0.2 33.2 0.5
         Apr 1,104.2 169.8 26.5 391.2 80.5 99.0 4.7 39.8 6.4 965.3 0.8 0.2 32.8 0.5
         May 1,107.3 173.0 26.7 391.2 84.0 103.3 4.8 39.0 6.6 965.1 0.5 0.2 32.8 0.5
         June 1,107.1 172.4 25.8 390.3 85.9 105.3 4.8 39.8 6.3 962.0 0.3 0.2 32.5 0.5
Changes*
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2017         Feb + 11.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 5.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 8.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0
         Mar − 3.6 − 2.0 + 1.9 − 4.5 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 −
         Apr − 10.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 13.9 − 6.8 − 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 −
         May + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.5 + 4.2 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         June − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017         Apr 20 228.3 43.7 0.0 16.9 13.3 99.8 25.0 24.7 2.6 23.9 164.9 10.3 2.9 11.0 6.7
         May 20 228.1 42.8 0.0 17.1 13.1 100.2 25.1 24.8 2.6 23.4 165.4 10.1 2.9 11.1 7.4         June 20 228.7 42.5 0.0 17.1 13.0 101.0 25.2 24.8 2.5 23.9 165.4 10.1 2.9 11.0 6.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         Apr 12 160.5 28.2 − 7.9 10.0 77.3 22.2 11.2 1.7 21.4 107.8 10.1 2.9 7.3 4.3
         May 12 160.4 27.4 − 8.0 9.8 77.6 22.3 11.3 1.7 21.3 108.0 9.8 2.9 7.4 4.5         June 12 160.8 27.1 − 8.0 9.7 78.2 22.4 11.2 1.7 21.6 108.0 9.7 2.9 7.4 4.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         Apr 8 67.8 15.5 0.0 9.0 3.3 22.5 2.8 13.5 0.8 2.5 57.1 0.3 − 3.7 2.4
         May 8 67.7 15.4 0.0 9.1 3.3 22.6 2.8 13.5 0.8 2.2 57.4 0.3 − 3.7 2.9         June 8 67.9 15.4 0.0 9.1 3.2 22.8 2.8 13.5 0.8 2.3 57.4 0.4 − 3.6 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017         Apr 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.1 2.5 3.4 1.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.5 17.1 8.1 0.6 0.0
         May 2.5 0.0 0.6 4.2 2.4 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.6 17.3 8.3 0.6 0.0         June 2.2 0.0 0.8 4.1 2.4 3.6 1.5 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.7 17.1 8.0 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         Apr 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.8 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.2 12.3 4.9 0.4 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.5 2.6 1.1 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.3 12.2 4.8 0.4 0.0         June 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.6 2.8 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 12.2 4.8 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017         Apr 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.2 0.1 0.0
         May 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.4 0.9 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.4 5.1 3.4 0.1 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.2 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2016         Aug 50 187 1,959.7 569.3 553.9 187.9 366.0 15.4 643.3 528.5 13.9 514.6 114.7 747.1 544.6
         Sep 50 187 1,916.6 595.9 581.3 200.4 380.9 14.6 629.3 524.9 14.3 510.6 104.4 691.4 511.1
         Oct 50 186 1,942.2 626.9 613.0 212.4 400.6 13.9 599.9 496.1 13.3 482.8 103.7 715.4 497.2
         Nov 50 185 1,928.8 592.4 578.4 205.9 372.5 14.0 622.8 516.4 14.1 502.3 106.4 713.7 495.0
         Dec 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017         Jan 51 192 1,877.2 603.8 590.4 215.5 375.0 13.4 586.0 492.4 14.1 478.4 93.6 687.4 461.8
         Feb 51 193 1,920.0 617.9 604.9 227.3 377.5 13.1 600.4 505.3 13.8 491.4 95.1 701.7 467.6
         Mar 51 193 1,918.1 616.1 602.7 228.2 374.5 13.4 609.0 513.0 14.1 499.0 95.9 693.0 452.2
         Apr 51 192 1,931.5 631.8 618.6 224.4 394.2 13.3 597.8 503.9 13.7 490.3 93.9 701.8 460.3
         May 51 192 1,894.2 629.7 616.8 215.1 401.8 12.8 565.5 478.3 13.2 465.1 87.2 699.0 459.0
Changes *
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2016         Sep − − − 42.9 + 27.4 + 28.1 + 12.5 + 15.6 − 0.7 − 12.8 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 3.1 − 10.1 − 55.6 − 32.4
         Oct − − 1 + 24.9 + 26.9 + 27.7 + 11.9 + 15.8 − 0.8 − 32.2 − 31.4 − 0.9 − 30.5 − 0.8 + 23.3 − 16.4
         Nov − − 1 − 15.5 − 44.0 − 43.9 − 6.5 − 37.4 − 0.2 + 12.5 + 11.3 + 0.7 + 10.6 + 1.1 − 3.8 − 9.1
         Dec + 1 + 6 − 55.9 − 10.2 − 9.9 − 1.0 − 8.9 − 0.3 − 44.3 − 28.4 + 0.4 − 28.8 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 11.1
2017         Jan − + 1 + 5.1 + 24.7 + 25.0 + 10.5 + 14.5 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 7.9 − 0.4 + 8.3 + 3.5 − 20.0 − 20.0
         Feb − + 1 + 41.4 + 9.6 + 10.1 + 11.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 − 0.2 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 13.0 + 2.9
         Mar − − − 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 10.6 + 0.3 + 10.3 + 1.2 − 7.9 − 13.7
         Apr − − 1 + 14.9 + 22.0 + 22.0 − 3.8 + 25.8 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 10.3 + 11.7
         May − − − 35.2 + 6.6 + 6.8 − 9.3 + 16.1 − 0.2 − 22.3 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 16.4 − 5.4 − 0.8 + 4.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2016         Aug 19 55 352.7 112.4 102.3 48.0 54.3 10.0 167.7 135.4 23.0 112.3 32.3 72.6 −
         Sep 19 53 320.9 84.2 74.1 20.9 53.2 10.0 168.0 135.7 23.2 112.6 32.3 68.7 −
         Oct 19 53 316.6 81.4 71.3 20.5 50.8 10.1 157.9 126.3 22.9 103.4 31.5 77.3 −
         Nov 19 52 323.1 83.1 73.2 19.9 53.3 10.0 154.6 123.1 23.1 100.0 31.5 85.4 −
         Dec 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017         Jan 20 53 314.1 81.3 71.7 22.0 49.7 9.6 161.5 130.5 22.9 107.6 31.0 71.3 −
         Feb 20 53 315.4 80.7 71.2 30.9 40.4 9.5 162.0 130.8 23.1 107.7 31.2 72.7 −
         Mar 20 53 309.8 79.8 70.7 31.1 39.7 9.1 162.7 131.5 23.0 108.5 31.2 67.2 −
         Apr 20 53 303.2 73.1 64.1 24.8 39.3 9.0 160.8 130.9 22.8 108.0 29.9 69.3 −
         May 20 53 295.9 72.1 64.6 26.7 38.0 7.5 157.0 128.3 23.0 105.3 28.7 66.8 −
Changes *
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2016         Sep − − 2 − 31.5 − 28.0 − 28.0 − 27.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 3.9 −
         Oct − − − 5.6 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 10.6 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 0.8 + 8.6 −
         Nov − − 1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 4.2 − 4.2 + 0.2 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 8.0 −
         Dec + 1 + 1 − 3.4 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 6.6 + 7.0 − 0.5 + 7.4 − 0.4 − 8.4 −
2017         Jan − − − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 5.6 −
         Feb − − + 0.0 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 8.9 − 10.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 −
         Mar − − − 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 5.5 −
         Apr − − − 4.9 − 5.7 − 5.7 − 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.1 −
         May − − − 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.5 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2017
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 20141,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 2016
1,128.2 760.8 382.8 378.1 367.4 21.6 17.7 3.8 345.8 114.7 49.8 667.0 548.8 2016          Aug 
1,117.2 763.1 380.6 382.5 354.1 21.5 17.7 3.8 332.6 113.7 49.7 636.1 513.9          Sep 
1,186.7 833.2 422.0 411.2 353.4 21.6 17.8 3.8 331.9 108.9 49.6 597.0 491.1          Oct 
1,165.0 791.8 410.5 381.3 373.2 19.1 15.5 3.6 354.1 104.2 50.3 609.4 495.3          Nov 1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0          Dec 
1,161.3 804.3 417.6 386.7 357.0 15.2 11.7 3.5 341.8 111.2 50.9 553.9 456.6 2017          Jan 
1,190.7 816.8 423.2 393.6 373.9 16.5 13.2 3.4 357.4 114.0 51.2 564.0 462.0          Feb 1,197.9 825.3 436.0 389.3 372.6 15.2 11.8 3.4 357.4 106.9 51.6 561.7 448.3          Mar 
1,210.4 846.5 422.0 424.5 363.9 15.3 12.0 3.3 348.7 104.7 51.3 565.0 455.4          Apr 
1,178.6 830.8 406.4 424.4 347.8 15.5 12.3 3.2 332.2 100.5 50.7 564.3 458.6          May
Changes *
− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016
− 10.3 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 5.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 30.9 − 33.9 2016          Sep 
+ 65.3 + 66.1 + 41.4 + 24.7 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 39.1 − 25.5          Oct 
− 31.1 − 50.5 − 11.5 − 39.0 + 19.4 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 21.9 − 6.8 + 0.7 + 12.3 − 2.6          Nov − 30.5 + 7.1 + 14.4 − 7.3 − 37.6 − 3.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 34.0 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 24.3 − 15.8          Dec 
+ 30.0 + 8.5 − 7.3 + 15.8 + 21.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 21.7 + 11.7 − 0.3 − 31.2 − 20.5 2017          Jan 
+ 24.8 + 8.0 + 5.6 + 2.4 + 16.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 15.4 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.3          Feb + 9.9 + 11.1 + 12.8 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.4 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 11.9          Mar 
+ 19.0 + 27.4 − 14.1 + 41.5 − 8.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 8.6 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 11.1          Apr 
− 22.7 − 6.8 − 15.5 + 8.7 − 15.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 16.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 8.7          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016
281.4 167.7 99.9 67.8 113.7 11.0 6.3 4.8 102.7 12.4 24.4 34.5 − 2016          Aug 
248.4 136.3 72.9 63.3 112.2 11.2 6.4 4.7 101.0 12.5 23.8 36.2 −          Sep 
243.7 140.6 76.3 64.3 103.1 10.8 6.3 4.5 92.3 12.7 23.9 36.3 −          Oct 
250.1 139.7 77.1 62.6 110.4 10.2 5.2 4.9 100.3 12.6 23.8 36.6 −          Nov 247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 −          Dec 
240.0 131.4 70.5 61.0 108.5 12.2 6.8 5.4 96.3 13.5 24.0 36.7 − 2017          Jan 
239.3 129.5 70.4 59.1 109.8 13.0 7.6 5.4 96.8 13.9 24.1 38.2 −          Feb 237.1 126.8 68.1 58.6 110.3 13.8 8.4 5.4 96.5 13.8 23.7 35.2 −          Mar 
229.6 116.9 57.7 59.1 112.7 12.9 7.2 5.7 99.8 13.8 23.6 36.2 −          Apr 
224.9 114.1 55.8 58.3 110.8 13.4 7.7 5.7 97.4 13.7 23.5 33.7 −          May
Changes *
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016
− 32.7 − 31.3 − 27.0 − 4.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.6 − 2016          Sep 
− 5.8 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 −          Oct 
+ 4.4 − 2.1 + 0.8 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 −          Nov − 3.7 − 5.8 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 −          Dec 
− 5.8 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 2017          Jan 
− 1.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 −          Feb − 1.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 −          Mar 
− 6.3 − 9.1 − 10.4 + 1.3 + 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 −          Apr 
− 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2017
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017         May  r 12,271.0 122.7 122.3 1,178.7 1,056.4 0.0
         June 12,299.7 123.0 122.6 1,169.2 1,046.6 0.0
         July  p 12,260.5 122.6 122.2 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base  2 in per cent Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017         May 3,467,773 28.3 34,678 34,513 417,999 383,486 1
         June 3,467,899 28.2 34,679 34,515 412,707 378,192 6
         July  p 3,456,232 28.2 34,562 34,401 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,170
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017         May 6,494 5,537 3,407 10,992 6,055 198 1,832
         June 6,583 5,618 3,231 11,065 6,088 167 1,762
         July 6,424 5,570 3,260 11,140 6,124 160 1,722
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017         May 2,244,724 1,684 509,025 586,013 126,323
         June 2,274,005 1,813 487,900 585,613 118,566
         July 2,282,504 2,069 465,089 585,322 121,246
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2017
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2017 July               12 7,104 7,104 0.0 0−−−7
         July               19 6,828 6,828 0.0 0−−−7
         July               26 7,350 7,350 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug                  2 4,267 4,267 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug                  9 4,591 4,591 0.0 0−−−6
         Aug                15 4,810 4,810 0.0 0−−−8
Long-term refinancing operations
2017 Apr                27 1,470 1,470 2 0 . 0 0−−− 9 1
         June                 1 3,050 3,050 2 ... − − − 91
         June               29 2,667 2,667 2 ... − − − 91
         July               27 2,860 2,860 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2017         Jan − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.15 − 0.09
         Feb − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.17 − 0.11         Mar − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.17 − 0.11
         Apr − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.12
         May − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.13         June − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.20 − 0.15
         July − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.15
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 metho d and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method.  
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         June 0.42 77,303 1.56 220,707 0.16 78,910 1.80 18,063
         July 0.41 77,112 1.55 219,660 0.14 80,553 1.76 18,143
         Aug 0.41 75,607 1.53 219,332 0.14 79,332 1.72 18,124
         Sep 0.40 75,235 1.52 219,354 0.12 83,015 1.65 18,371
         Oct 0.40 75,245 1.51 218,836 0.13 80,349 1.60 18,507
         Nov 0.39 74,620 1.49 218,016 0.10 82,888 1.56 19,037
         Dec 0.38 74,227 1.48 220,035 0.10 81,192 1.54 19,097
2017         Jan 0.37 73,435 1.46 219,585 0.10 82,672 1.53 19,293
         Feb 0.35 73,708 1.45 219,045 0.10 83,514 1.52 19,144
         Mar 0.34 73,460 1.44 218,575 0.09 84,520 1.49 19,649
         Apr 0.33 72,221 1.42 218,122 0.09 82,082 1.44 20,074
         May 0.33 71,503 1.41 217,847 0.08 82,646 1.41 20,471
         June 0.33 69,951 1.40 217,155 0.08 80,018 1.35 20,769
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016         June 2.57 4,863 2.28 27,272 3.16 1,064,491 7.39 53,521 4.22 82,252 4.31 309,025
         July 2.50 4,836 2.25 27,233 3.13 1,069,851 7.26 51,406 4.20 82,844 4.29 310,390
         Aug 2.50 4,772 2.23 27,198 3.10 1,074,183 7.27 51,516 4.17 83,206 4.27 310,914
         Sep 2.49 4,645 2.22 27,195 3.07 1,079,270 7.29 52,985 4.15 83,297 4.24 310,507
         Oct 2.49 4,711 2.19 27,068 3.04 1,083,120 7.26 52,115 4.12 83,574 4.21 310,941
         Nov 2.42 4,538 2.13 27,004 3.02 1,087,318 7.17 51,035 4.09 83,826 4.19 311,454
         Dec 2.42 4,380 2.11 26,777 2.99 1,090,316 7.18 51,459 4.07 83,809 4.16 310,013
2017         Jan 2.43 4,463 2.10 26,399 2.96 1,090,663 7.21 51,134 4.04 83,791 4.13 310,789
         Feb 2.41 4,314 2.09 26,272 2.94 1,093,062 7.24 50,975 4.02 83,726 4.11 311,206
         Mar 2.47 4,342 2.07 26,205 2.91 1,097,148 7.32 51,515 4.01 84,063 4.09 311,220
         Apr 2.45 4,296 2.05 26,173 2.88 1,102,315 7.10 50,383 3.99 84,268 4.08 310,696
         May 2.44 4,356 2.04 26,187 2.85 1,106,601 7.13 50,320 3.96 84,963 4.06 312,176
         June 2.44 4,254 2.03 26,517 2.83 1,112,862 7.17 51,412 3.95 85,255 4.04 311,595
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         June 2.62 135,941 2.13 133,455 2.60 604,497
         July 2.59 133,112 2.09 133,334 2.57 608,349
         Aug 2.60 129,449 2.08 134,293 2.55 613,121
         Sep 2.58 132,381 2.06 134,447 2.52 612,812
         Oct 2.53 132,273 2.04 134,868 2.50 615,105
         Nov 2.54 131,980 2.02 136,298 2.48 620,104
         Dec 2.57 125,998 2.01 136,477 2.45 623,831
2017         Jan 2.52 130,773 2.00 136,921 2.42 628,271
         Feb 2.55 132,264 1.99 136,362 2.41 631,862
         Mar 2.54 132,741 1.98 136,980 2.39 632,484
         Apr 2.51 133,262 1.98 137,137 2.37 637,174
         May 2.45 133,371 1.97 137,779 2.35 643,570
         June 2.51 134,739 1.95 138,253 2.33 639,612
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effecti ve rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans b ut not any
hitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, pr eparation of
The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and lo an associations
individuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans grante d by the reporting agents in
Non-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption o f goods and
regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc .6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47   ). 
statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016         June 0.08 1,149,604 0.27 6,027 0.73 759 0.83 935 0.30 533,649 0.36 55,415
         July 0.08 1,168,427 0.27 5,846 0.57 856 0.80 903 0.28 533,501 0.35 54,560
         Aug 0.08 1,171,644 0.33 5,081 0.61 1,148 0.86 961 0.27 533,503 0.34 53,749         Sep 0.08 1,173,762 0.32 5,240 0.50 671 0.77 885 0.26 532,980 0.33 53,031
         Oct 0.07 1,184,012 0.30 6,402 0.44 716 0.75 933 0.25 533,209 0.32 52,223
         Nov 0.07 1,208,967 0.30 5,075 0.58 523 0.77 907 0.24 533,406 0.32 51,649         Dec 0.07 1,220,413 0.23 5,583 0.51 621 0.68 967 0.24 536,031 0.32 51,299
2017         Jan 0.07 1,222,852 0.28 6,002 0.59 715 0.61 999 0.23 536,834 0.31 50,563
         Feb 0.06 1,233,193 0.31 4,688 0.47 617 0.70 773 0.22 537,566 0.31 49,971         Mar 0.05 1,233,631 0.26 4,918 0.51 676 0.69 820 0.21 536,136 0.31 49,493
         Apr 0.05 1,253,497 0.19 4,926 0.37 729 0.63 741 0.21 536,260 0.31 49,013
         May 0.05 1,258,521 0.20 4,724 0.43 719 0.87 726 0.21 536,046 0.30 48,646         June 0.04 1,264,830 0.22 4,078 0.27 947 0.73 633 0.21 535,418 0.30 48,252
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         June 0.01 376,365 − 0.02 10,619 0.16 689 0.46 858
         July 0.01 378,718 − 0.02 9,596 0.14 569 0.25 476
         Aug 0.01 388,519 − 0.06 9,727 0.19 451 0.39 286         Sep 0.01 389,701 − 0.08 15,158 0.14 598 0.30 792
         Oct 0.00 399,216 − 0.03 10,736 0.14 577 0.36 521
         Nov − 0.00 400,064 − 0.11 13,017 0.24 951 0.39 1,490         Dec − 0.00 401,493 − 0.12 15,159 0.22 1,205 0.36 538
2017         Jan − 0.00 400,475 − 0.05 11,356 0.22 754 0.40 314
         Feb − 0.00 397,363 − 0.07 10,802 0.13 631 0.54 336         Mar − 0.01 395,640 − 0.09 12,614 0.19 450 0.79 309
         Apr − 0.01 397,203 − 0.07 9,275 0.08 899 0.33 1,039
         May − 0.01 401,652 − 0.05 10,212 0.13 912 0.30 837         June − 0.02 415,078 − 0.14 14,661 0.07 525 0.24 586
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which  loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016         June 2.02 6,820 1.93 2,359 1.84 3,200 2.58 1,134 1.98 2,486 2.09 1,953 2.67 898 1.89 1,769
         July 1.89 6,818 1.73 2,543 1.69 3,394 2.66 936 1.89 2,488 1.88 2,323 2.82 724 1.85 1,614
         Aug 2.02 5,949 1.95 1,989 1.94 2,699 2.80 793 1.85 2,457 1.99 1,789 2.96 589 1.89 1,569         Sep 1.89 6,462 1.76 2,153 1.76 3,266 2.69 807 1.81 2,389 1.88 2,013 2.89 610 1.78 1,638
         Oct 1.89 6,445 1.72 2,522 1.70 3,408 2.63 928 1.87 2,109 1.86 2,096 2.78 728 1.82 1,403
         Nov 1.92 6,305 1.89 2,070 1.79 3,051 2.71 837 1.81 2,417 2.00 1,920 2.78 647 1.76 1,572         Dec 1.93 7,774 1.89 2,343 1.86 3,262 2.61 1,085 1.79 3,427 1.98 2,257 2.71 881 1.76 2,255
2017         Jan 1.94 6,698 1.84 2,651 1.78 3,024 2.52 915 1.92 2,759 1.92 2,084 2.61 712 1.83 1,898
         Feb 1.94 5,484 1.86 1,916 1.69 2,540 2.56 803 1.99 2,141 1.95 1,579 2.75 568 1.93 1,466         Mar 2.01 7,097 1.88 2,130 1.80 3,237 2.72 1,032 1.99 2,828 2.01 2,120 2.84 767 1.93 1,896
         Apr 2.00 6,030 1.86 2,229 1.75 2,826 2.67 853 2.05 2,351 1.95 1,931 2.77 670 1.97 1,679
         May 2.02 5,890 1.81 1,930 1.83 2,535 2.61 941 1.99 2,414 2.04 1,667 2.84 689 1.92 1,677         June 2.05 5,909 1.90 1,848 1.94 2,702 2.73 859 1.93 2,348 2.12 1,944 2.84 681 1.88 1,552
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the cal culation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans  9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2016         June 6.20 6.18 8,940 7.47 1,864 5.73 314 4.87 3,616 7.15 5,010
         July 6.20 6.18 8,468 7.50 1,764 5.97 298 4.77 3,405 7.20 4,765
         Aug 6.09 6.06 8,301 7.36 1,643 5.89 328 4.70 3,402 7.09 4,571
         Sep 5.94 5.92 7,802 7.11 1,560 6.04 296 4.56 3,257 6.95 4,249
         Oct 5.95 5.93 7,579 7.10 1,482 6.04 300 4.52 3,127 6.99 4,152
         Nov 5.85 5.83 7,595 7.12 1,674 6.05 316 4.51 3,312 6.91 3,967
         Dec 5.69 5.67 6,552 7.06 1,399 6.09 320 4.40 3,026 6.83 3,206
2017         Jan 6.06 6.04 8,603 7.16 1,886 6.15 330 4.59 3,242 6.97 5,031
         Feb 5.82 5.80 8,187 6.92 1,619 6.15 273 4.37 3,094 6.69 4,820
         Mar 5.62 5.60 9,849 6.88 1,761 6.12 341 4.15 4,041 6.64 5,467
         Apr 5.66 5.65 8,222 6.91 1,544 6.17 287 4.32 3,415 6.61 4,520
         May 5.89 5.87 9,372 7.22 1,814 6.41 337 4.49 3,846 6.87 5,189
         June 5.90 5.88 8,685 7.22 1,689 6.28 308 4.49 3,573 6.88 4,804
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016         June . 3.62 213 . . 2.95 17 3.96 141 2.94 55
         July . 3.53 193 . . 2.85 18 3.82 135 2.86 40
         Aug . 3.52 216 . . 3.00 16 3.83 149 2.80 51
         Sep . 3.56 201 . . 2.86 17 3.87 134 2.97 50
         Oct . 3.51 189 . . 2.63 17 3.91 129 2.65 43
         Nov . 3.55 198 . . 2.48 15 3.93 140 2.66 43
         Dec . 3.38 207 . . 2.72 18 3.80 136 2.53 53
2017         Jan . 3.51 169 . . 2.85 13 3.78 118 2.92 38
         Feb . 3.65 188 . . 2.92 14 3.87 139 3.08 35
         Mar . 3.53 230 . . 2.83 14 3.85 163 2.74 53
         Apr . 3.58 189 . . 2.99 11 3.84 135 2.89 43
         May . 3.68 204 . . 3.31 13 3.90 151 2.96 40
         June . 3.50 214 . . 2.98 15 3.92 144 2.55 55
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016         June 1.82 1.76 21,409 1.94 4,079 2.04 2,567 1.85 1,931 1.60 7,424 1.79 9,487
         July 1.78 1.73 20,287 1.83 4,970 2.01 2,464 1.79 1,866 1.59 7,230 1.75 8,727
         Aug 1.74 1.68 19,903 1.86 4,075 2.18 2,185 1.76 1,745 1.49 7,197 1.69 8,776
         Sep 1.70 1.64 18,636 1.79 3,854 2.01 2,062 1.75 1,658 1.48 6,555 1.66 8,361
         Oct 1.68 1.62 17,913 1.72 4,542 1.99 2,093 1.62 1,584 1.45 6,317 1.66 7,919
         Nov 1.67 1.62 20,223 1.72 4,687 1.88 2,611 1.66 1,614 1.43 7,008 1.68 8,990
         Dec 1.72 1.66 21,400 1.80 4,757 1.98 2,347 1.67 1,800 1.49 8,054 1.73 9,199
2017         Jan 1.82 1.77 19,804 1.84 5,711 2.08 2,283 1.66 1,780 1.59 7,454 1.86 8,287
         Feb 1.87 1.81 17,838 1.89 4,291 2.17 1,784 1.65 1,567 1.64 6,556 1.90 7,931
         Mar 1.87 1.82 22,196 1.86 4,945 2.08 2,428 1.69 1,932 1.67 7,609 1.89 10,227
         Apr 1.91 1.85 18,087 1.89 4,620 2.10 2,001 1.73 1,672 1.71 6,456 1.92 7,958
         May 1.88 1.83 20,484 1.92 4,136 2.17 2,288 1.77 1,731 1.66 7,308 1.88 9,157
         June 1.87 1.82 19,294 1.92 3,767 2.02 2,265 1.70 1,541 1.68 6,573 1.89 8,915
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016         June . 1.67 9,111 . . 1.96 956 1.55 849 1.53 3,475 1.75 3,831
         July . 1.65 8,675 . . 1.86 927 1.51 833 1.53 3,387 1.75 3,528
         Aug . 1.58 8,476 . . 1.97 770 1.46 770 1.41 3,410 1.67 3,526
         Sep . 1.55 7,930 . . 1.98 728 1.46 708 1.39 3,109 1.61 3,385
         Oct . 1.55 7,854 . . 1.89 764 1.43 768 1.39 3,023 1.65 3,299
         Nov . 1.51 9,115 . . 1.54 1,225 1.48 763 1.36 3,407 1.65 3,720
         Dec . 1.57 9,705 . . 1.85 863 1.55 878 1.41 3,968 1.66 3,996
2017         Jan . 1.67 8,932 . . 1.90 835 1.50 925 1.52 3,632 1.81 3,540
         Feb . 1.71 7,964 . . 2.06 643 1.50 796 1.57 3,181 1.82 3,344
         Mar . 1.72 9,905 . . 1.96 855 1.53 939 1.59 3,565 1.82 4,546
         Apr . 1.75 8,413 . . 1.98 795 1.53 838 1.60 3,204 1.89 3,576
         May . 1.73 9,110 . . 2.09 843 1.59 900 1.58 3,370 1.81 3,997
         June . 1.72 8,374 . . 1.87 865 1.53 726 1.61 3,030 1.82 3,753
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans  13 Revolving loans  13 
and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 Extended and overdrafts  14 Revolving loans  13 
credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 credit card debt credit card debt  15 and overdrafts  14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016         June 8.75 41,709 8.77 34,494 15.23 4,093 3.74 67,687 3.75 67,430
         July 8.61 39,874 8.62 32,504 15.22 4,152 3.66 65,412 3.67 65,180
         Aug 8.61 40,210 8.63 32,811 15.22 4,137 3.73 63,560 3.74 63,322         Sep 8.62 41,559 8.66 33,900 15.13 4,269 3.70 66,057 3.71 65,773
         Oct 8.59 40,657 8.60 32,988 15.13 4,328 3.67 64,202 3.68 63,931
         Nov 8.50 39,342 8.51 31,782 15.13 4,222 3.61 64,064 3.63 63,786         Dec 8.50 40,103 8.54 32,351 15.06 4,286 3.69 61,612 3.71 61,357
2017         Jan 8.55 39,784 8.54 32,190 15.12 4,309 3.61 64,182 3.63 63,925
         Feb 8.65 39,345 8.62 31,953 15.14 4,291 3.68 65,697 3.70 65,431         Mar 8.66 40,215 8.61 32,949 15.13 4,273 3.67 65,990 3.68 65,698
         Apr 8.50 38,972 8.49 31,353 15.13 4,295 3.64 65,154 3.66 64,865
         May 8.46 39,394 8.50 31,647 15.13 4,259 3.53 65,353 3.54 65,067         June 8.44 40,606 8.47 32,739 15.13 4,328 3.59 67,424 3.60 67,134
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016         June 1.52 66,550 1.68 19,903 2.61 8,992 2.79 1,600 1.76 1,526 1.23 43,829 1.57 2,249 1.55 8,354
         July 1.46 62,584 1.55 21,116 2.44 8,339 2.67 1,484 1.72 1,554 1.16 41,120 1.88 2,329 1.53 7,758
         Aug 1.43 54,015 1.58 14,307 2.44 7,384 2.62 1,340 1.68 1,416 1.14 33,033 1.48 2,112 1.40 8,730         Sep 1.51 62,170 1.66 19,929 2.54 8,312 2.63 1,431 1.70 1,312 1.24 41,393 1.67 1,986 1.54 7,736
         Oct 1.43 59,422 1.50 20,936 2.44 8,219 2.63 1,417 1.65 1,258 1.16 40,159 1.69 1,960 1.44 6,409
         Nov 1.45 58,860 1.52 15,959 2.48 8,095 2.64 1,497 1.69 1,361 1.16 36,792 1.32 2,628 1.49 8,487         Dec 1.53 78,985 1.63 22,509 2.50 8,638 2.57 1,829 1.77 1,881 1.27 48,315 1.64 3,444 1.62 14,878
2017         Jan 1.33 64,819 1.54 18,857 2.42 8,119 2.60 1,328 1.86 1,423 1.01 43,339 1.40 2,830 1.57 7,780
         Feb 1.33 56,958 1.55 13,746 2.55 7,309 2.58 1,326 1.83 1,209 0.99 37,140 1.29 2,001 1.54 7,973         Mar 1.50 71,530 1.60 22,647 2.51 9,245 2.59 1,733 1.85 1,665 1.20 45,163 1.41 2,977 1.67 10,747
         Apr 1.43 57,323 1.46 19,903 2.44 7,699 2.54 1,493 1.81 1,371 1.14 38,649 1.41 2,188 1.67 5,923
         May 1.35 65,177 1.53 18,706 2.54 8,000 2.58 1,661 1.82 1,423 0.99 41,638 1.55 3,072 1.58 9,383         June 1.41 71,910 1.48 20,878 2.51 8,860 2.57 1,682 1.84 1,442 1.13 46,904 1.08 3,656 1.61 9,366
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016         June 1.58 10,056 . . 1.91 601 2.51 159 1.64 468 1.56 4,885 1.72 1,003 1.46 2,940
         July 1.53 10,322 . . 1.87 681 2.38 161 1.53 544 1.35 5,526 1.95 929 1.61 2,481
         Aug 1.54 7,519 . . 2.01 523 2.54 119 1.51 410 1.40 3,645 1.71 452 1.57 2,370         Sep 1.59 9,002 . . 1.93 550 2.49 104 1.46 379 1.53 5,125 2.18 614 1.45 2,230
         Oct 1.49 8,746 . . 1.85 652 2.40 149 1.48 401 1.40 5,352 1.90 560 1.44 1,632
         Nov 1.49 8,480 . . 2.00 494 2.41 159 1.57 401 1.29 4,031 2.04 610 1.50 2,785         Dec 1.55 16,083 . . 1.91 662 2.46 176 1.57 569 1.39 8,076 1.96 1,310 1.62 5,290
2017         Jan 1.57 8,742 . . 1.80 692 2.24 141 1.81 505 1.41 4,626 2.05 518 1.60 2,260
         Feb 1.46 8,259 . . 2.07 464 2.44 158 1.78 399 1.33 4,051 1.73 512 1.40 2,675         Mar 1.48 11,857 . . 1.87 643 2.52 166 1.72 493 1.37 7,040 1.30 519 1.60 2,996
         Apr 1.42 8,360 . . 1.81 570 2.23 164 1.69 413 1.29 5,640 1.59 299 1.62 1,274
         May 1.61 8,671 . . 2.06 545 2.54 191 1.70 401 1.45 4,558 2.04 646 1.63 2,330         June 1.55 11,011 . . 1.85 632 2.60 150 1.75 444 1.44 6,484 1.64 625 1.66 2,676
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers a nd the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billing
use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific bil ling cycle become
to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs)  1 derivatives) granted  2 equity  3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016 2,659.4 2,571.8 459.2 461.8 317.0 268.5 914.4 79.4 71.5 87.6
2015         Q2 2,489.5 2,410.8 509.4 396.7 304.8 238.9 819.2 72.6 69.2 78.6
         Q3 2,507.3 2,427.5 498.0 412.5 308.0 241.6 823.8 74.7 68.9 79.8
         Q4 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016         Q1 2,598.2 2,514.1 486.8 456.3 310.8 248.3 863.1 78.9 70.0 84.1
         Q2 2,637.2 2,552.5 478.6 480.8 312.6 248.5 882.7 78.7 70.6 84.7
         Q3 2,693.1 2,608.4 470.9 486.8 315.9 261.8 922.9 79.0 71.2 84.7
         Q4 2,659.4 2,571.8 459.2 461.8 317.0 268.5 914.4 79.4 71.5 87.6
2017         Q1 2,644.3 2,557.9 453.6 463.7 312.3 261.7 913.6 81.6 71.4 86.4
Insurance corporations
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016 2,049.5 1,996.2 312.3 392.7 285.9 247.1 632.0 73.7 52.6 53.3
2015         Q2 1,925.8 1,875.9 357.5 337.9 275.3 221.6 564.6 67.5 51.5 49.9
         Q3 1,938.2 1,887.7 347.5 350.0 278.1 224.0 567.7 69.5 51.0 50.5
         Q4 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016         Q1 2,007.2 1,954.1 336.2 386.6 280.0 230.0 596.3 73.4 51.6 53.1
         Q2 2,034.0 1,980.7 328.6 408.0 281.7 229.6 607.7 73.1 51.9 53.2
         Q3 2,081.0 2,028.4 319.5 414.0 284.9 242.8 641.4 73.4 52.5 52.6
         Q4 2,049.5 1,996.2 312.3 392.7 285.9 247.1 632.0 73.7 52.6 53.3
2017         Q1 2,028.3 1,976.6 305.0 396.7 280.6 239.8 626.3 75.8 52.4 51.7
Pension funds 4
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016 609.8 575.6 146.9 69.1 31.1 21.4 282.4 5.7 18.9 34.3
2015         Q2 563.7 534.9 151.8 58.8 29.6 17.3 254.7 5.1 17.7 28.8
         Q3 569.2 539.9 150.6 62.5 29.9 17.7 256.0 5.3 17.9 29.3
         Q4 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016         Q1 591.1 560.0 150.6 69.7 30.7 18.3 266.8 5.5 18.4 31.0
         Q2 603.2 571.7 150.0 72.8 30.9 18.8 275.0 5.5 18.6 31.5
         Q3 612.1 580.0 151.5 72.8 31.0 18.9 281.5 5.6 18.7 32.1
         Q4 609.8 575.6 146.9 69.1 31.1 21.4 282.4 5.7 18.9 34.3
2017         Q1 616.0 581.3 148.6 67.1 31.6 21.9 287.3 5.8 19.0 34.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporati ons and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2016 Q4 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contrac tual Trust Ar-
have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Otheryear/quarter Total derivatives) received  
1 other equity  2 Total reserves  3 claims liabilities Net worth  4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.82012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.82013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.52014 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016 2,659.4 18.7 99.6 225.3 2,079.0 1,757.6 321.4 77.0 159.9
2015         Q2 2,489.5 17.9 91.9 206.2 1,958.3 1,649.6 308.7 72.5 142.7
         Q3 2,507.3 17.5 94.3 208.4 1,976.5 1,665.6 311.0 72.2 138.4         Q4 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016         Q1 2,598.2 17.7 97.8 231.7 2,027.1 1,707.3 319.9 73.2 150.6
         Q2 2,637.2 17.6 97.9 201.1 2,041.1 1,722.3 318.8 73.3 206.2         Q3 2,693.1 19.0 98.9 208.0 2,073.4 1,754.2 319.2 74.0 219.8         Q4 2,659.4 18.7 99.6 225.3 2,079.0 1,757.6 321.4 77.0 159.9
2017         Q1 2,644.3 20.3 101.7 237.8 2,071.8 1,736.9 335.0 77.5 135.2
Insurance corporations
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.22009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.32012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.42013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.22014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016 2,049.5 18.7 94.4 213.9 1,536.0 1,215.1 320.9 72.5 114.0
2015         Q2 1,925.8 17.9 87.2 196.4 1,453.2 1,145.0 308.3 70.7 100.3
         Q3 1,938.2 17.5 89.5 198.5 1,464.5 1,154.0 310.5 70.5 97.6         Q4 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016         Q1 2,007.2 17.7 92.8 220.6 1,499.3 1,179.8 319.4 71.4 105.4
         Q2 2,034.0 17.6 92.9 191.3 1,506.7 1,188.4 318.3 71.5 154.0         Q3 2,081.0 19.0 93.8 197.9 1,534.3 1,215.6 318.7 72.2 163.8         Q4 2,049.5 18.7 94.4 213.9 1,536.0 1,215.1 320.9 72.5 114.0
2017         Q1 2,028.3 20.3 96.5 226.0 1,521.2 1,186.7 334.5 73.0 91.4
Pension funds 5
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.72009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.52012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.32013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.32014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016 609.8 − 5.2 11.3 543.0 542.5 0.5 4.5 45.9
2015         Q2 563.7 − 4.8 9.8 505.1 504.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
         Q3 569.2 − 4.8 9.9 512.0 511.6 0.5 1.7 40.7         Q4 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016         Q1 591.1 − 5.0 11.2 527.9 527.4 0.5 1.7 45.3
         Q2 603.2 − 5.0 9.8 534.4 533.9 0.5 1.8 52.3         Q3 612.1 − 5.1 10.1 539.1 538.6 0.5 1.8 56.0         Q4 609.8 − 5.2 11.3 543.0 542.5 0.5 4.5 45.9
2017         Q1 616.0 − 5.2 11.7 550.6 550.2 0.5 4.5 43.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own fund s are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension funds
from 2015 are partially estimated. Figures from 2016 Q4 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2017
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities  3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors  7 residents  8 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  6 
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,526
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,380
2014 64,027 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,988 53,068 − 12,124 − 11,951 77,143 10,961
2015 31,809 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 67,819 123,820 − 66,330 121,164 68,986 − 92,012
2016 69,798 27,069 19,177 17,905 − 10,012 42,728 173,193 − 58,012 187,500 43,705 − 103,395
2016         Aug 19,190 18,041 7,011 − 942 11,972 1,149 11,826 − 10,241 13,001 9,066 7,364
         Sep 17,625 12,468 6,106 3,712 2,650 5,157 23,838 − 4,025 17,786 10,077 − 6,214
         Oct − 8,977 − 6,357 640 3,347 − 10,344 − 2,619 10,962 − 7,635 17,287 1,310 − 19,939
         Nov − 193 2,417 − 5,172 − 377 7,966 − 2,611 6,331 − 2,469 18,652 − 9,852 − 6,524
         Dec − 30,541 − 21,892 − 10,590 1,125 − 12,426 − 8,649 557 − 9,459 13,554 − 3,538 − 31,098
2017         Jan 24,212 22,588 12,008 4,673 5,908 1,624 20,521 − 7,443 18,146 9,818 3,692
         Feb 4,188 − 2,177 12,413 1,756 − 16,346 6,365 21,814 − 5,044 16,715 10,143 − 17,626
         Mar 9,225 8,713 1,179 − 131 7,665 512 17,676 − 8,293 17,769 8,200 − 8,451
         Apr − 12,590 − 15,170 − 5,909 − 276 − 8,985 2,580 3,520 − 5,737 12,817 − 3,560 − 16,110
         May 39,706 28,463 10,800 1,096 16,567 11,243 17,325 3,906 12,751 668 22,381
         June 3,552 − 1,090 2,876 − 5,769 1,802 4,642 11,251 − 11,745 12,871 10,125 − 7,699
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  9 shares  10 Total 11 tutions  6 Other sectors  12 residents  13 
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 39,903 18,778 21,125 34,148 17,203 16,945 5,755
2015 40,293 7,668 32,625 26,058 − 5,421 31,479 14,235
2016 33,504 4,409 29,095 32,324 − 5,143 37,467 1,180
2016         Aug 4,804 1,063 3,741 3,191 2,256 935 1,613
         Sep 5,438 229 5,209 6,092 503 5,589 − 654
         Oct 1,984 204 1,780 − 1,464 − 221 − 1,243 3,448
         Nov 3,866 681 3,185 3,772 728 3,044 94
         Dec 3,021 861 2,160 − 12 1,291 − 1,303 3,033
2017         Jan 2,154 148 2,006 1,369 − 247 1,616 785
         Feb 2,436 852 1,584 2,985 1,866 1,119 − 549
         Mar 13,985 10,136 3,849 11,531 506 11,025 2,454
         Apr − 1,261 95 − 1,356 − 3,599 − 2,589 − 1,010 2,338
         May 3,434 107 3,327 2,137 475 1,662 1,297
         June − 3,655 920 − 4,575 2,373 5,219 − 2,846 − 6,028
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic m utual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most rec ent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,8342007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,8722008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,3762012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,5292013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8912014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 
5 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2016         Nov 72,858 40,706 2,017 211 29,840 8,639 2,842 29,309
         Dec 56,403 32,710 340 48 23,727 8,595 9,060 14,634
2017         Jan 123,462 82,622 4,569 2,909 62,057 13,088 6,115 34,725
         Feb 99,851 70,911 2,669 733 48,391 19,118 4,105 24,835         Mar 95,842 47,729 3,548 756 31,244 12,182 4,691 43,421
         Apr 87,097 55,296 2,170 58 45,233 7,836 2,707 29,094
         May 88,568 55,536 1,700 238 41,685 11,913 5,015 28,016         June 73,438 42,842 5,005 364 25,324 12,148 4,284 26,312
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  6 
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,7112007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
5 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2016         Nov 23,848 11,083 2,004 211 5,122 3,746 1,368 11,397
         Dec 19,429 7,699 137 48 3,777 3,737 6,592 5,138
2017         Jan 41,887 26,101 3,344 1,861 15,975 4,921 4,857 10,929
         Feb 31,566 17,827 2,220 733 11,542 3,332 2,843 10,896         Mar 34,636 15,895 2,772 462 6,186 6,474 3,396 15,345
         Apr 27,201 15,693 2,055 23 11,781 1,834 1,547 9,962
         May 29,215 12,669 1,165 136 6,045 5,322 3,142 13,404         June 24,255 10,611 3,011 54 3,390 4,156 1,784 11,860
Net sales  7 
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,4822007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
5 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2016         Nov 4,577 − 6,635 1,095 − 1,855 − 3,251 − 2,625 175 11,037
         Dec − 26,763 − 10,987 − 1,766 − 428 − 5,419 − 3,374 1,714 − 17,490
2017         Jan 5,954 13,059 2,874 788 6,724 2,673 1,848 − 8,953
         Feb − 2,582 13,750 1,628 138 1,366 10,618 221 − 16,553         Mar 11,887 4,049 1,520 − 839 3,038 330 − 705 8,543
         Apr − 15,906 − 5,239 1,191 − 1,613 − 1,034 − 3,781 − 1,836 − 8,832
         May 26,524 10,344 − 1,329 − 1,105 13,027 − 250 − 226 16,406         June − 6,370 1,035 2,036 − 245 4,667 − 5,423 − 2,704 − 4,701
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. e. 6Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 7Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal redemptions. 
Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2017
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2016         Dec 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017         Jan 3,074,066 1,178,024 135,649 63,489 640,303 338,583 277,637 1,618,405
         Feb 3,071,484 1,191,774 1 139,719 63,627 641,669 1 346,760 277,858 1,601,851
         Mar 3,083,371 1,195,823 141,239 62,787 644,707 347,090 277,153 1,610,395
         Apr 3,067,464 1,190,584 1 142,097 61,174 1 644,126 343,188 275,317 1,601,563
         May 3,093,988 1,200,928 140,768 60,069 657,153 342,938 275,091 1,617,969
         June 3,087,618 1,201,963 142,804 59,824 661,820 337,515 272,387 1,613,268
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2017 
1,020,630 469,329 38,864 22,692 285,033 122,739 50,850 500,451    less than 2
653,296 287,167 41,632 15,253 155,096 75,186 49,625 316,505 2 to less than 4
475,066 176,464 26,410 7,576 96,632 45,849 40,255 258,345 4 to less than 6
300,155 109,706 20,077 5,944 57,418 26,267 23,438 167,010 6 to less than 8
221,314 74,254 12,694 5,802 33,726 22,033 12,267 134,793 8 to less than 10
125,179 30,631 2,438 1,217 12,821 14,156 14,665 79,883 10 to less than 15
77,838 16,146 192 1,241 11,830 2,882 8,135 53,556 15 to less than 20
214,139 38,264 498 100 9,264 28,402 73,149 102,725 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
reclassification of debt securities. 2Calculated from month under review until final residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2016         Dec 176,355 − 439 747 8−−0 − 1,164 − 29 1,676,397
2017         Jan 176,328 − 28 38 − 8 − − 34 − 21 − 18 1,716,525
         Feb 176,382 54 112 −−−0 − 6 − 5 2 1,731,415
         Mar 178,273 1,891 2,229 1 0 − − 105 − 94 − 140 1,794,735
         Apr 178,328 54 93 2 02−0 − 1 3 − 4 7 1,828,445
         May 178,326 − 2 78 48 50 − 0 − 17 − 162 1,845,930
         June 178,620 294 64 202 218 − 0 − 6 − 184 1,811,817
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017         Feb 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 1.9 143.32 112.08 543.02 11,834.41
         Mar 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.5 1.0 1.9 141.93 110.93 562.80 12,312.87
         Apr 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 1.0 1.8 141.87 111.03 570.29 12,438.01
         May 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.7 141.95 110.90 572.60 12,615.06         June 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.79 109.60 557.50 12,325.12
         July 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.7 140.78 108.71 552.08 12,118.25
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly fig ures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual f igures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 139,768 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,057 143,560 819 − 1,745 142,741 43,802 − 3,790
2015 180,762 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 34,626 173,417 7,362 494 166,055 34,131 7,3452016 155,955 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,586 162,883 2,877 − 3,172 160,006 39,757 − 6,928
2016         Dec 20,446 16,366 1,388 − 37 1,016 253 14,977 4,081 20,017 − 614 − 756 20,631 4,837 429
2017         Jan 18,658 10,107 1,518 − 65 583 1,001 8,589 8,551 19,191 1,383 502 17,808 8,049 − 533
         Feb 14,721 11,872 2,730 − 62 1,782 603 9,141 2,849 14,854 1,263 452 13,591 2,397 − 133         Mar 12,841 7,318 3,636 − 64 2,626 704 3,682 5,523 12,039 133 − 176 11,906 5,699 802
         Apr 10,284 6,496 2,607 − 51 1,878 450 3,890 3,788 11,594 302 − 193 11,292 3,981 − 1,309
         May 6,140 5,658 3,113 − 12 2,492 238 2,545 481 5,515 422 250 5,093 231 625         June 4,868 4,745 1,831 66 874 488 2,915 123 5,565 557 662 5,008 − 539 − 697
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 10.74 34.02 34.15 15.17 3.25 7.05 18.84 5.00 − 0.48
Debt securities − 5.38 − 0.93 − 3.22 − 0.52 0.87 − 3.32 0.17 − 0.94 − 0.89
short-term debt securities 1.62 − 0.77 − 0.57 0.78 0.98 − 0.70 − 0.02 − 0.82 0.23
long-term debt securities − 7.00 − 0.15 − 2.65 − 1.29 − 0.10 − 2.62 0.19 − 0.11 − 1.13
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.88 0.73 − 2.60 − 0.38 0.51 − 2.54 − 0.04 − 0.52 − 0.52
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85
Financial corporations − 1.26 1.93 − 2.49 0.58 0.31 − 1.80 − 0.53 − 0.47 − 0.34
General government − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.81 − 0.44 − 0.46 − 0.62 0.47 − 0.20 − 1.03
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.50 − 1.66 − 0.62 − 0.14 0.37 − 0.78 0.21 − 0.41 − 0.38
Loans 18.52 27.00 10.37 − 0.25 4.88 − 8.00 − 0.62 14.11 27.62
short-term loans 33.19 25.81 6.66 1.47 − 0.08 − 2.49 − 4.65 13.88 16.97
long-term loans − 14.67 1.20 3.71 − 1.72 4.96 − 5.51 4.03 0.23 10.65
Memo item
to domestic sectors 14.15 8.78 − 3.69 − 3.43 4.09 − 6.53 − 2.90 1.64 9.65
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 8.35 0.02 5.63 − 12.25 − 2.54 0.81 1.65
Financial corporations 14.46 7.88 4.47 − 3.46 − 1.59 5.67 − 0.40 0.78 7.99
General government 0.11 0.06 0.18 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.00
to the rest of the world 4.37 18.22 14.06 3.18 0.79 − 1.47 2.28 12.47 17.98
Equity and investment fund shares − 1.82 44.50 60.98 20.55 9.56 4.15 12.22 35.06 15.49
Equity 8.56 28.16 55.16 19.05 9.11 4.90 8.13 33.02 16.74
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 1.62 − 10.41 20.66 2.88 − 6.00 − 0.77 6.72 20.70 − 5.54
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45
Financial corporations 3.78 − 2.37 0.31 0.02 0.17 0.17 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.09
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.85 12.45 10.13 3.02 0.66 − 0.59 1.37 8.69 3.23
Other equity  1 15.02 26.12 24.37 13.15 14.45 6.26 0.04 3.63 19.05
Investment fund shares − 10.38 16.35 5.82 1.50 0.45 − 0.75 4.08 2.04 − 1.25
Money market fund shares 0.23 0.21 0.36 0.35 − 0.30 − 0.10 − 0.03 0.79 − 0.28
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 10.61 16.13 5.46 1.15 0.75 − 0.65 4.11 1.25 − 0.97
Insurance technical reserves 1.10 3.03 2.56 0.68 0.59 0.78 0.73 0.46 0.52
Financial derivatives − 1.26 0.54 4.60 − 1.48 − 2.07 0.86 − 1.07 6.88 − 1.15
Other accounts receivable − 78.15 31.02 − 23.24 14.86 6.87 − 7.00 − 6.05 − 17.05 75.55
Total − 77.74 139.18 86.20 49.02 23.95 − 5.48 24.22 43.51 116.65
External financing
Debt securities 1.26 7.78 23.71 − 1.17 10.40 4.60 2.88 5.82 7.57
short-term securities − 11.63 1.96 − 0.15 − 0.27 2.04 0.18 − 0.57 − 1.79 5.47
long-term securities 12.89 5.82 23.85 − 0.89 8.36 4.43 3.45 7.61 2.11
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 4.27 1.76 10.79 − 1.20 4.97 1.27 1.59 2.96 3.14
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85
Financial corporations 4.12 2.07 9.97 − 0.60 3.59 1.96 1.56 2.86 2.98
General government 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.01 − 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 − 0.01
Households 0.20 0.46 0.12 − 0.07 0.73 − 0.57 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.69
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.01 6.02 12.92 0.03 5.43 3.33 1.29 2.87 4.44
Loans − 7.26 47.58 49.71 − 2.60 29.87 6.50 16.42 − 3.09 29.90
short-term loans 0.55 29.91 14.52 2.92 15.01 − 2.47 2.77 − 0.80 4.00
long-term loans − 7.81 17.67 35.19 − 5.53 14.86 8.97 13.65 − 2.30 25.90
Memo item
from domestic sectors 10.90 20.72 26.30 − 9.61 25.70 − 7.68 10.51 − 2.24 10.92
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 8.35 0.02 5.63 − 12.25 − 2.54 0.81 1.65
Financial corporations 22.78 26.86 25.92 1.42 12.51 4.08 15.67 − 6.34 12.21
General government − 11.46 − 6.98 8.73 − 11.04 7.56 0.50 − 2.62 3.29 − 2.94
from the rest of the world − 18.16 26.86 23.41 7.00 4.17 14.18 5.91 − 0.85 18.98
Equity 31.11 16.63 8.95 0.85 3.60 2.05 2.18 1.12 2.83
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 0.34 7.36 21.96 11.39 − 2.67 3.30 4.33 17.00 − 6.76
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45
Financial corporations 2.22 11.75 − 2.31 5.09 − 1.14 3.22 − 2.25 − 2.13 − 0.88
General government 0.03 0.11 0.07 0.01 0.04 0.05 0.01 − 0.02 0.01
Households 2.80 3.55 3.85 3.43 4.61 0.98 − 0.26 − 1.47 − 0.44
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 9.09 − 1.34 − 20.44 − 10.04 2.71 − 2.89 − 4.10 − 16.16 7.09
Other equity  1 22.37 10.61 7.43 − 0.50 3.56 1.64 1.95 0.29 2.51
Insurance technical reserves 6.41 5.06 5.06 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.21 − 10.81 − 0.13 − 3.90 5.34 − 5.71 8.05 − 7.81 0.67
Other accounts payable − 0.79 15.79 31.24 − 7.75 6.65 0.70 − 0.80 24.69 28.71
Total 30.52 82.03 118.53 − 13.30 57.14 9.40 29.99 22.01 70.94
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 406.3 463.4 514.8 463.4 456.1 466.5 502.9 514.8 516.6
Debt securities 49.6 47.8 44.8 47.8 48.8 45.7 46.0 44.8 43.9
short-term debt securities 6.8 6.0 5.5 6.0 7.0 6.3 6.3 5.5 5.8long-term debt securities 42.9 41.7 39.3 41.7 41.7 39.3 39.6 39.3 38.1
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.9 23.3 20.8 23.3 23.8 21.4 21.4 20.8 20.3
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3Financial corporations 12.7 14.5 12.0 14.5 14.8 13.0 12.5 12.0 11.6General government 5.7 5.2 4.4 5.2 4.8 4.2 4.6 4.4 3.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 26.7 24.4 24.0 24.4 24.9 24.3 24.5 24.0 23.6
Loans 455.4 485.2 494.5 485.2 487.8 480.0 478.4 494.5 522.8
short-term loans 356.2 383.7 390.5 383.7 382.5 380.4 375.4 390.5 407.8long-term loans 99.2 101.5 104.0 101.5 105.3 99.6 103.0 104.0 115.0
Memo item
to domestic sectors 303.7 312.5 308.8 312.5 316.6 310.0 307.2 308.8 318.5
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 204.9 213.3 218.9 206.7 204.1 204.9 206.6Financial corporations 84.9 92.8 97.2 92.8 91.2 96.8 96.4 97.2 105.2General government 6.4 6.4 6.6 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.6 6.6 6.6
to the rest of the world 151.7 172.7 185.7 172.7 171.2 170.0 171.2 185.7 204.3
Equity and investment fund shares 1,700.7 1,880.9 1,926.3 1,880.9 1,797.6 1,757.1 1,814.5 1,926.3 2,005.3
Equity 1,565.2 1,728.9 1,766.4 1,728.9 1,646.5 1,605.5 1,656.3 1,766.4 1,844.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 262.2 273.0 292.3 273.0 248.1 239.4 265.1 292.3 304.1
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6Financial corporations 10.0 6.3 6.1 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.8 6.1 5.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world 50.0 62.5 73.9 62.5 62.9 62.1 64.5 73.9 79.7
Other equity  
1 1,252.9 1,393.4 1,400.2 1,393.4 1,335.5 1,303.9 1,326.6 1,400.2 1,460.7
Investment fund shares 135.5 151.9 159.9 151.9 151.1 151.7 158.2 159.9 160.8
Money market fund shares 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.4 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.9 1.7Non-MMF investment fund shares 134.4 150.6 158.0 150.6 150.1 150.6 157.2 158.0 159.1
Insurance technical reserves 47.3 50.0 52.9 50.0 50.7 51.4 52.2 52.9 53.6Financial derivatives 22.7 24.0 26.9 24.0 23.2 25.3 22.0 26.9 23.4Other accounts receivable 883.4 912.6 930.1 912.6 904.1 903.5 904.0 930.1 1,016.8
Total 3,565.4 3,863.9 3,990.4 3,863.9 3,768.4 3,729.6 3,819.9 3,990.4 4,182.3
Liabilities
Debt securities 150.9 156.8 183.8 156.8 173.1 179.0 183.0 183.8 189.7
short-term securities 1.8 3.0 2.9 3.0 5.1 5.3 4.7 2.9 8.3
long-term securities 149.1 153.7 180.9 153.7 168.0 173.7 178.3 180.9 181.4
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 60.2 58.7 72.0 58.7 65.9 68.2 71.2 72.0 74.7
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3Financial corporations 39.8 40.0 51.7 40.0 46.0 49.1 50.9 51.7 54.3General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.8 15.0 15.7 15.0 15.6 14.9 15.9 15.7 15.0
Debt securities of the rest of the world 90.7 98.1 111.8 98.1 107.2 110.8 111.8 111.8 115.0
Loans 1,388.2 1,436.9 1,481.6 1,436.9 1,461.5 1,464.2 1,481.7 1,481.6 1,510.9
short-term loans 486.6 515.7 529.2 515.7 528.9 526.5 530.4 529.2 533.1long-term loans 901.7 921.2 952.5 921.2 932.6 937.7 951.2 952.5 977.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,091.5 1,108.9 1,129.3 1,108.9 1,131.8 1,119.6 1,130.2 1,129.3 1,139.5
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 204.9 213.3 218.9 206.7 204.1 204.9 206.6Financial corporations 819.7 843.9 862.8 843.9 854.9 855.3 869.8 862.8 875.1General government 59.4 51.7 61.5 51.7 57.9 57.7 56.3 61.5 57.8
from the rest of the world 296.7 328.0 352.4 328.0 329.7 344.6 351.4 352.4 371.4
Equity 2,543.6 2,673.9 2,749.3 2,673.9 2,570.6 2,490.5 2,665.4 2,749.3 2,870.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 570.8 626.4 664.0 626.4 585.2 569.6 616.9 664.0 696.5
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6Financial corporations 134.7 150.1 154.7 150.1 140.3 139.2 147.8 154.7 161.3General government 35.2 43.4 44.4 43.4 41.5 40.4 40.8 44.4 47.0Households 148.7 166.2 178.7 166.2 161.5 156.3 168.9 178.7 189.7
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 719.1 756.3 803.7 756.3 724.7 684.7 782.2 803.7 865.4
Other equity  
1 1,253.7 1,291.2 1,281.6 1,291.2 1,260.8 1,236.2 1,266.4 1,281.6 1,308.5
Insurance technical reserves 250.3 255.4 260.4 255.4 256.6 257.9 259.2 260.4 261.7Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 51.8 42.0 38.2 42.0 49.6 46.5 50.4 38.2 35.4
Other accounts payable 978.1 999.2 1,033.1 999.2 980.2 982.8 991.3 1,033.1 1,057.4
Total 5,362.9 5,564.1 5,746.4 5,564.1 5,491.6 5,420.9 5,630.9 5,746.4 5,925.6
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.82 96.56 114.97 38.97 8.72 29.08 24.73 52.45 12.47
Currency 15.64 25.40 21.30 7.73 3.03 4.82 7.09 6.36 3.76
Deposits 70.18 71.16 93.68 31.24 5.70 24.26 17.63 46.09 8.72
Transferable deposits 73.84 100.96 105.26 32.22 7.24 28.09 23.41 46.52 13.26
Time deposits 8.74 − 9.22 1.28 0.44 0.83 2.16 − 1.73 0.02 − 1.59
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 12.41 − 20.58 − 12.87 − 1.43 − 2.37 − 5.99 − 4.05 − 0.45 − 2.96
Debt securities − 18.00 − 17.40 − 12.20 − 3.07 − 1.76 − 4.10 − 3.16 − 3.18 − 1.19
short-term debt securities − 0.67 0.75 − 0.10 − 0.13 0.10 − 0.62 0.10 0.33 0.38
long-term debt securities − 17.33 − 18.16 − 12.10 − 2.95 − 1.86 − 3.48 − 3.26 − 3.50 − 1.57
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 15.08 − 9.34 − 3.81 − 1.45 1.08 − 1.57 − 1.74 − 1.58 0.11
Non-financial corporations 0.02 0.39 0.02 − 0.07 0.67 − 0.59 0.03 − 0.09 − 0.65
Financial corporations − 12.52 − 6.80 − 2.22 − 0.78 0.74 − 0.36 − 1.29 − 1.31 1.08
General government − 2.58 − 2.93 − 1.61 − 0.60 − 0.33 − 0.63 − 0.48 − 0.18 − 0.33
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.93 − 8.06 − 8.39 − 1.62 − 2.84 − 2.53 − 1.42 − 1.60 − 1.30
Equity and investment fund shares 36.87 46.39 42.23 14.48 15.67 11.57 10.20 4.79 10.61
Equity 12.17 15.03 18.16 6.69 10.26 5.22 3.35 − 0.67 1.84
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.61 4.06 6.49 2.79 6.59 2.69 0.25 − 3.03 − 0.70
Non-financial corporations 2.69 3.77 3.22 2.76 4.52 0.69 − 0.30 − 1.69 − 0.36
Financial corporations 1.93 0.28 3.28 0.03 2.07 2.00 0.55 − 1.33 − 0.33
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 3.70 6.75 6.83 2.30 1.65 1.21 2.08 1.88 1.77
Other equity  1 3.86 4.22 4.83 1.60 2.02 1.32 1.02 0.47 0.77
Investment fund shares 24.70 31.36 24.07 7.79 5.41 6.35 6.86 5.46 8.76
Money market fund shares − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.52 − 0.30 − 0.30 − 0.15 0.10 − 0.17 − 0.22
Non-MMF investment fund shares 25.04 31.93 24.60 8.09 5.71 6.50 6.76 5.63 8.98
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 22.97 20.08 17.36 5.12 4.67 4.18 4.32 4.18 3.38
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.89 31.36 40.02 7.19 19.65 7.58 9.01 3.78 13.13
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 36.84 30.32 27.01 6.79 3.09 6.55 5.69 11.68 7.76
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 34.57 − 23.28 − 34.46 − 25.15 10.53 − 7.38 − 8.83 − 28.78 13.45
Total 161.82 184.03 194.93 44.33 60.57 47.49 41.95 44.92 59.60
  External financing
Loans 20.59 39.06 47.17 9.39 5.99 15.83 15.99 9.36 6.38
short-term loans − 1.98 − 3.17 − 4.31 − 1.40 − 0.42 − 0.91 − 0.93 − 2.05 − 0.35
long-term loans 22.57 42.23 51.48 10.79 6.41 16.74 16.92 11.41 6.73
Memo item
Mortage loans 24.87 36.49 41.64 10.44 4.27 12.14 14.31 10.92 4.59
Consumer loans 1.21 5.44 9.78 0.32 2.11 3.93 2.86 0.88 2.41
Entrepreneurial loans − 5.49 − 2.88 − 4.24 − 1.38 − 0.38 − 0.24 − 1.17 − 2.44 − 0.62
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 18.87 39.35 42.87 9.38 5.24 13.81 15.74 8.08 7.10
Loans from other financial institutions 1.72 − 0.29 4.31 0.01 0.75 2.02 0.25 1.28 − 0.72
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 0.78 − 1.14 0.34 − 0.25 0.19 0.03 0.11 0.01 − 0.16
Total 21.37 37.92 47.51 9.14 6.18 15.86 16.10 9.37 6.22
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 2017 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,998.1 2,094.7 2,208.8 2,094.7 2,103.5 2,132.6 2,157.5 2,208.8 2,222.0
Currency 127.7 153.1 174.4 153.1 156.1 160.9 168.0 174.4 178.1
Deposits 1,870.4 1,941.6 2,034.4 1,941.6 1,947.4 1,971.6 1,989.5 2,034.4 2,043.8
Transferable deposits 981.4 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,082.4 1,089.8 1,117.9 1,141.5 1,188.0 1,201.2
Time deposits 256.4 246.8 248.7 246.8 248.3 250.4 248.7 248.7 247.9
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 632.7 612.4 597.7 612.4 609.3 603.4 599.3 597.7 594.7
Debt securities 162.2 139.8 127.4 139.8 137.1 133.5 130.6 127.4 126.7
short-term debt securities 2.1 2.9 2.7 2.9 2.9 2.3 2.4 2.7 3.1
long-term debt securities 160.1 136.9 124.7 136.9 134.2 131.2 128.3 124.7 123.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 102.4 89.4 85.6 89.4 89.6 87.8 87.1 85.6 86.1
Non-financial corporations 14.1 13.4 13.9 13.4 13.9 13.1 14.1 13.9 13.3Financial corporations 78.7 69.5 66.7 69.5 69.4 69.0 67.8 66.7 68.2General government 9.6 6.5 5.0 6.5 6.3 5.7 5.2 5.0 4.6
Debt securities of the rest of the world 59.8 50.3 41.8 50.3 47.6 45.7 43.5 41.8 40.6
Equity and investment fund shares 951.4 1,040.7 1,108.3 1,040.7 1,023.0 1,028.9 1,069.2 1,108.3 1,155.9
Equity 508.9 555.9 590.4 555.9 543.7 541.2 564.1 590.4 615.0
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 169.7 188.9 200.8 188.9 181.8 174.6 187.9 200.8 213.0
Non-financial corporations 142.1 158.7 169.8 158.7 154.1 148.6 160.6 169.8 180.4
Financial corporations 27.6 30.3 31.0 30.3 27.6 26.0 27.3 31.0 32.6
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 64.0 74.8 86.8 74.8 73.1 76.8 80.7 86.8 93.1
Other equity  
1 275.3 292.2 302.9 292.2 288.9 289.7 295.5 302.9 308.8
Investment fund shares 442.5 484.8 517.8 484.8 479.3 487.8 505.1 517.8 540.9
Money market fund shares 4.0 3.4 2.8 3.4 3.1 3.0 3.0 2.8 2.7
Non-MMF investment fund shares 438.5 481.4 515.0 481.4 476.3 484.7 502.1 515.0 538.2
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 307.3 324.4 337.8 324.4 327.7 331.1 334.5 337.8 341.1
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 885.6 919.5 963.2 919.5 940.4 948.8 958.6 963.2 976.3
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 752.1 783.4 810.4 783.4 786.5 793.0 798.7 810.4 818.2
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 35.8 37.1 35.6 37.1 36.8 36.5 36.0 35.6 35.3
Total 5,092.6 5,339.5 5,591.4 5,339.5 5,355.1 5,404.3 5,485.1 5,591.4 5,675.5
  Liabilities
Loans 1,570.5 1,607.5 1,655.3 1,607.5 1,613.9 1,629.7 1,645.9 1,655.3 1,661.7
short-term loans 64.6 60.9 56.6 60.9 60.5 59.6 58.6 56.6 56.3
long-term loans 1,505.9 1,546.6 1,598.7 1,546.6 1,553.4 1,570.1 1,587.2 1,598.7 1,605.4
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,118.0 1,154.7 1,196.4 1,154.7 1,159.0 1,171.2 1,185.5 1,196.4 1,201.0Consumer loans 188.9 191.9 201.8 191.9 194.0 197.8 200.9 201.8 204.2Entrepreneurial loans 263.6 260.9 257.0 260.9 260.9 260.7 259.5 257.0 256.4
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,514.9 1,520.5 1,534.3 1,550.2 1,558.3 1,565.4Loans from other financial institutions 92.9 92.7 97.0 92.7 93.4 95.4 95.7 97.0 96.2Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 16.4 14.9 15.6 14.9 15.8 15.9 16.3 15.6 16.5
Total 1,586.9 1,622.4 1,670.9 1,622.4 1,629.7 1,645.5 1,662.1 1,670.9 1,678.1
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 5.4 − 8.1 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.6 + 8.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 p + 20.9 + 10.0 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 pe + 26.4 + 6.9 + 5.9 + 5.5 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2015         H1  p + 14.4 + 2.4 + 3.7 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         H2  p + 6.6 + 7.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
2016         H1  pe + 16.4 + 4.3 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 6.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
         H2  pe + 10.0 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2010 2,088.8 1,334.0 629.6 143.1 1.3 81.0 51.7 24.4 5.5 0.1
2011 2,128.3 1,344.1 657.0 143.6 1.3 78.7 49.7 24.3 5.3 0.0
2012 2,204.9 1,387.9 685.5 148.2 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,189.8 1,390.5 664.1 151.3 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.4 0.0
2014 p 2,189.6 1,396.5 657.0 152.5 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,158.8 1,372.7 653.1 152.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,140.4 1,366.9 637.0 152.7 1.1 68.3 43.6 20.3 4.9 0.0
2015         Q1  p 2,195.0 1,398.0 665.0 152.8 1.4 74.5 47.4 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2  p 2,160.8 1,380.6 644.6 152.6 1.4 72.6 46.4 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q3  p 2,162.5 1,374.8 652.1 153.4 1.5 72.0 45.8 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,158.8 1,372.7 653.1 152.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016         Q1  p 2,166.4 1,382.5 645.8 154.9 1.2 70.9 45.2 21.1 5.1 0.0
         Q2  p 2,169.3 1,391.2 642.1 154.4 1.1 70.2 45.0 20.8 5.0 0.0
         Q3  p 2,162.3 1,381.1 642.5 155.1 1.0 69.4 44.4 20.6 5.0 0.0
         Q4  p 2,140.4 1,366.9 637.0 152.7 1.1 68.3 43.6 20.3 4.9 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,114.8 1,352.8 625.6 152.0 1.2 66.9 42.8 19.8 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 118.0 59.4 63.9 139.9 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 p 1,258.4 650.6 465.0 142.8 1,263.7 666.5 217.9 133.1 60.7 56.0 129.4 − 5.4 1,119.9
2014 p 1,306.8 674.0 482.0 150.7 1,298.2 692.5 224.1 134.3 60.9 52.0 134.3 + 8.6 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.8 706.3 500.8 147.8 1,333.9 723.4 228.6 139.5 64.3 47.3 130.8 + 20.9 1,212.5
2016 pe 1,414.7 738.8 523.3 152.7 1,388.4 755.4 236.7 150.1 66.3 43.2 136.7 + 26.4 1,269.0
as a percentage of GDP
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 4.6 2.3 2.5 5.4 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 p 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.2 39.6
2014 p 44.7 23.1 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.7 7.7 4.6 2.1 1.8 4.6 + 0.3 39.7
2015 p 44.7 23.3 16.5 4.9 44.0 23.9 7.5 4.6 2.1 1.6 4.3 + 0.7 40.0
2016 pe 45.1 23.6 16.7 4.9 44.3 24.1 7.6 4.8 2.1 1.4 4.4 + 0.8 40.5
Percentage growth rates
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 23.9 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 p + 3.1 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 − 1.3 − 11.2 + 14.8 . + 3.3
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 3.8 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.8 + 3.9 − 1.9 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 3.9 + 5.4 − 9.1 − 2.6 . + 4.5
2016 pe + 4.4 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 4.1 + 4.4 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 3.1 − 8.6 + 4.5 . + 4.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and lution Fund established at the European level. 
social contributions plus customs duties and levies from banks to the Single Reso-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.7 + 3.8 1,033.7 1,108.8 − 75.1
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 + 15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.92012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.0 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.6 601.2 594.6 + 6.7 1,354.2 1,330.0 + 24.2
2015         Q1  p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2  p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3  p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4  p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016         Q1  p 205.7 169.9 1.4 206.5 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 321.8 326.2 − 4.5
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.9 169.3 2.9 211.7 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 329.0 334.2 − 5.2
         Q4  p 232.3 189.2 2.1 232.6 68.0 82.3 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.3 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 364.9 357.4 + 7.5
2017         Q1  p 215.6 180.4 0.9 200.9 63.1 80.9 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 14.6 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 337.5 327.7 + 9.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans gran ted.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 373.5 + 7.6 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2015         Q1  p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2  p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3  p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4  p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016         Q1  p 81.1 83.6 − 2.5 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 92.5 − 1.6 104.3 105.5 − 1.2 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 84.6 + 3.5 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,791 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,679 + 148 27,836
2015         Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558
         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016         Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512
         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584
         Q4 189,180 164,382 83,920 72,608 7,855 32,513 − 7,715 7,253
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 ... 149,915 76,387 66,605 6,922 ... ... 6,825
2016         June . 63,479 34,058 27,918 1,504 . . 2,171
2017         June . 58,559 28,349 27,904 2,306 . . 2,275
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central gov ernment tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government c ash offices in the
government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmen t
deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,310 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2015         Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907
         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453
         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016         Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054
         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824
         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
2016         June 68,089 38,863 16,170 11,667 6,533 4,493 17,685 13,581 4,104 1 8,734 2,403 403 4,610
2017         June 63,666 39,961 17,319 13,145 7,041 2,456 17,878 13,124 4,755 − 7 3,500 1,888 446 5,107
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2016: 49.4:48.3:2.2. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2016: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Period Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits land and ance lottery business property
tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2010 39,838 11,713 13,492 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 5,290 4,404 1,412 1,039 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,313 50,097 13,654
2015         Q1 4,704 3,783 2,223 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 2,760 1,668 426 353 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 4,278 3,683 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 2,561 1,617 433 227 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,714 3,981 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 3,021 1,335 401 272 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 4,155 5,034 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 2,906 1,670 452 236 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016         Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,039 13,673 3,024
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 ... ... ...
2016         June 3,414 2,204 849 623 777 422 153 292 1,003 1,153 151 96 . . .
2017         June 3,515 2,445 1,270 657 843 686 155 − 6,071 1,074 563 157 94 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2015         Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2015         Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of t he basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2010 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2015         Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,643 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2015         Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,088,785 4,440 691,401 207,062 133,351 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,128,324 4,440 641,685 206,631 123,064 1,152,5052012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,204,943 4,440 643,884 199,132 143,883 1,213,6032013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,189,775 4,440 634,669 190,555 145,785 1,214,3272014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,189,564 4,440 619,838 190,130 134,670 1,240,486
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,158,813 77,220 606,481 186,661 150,966 1,137,486
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016  
p 2,140,368 196,320 572,527 179,755 175,358 1,016,408
2015         Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 2,195,020 12,335 625,817 189,048 142,040 1,225,780
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 2,160,801 34,310 612,663 187,280 141,307 1,185,241         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 2,162,548 54,990 616,499 188,165 142,763 1,160,130         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 2,158,813 77,220 606,481 186,661 150,966 1,137,486
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1  
p 2,166,362 100,051 607,793 183,160 144,155 1,131,204
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2  p 2,169,346 133,297 595,070 181,372 158,883 1,100,724
         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3  p 2,162,250 163,636 590,349 179,359 158,991 1,069,914
         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4  p 2,140,368 196,320 572,527 179,755 175,358 1,016,408
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  p 2,114,849 230,505 554,222 178,219 173,785 978,117
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 Day-bond tions  4 funds Other  4 claims  5 Other  5,6 
Central, state and local government
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,903 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,606 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,672 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 289,225 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013 1,816,557 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,969 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014 1,817,587 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 277,296 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015         Q1 1,821,890 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,509 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 1,807,271 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,661 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 1,811,599 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 270,467 42 110,741 4,440 2
         Q4 1,805,314 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 263,992 59 112,972 4,440 2
2016         Q1  p 1,814,572 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 279,084 59 109,023 4,440 2
         Q2  p 1,812,750 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 277,672 59 107,769 4,440 2
         Q3  p 1,804,565 31,237 433,493 245,945 922 717,358 1,021 262,894 59 107,194 4,440 2
         Q4  p 1,786,779 24,509 430,701 236,136 737 724,328 1,010 258,084 59 106,772 4,440 2
2017         Q1  p 1,773,085 16,098 424,930 227,906 619 730,531 995 260,835 56 106,673 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015         Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016         Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
         Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2
         Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2
         Q4 1,102,410 23,609 95,727 236,136 737 722,124 1,010 11,761 − 6,866 4,440 2
2017         Q1 1,096,711 14,910 95,148 227,906 619 727,887 995 17,829 − 6,976 4,440 2
         Q2 1,101,991 14,431 93,795 219,668 487 743,120 986 18,076 − 6,986 4,440 2
State government
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,870 1,975 283,601 .... 154,844 62 97,387 . 1
2012 541,254 950 299,750 .... 139,116 52 101,386 . 1
2013 546,354 125 313,412 .... 134,439 35 98,343 . 1
2014 544,992 0 326,188 .... 120,101 5 98,697 . 1
2015         Q1 547,487 1,821 323,055 .... 123,943 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 538,594 2,040 320,492 .... 117,935 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 544,260 2,056 326,447 .... 117,506 5 98,245 . 1
         Q4 543,999 895 333,429 .... 110,674 5 98,996 . 1
2016         Q1  p 542,715 1,278 328,858 .... 117,194 5 95,379 . 1
         Q2  p 536,884 1,173 328,397 .... 112,651 6 94,657 . 1
         Q3  p 541,819 611 331,441 .... 115,550 6 94,212 . 1
         Q4  p 538,755 900 334,975 .... 108,948 6 93,927 . 1
2017         Q1  p 531,334 1,188 329,782 .... 106,644 3 93,718 . 1
Local government9
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014 142,468 . − . . 1,297 . 136,686 37 4,448 . .
2015         Q1 147,362 . − . . 1,597 . 141,278 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 147,039 . − . . 1,847 . 140,705 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 147,669 . − . . 1,997 . 141,185 37 4,450 . .
         Q4 147,573 . − . . 2,047 . 139,493 54 5,980 . .
2016         Q1  p 147,466 . − . . 2,076 . 139,356 54 5,980 . .
         Q2  p 147,271 . − . . 2,453 . 138,785 54 5,980 . .
         Q3  p 148,038 . − . . 2,455 . 139,550 54 5,980 . .
         Q4  p 145,614 . − . . 2,204 . 137,376 54 5,980 . .
2017         Q1  p 145,040 . − . . 2,645 . 136,362 54 5,980 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and its
non-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures ha ve been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2015   2016   2017
  2014   2015   2016   2014   2015   2016   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 110.0 111.8 113.3 5.0 1.6 1.4 1.7 1.9 0.9 4.0 0.7 0.1 3.8Construction 101.6 101.4 103.5 1.4 − 0.2 2.1 − 0.8 2.4 1.6 5.6 1.8 − 0.5 4.0Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 106.6 108.6 111.0 0.4 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 1.2 4.3 1.5 2.0 3.0Information and communication 125.9 129.1 132.7 4.8 2.5 2.8 2.5 3.0 2.4 3.4 3.1 2.2 3.7Financial and insuranceactivities 105.8 106.5 109.1 − 4.8 0.7 2.4 1.6 − 0.4 2.2 1.4 2.4 3.8 1.6Real estate activities 101.8 102.6 103.4 − 1.5 0.9 0.7 0.9 1.2 0.7 1.0 0.5 0.6 1.1Business services  
1 106.6 109.0 111.6 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.1 3.0 1.7 3.8 2.2 2.0 3.8
Public services, education andhealth 103.1 105.2 107.4 0.7 2.0 2.1 2.1 1.6 1.5 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3Other services 97.3 97.6 99.0 − 0.5 0.3 1.4 0.2 0.9 0.2 2.2 1.6 1.7 2.6
Gross value added 106.3 107.9 109.9 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.6 1.8 1.2 3.2 1.5 1.4 2.9Gross domestic product  
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.2 1.6 1.3 2.9
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 104.4 106.5 108.7 0.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.9 1.9 1.6 1.6
Government consumption 104.5 107.4 111.7 1.2 2.7 4.0 2.6 3.4 4.7 4.9 3.9 2.7 1.5Machinery and equipment 106.8 110.7 111.9 5.5 3.7 1.1 4.4 6.4 3.9 4.4 − 0.5 − 2.6 2.0Premises 109.5 109.8 112.9 1.9 0.3 2.8 0.1 3.1 3.1 5.5 2.1 0.4 4.7Other investment  
4 111.4 113.5 116.5 4.0 1.9 2.6 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 2.7 2.5 2.5
Changes in inventories  5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.3
Domestic demand 104.5 106.2 108.6 1.4 1.6 2.3 2.0 2.5 2.3 3.2 2.1 1.5 2.2
Net exports  6 . . . 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.9
Exports 118.0 124.1 127.4 4.1 5.2 2.7 4.9 3.6 1.3 4.6 1.4 3.3 6.6Imports 114.8 121.0 125.6 4.0 5.5 3.8 6.0 5.0 3.1 5.0 2.7 4.3 5.6
Gross domestic product  
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.2 1.6 1.3 2.9
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,594.4 1,636.0 1,681.5 1.8 2.6 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.6 3.3 2.5 2.8 3.2
Government consumption 561.1 583.7 615.3 3.5 4.0 5.4 3.8 4.9 6.4 6.3 5.2 4.0 3.4Machinery and equipment 191.5 200.2 204.4 6.1 4.6 2.1 5.3 7.4 5.1 5.4 0.5 − 1.6 2.7Premises 288.7 295.0 308.7 4.2 2.2 4.7 1.9 4.9 4.6 7.4 4.1 2.5 7.5Other investment  
4 105.0 108.6 112.9 5.5 3.5 3.9 3.3 3.7 3.8 4.0 4.0 3.9 3.8
Changes in inventories  5 − 7.4 − 20.2 − 27.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,733.2 2,803.3 2,895.3 2.8 2.6 3.3 2.9 3.6 3.1 4.0 3.1 2.9 3.9
Net exports 190.7 229.5 238.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,334.8 1,418.8 1,442.2 3.9 6.3 1.7 6.2 4.2 0.7 2.7 0.1 3.0 8.3Imports 1,144.1 1,189.3 1,203.5 2.5 3.9 1.2 4.7 2.8 0.1 0.8 0.1 3.9 9.7
Gross domestic product  
2 2,923.9 3,032.8 3,134.1 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.7 4.2 3.2 4.7 2.9 2.6 3.7
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 105.6 106.2 106.9 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.7Gross domestic product 106.6 108.7 110.2 1.8 2.0 1.4 1.9 2.1 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.8Terms of trade 99.5 102.0 103.6 1.3 2.6 1.5 2.5 2.6 2.4 2.3 1.3 0.1 − 2.3
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,485.5 1,539.9 1,598.4 3.9 3.7 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.2 3.4 3.8 3.9 4.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 694.1 723.4 740.8 2.4 4.2 2.4 4.1 5.3 1.6 9.8 0.4 − 1.6 1.8
National income 2,179.5 2,263.2 2,339.2 3.4 3.8 3.4 3.9 4.3 3.3 5.3 2.6 2.3 3.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,988.9 3,098.8 3,198.7 3.3 3.7 3.2 3.7 4.2 3.4 4.8 2.6 2.2 3.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2017. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
basic metals Motor electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2013 106.4 106.4 96.4 107.7 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.7
2014 108.1 109.5 92.7 109.8 106.2 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.6 107.0 97.5 110.3 106.1 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.4 114.8 119.3
2016 109.8 109.6 96.2 111.7 107.3 119.3 105.9 103.0 113.0 111.4 114.8 121.6
 
2016         Q2 109.2 110.9 89.0 111.5 108.2 118.9 104.2 101.1 114.5 109.2 112.9 124.2
         Q3 110.1 117.9 91.8 111.4 108.3 117.6 103.0 104.1 112.6 113.5 113.2 119.3
         Q4 112.9 120.5 101.6 113.3 104.8 124.1 109.6 106.1 111.7 114.1 124.1 117.7
2017         Q1 108.4 90.8 101.8 111.7 109.3 117.7 110.0 101.9 115.3 112.9 110.6 125.4
         Q2 x,p 112.8 117.1 92.1 114.8 112.0 122.1 110.3 102.8 119.0 115.5 117.0 126.2
 
2016         June 112.4 114.8 86.0 115.5 109.8 125.9 110.6 102.3 117.2 115.1 121.5 128.6
         July 2 110.4 120.7 91.7 111.4 109.2 117.5 99.3 102.7 113.6 111.9 111.1 121.7
         Aug 2 104.5 113.6 90.6 105.1 104.2 107.8 94.1 102.5 107.0 108.2 105.8 104.6
         Sep 115.4 119.5 93.1 117.7 111.5 127.5 115.7 107.0 117.3 120.3 122.6 131.7
         Oct 115.7 122.4 99.5 116.8 111.9 124.0 114.5 109.9 118.6 116.7 114.2 132.1
         Nov 118.7 123.6 102.2 120.2 111.8 131.6 115.9 111.3 121.8 120.4 127.3 131.0
         Dec 104.3 115.4 103.1 102.9 90.6 116.7 98.4 97.2 94.6 105.3 130.9 90.1
2017         Jan 99.8 68.9 108.2 103.1 104.3 103.8 102.7 98.2 108.3 106.0 94.9 112.6
         Feb 106.1 90.7 97.2 109.5 106.1 116.8 108.8 98.0 112.4 109.5 110.1 126.0
         Mar 119.2 112.7 100.0 122.6 117.5 132.4 118.5 109.4 125.1 123.1 126.7 137.7
         Apr x 111.6 116.0 93.3 113.3 111.9 119.1 110.0 101.4 117.8 114.6 112.3 127.0
         May x 111.6 115.7 92.1 113.6 111.1 120.2 107.6 102.8 118.4 113.0 114.4 125.2
         June x,p 115.1 119.6 90.9 117.6 112.9 127.1 113.2 104.1 120.8 118.8 124.3 126.4
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.2
2015 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.1 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.9
 
2016         Q2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.2
         Q3 + 0.9 + 2.7 − 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 1.6
         Q4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.0
2017         Q1 + 1.1 + 2.0 − 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 0.3
         Q2 x,p + 3.3 + 5.6 + 3.4 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 1.7 + 3.9 + 5.7 + 3.7 + 1.6
 
2016         June + 1.3 + 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 7.9 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 7.0
         July 2 − 1.3 + 3.1 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 4.3 − 3.9
         Aug 2 + 2.3 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 7.9
         Sep + 1.8 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 2.2
         Oct + 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 3.8 − 1.6 + 1.5
         Nov + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 3.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 1.2
         Dec + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 5.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.2
2017         Jan − 0.4 − 5.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.1 + 3.3 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 2.1
         Feb + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 0.6
         Mar + 2.1 + 5.1 − 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 3.0 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 2.1
         Apr x + 2.8 + 6.9 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 3.7 + 0.9 + 5.1 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 7.0 + 2.2 − 1.1
         May x + 4.8 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 3.8 + 6.6 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 5.4 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 8.2
         June x,p + 2.4 + 4.2 + 5.7 + 1.8 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 2.3 − 1.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Pro duction Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013 109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.02014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2016 115.7 + 0.8 102.1 − 0.9 125.3 + 1.7 115.3 + 0.9 112.6 + 5.5 116.2 − 0.6
2016         June 118.7 − 3.9 103.0 − 3.5 130.4 − 4.5 114.1 − 0.2 111.1 + 2.8 115.2 − 1.0
         July 114.1 − 2.1 102.1 − 2.8 122.1 − 1.9 117.3 − 1.2 110.0 + 2.0 119.9 − 2.0
         Aug 103.2 + 0.4 92.9 − 0.6 109.0 + 0.6 114.5 + 4.3 101.9 + 2.4 119.0 + 4.8         Sep 113.9 + 1.8 100.5 + 0.5 123.3 + 2.7 115.4 + 1.1 119.2 + 2.4 114.1 + 0.6
         Oct 118.7 + 4.4 105.0 + 2.2 128.4 + 6.6 117.9 − 1.8 129.5 + 12.9 113.8 − 6.6
         Nov 119.0 + 2.1 107.5 + 2.1 127.1 + 1.8 118.3 + 2.5 119.1 + 8.7 118.0 + 0.5         Dec 121.1 + 9.5 93.6 + 3.7 143.0 + 13.9 104.1 − 2.1 103.6 + 5.0 104.2 − 4.4
2017         Jan 115.1 + 1.1 107.0 + 2.6 120.7 + 1.1 116.9 − 4.1 115.6 − 0.6 117.4 − 5.2
         Feb 119.0 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.4 123.8 + 3.7 121.7 + 4.1 116.6 + 11.9 123.4 + 1.7         Mar 133.6 + 4.3 119.5 + 10.0 143.8 + 0.8 131.1 + 8.2 135.0 + 14.8 129.8 + 6.0
         Apr 119.4 + 5.5 111.0 + 5.9 125.3 + 4.9 118.7 + 7.8 120.9 + 2.3 117.9 + 10.0
         May 118.3 + 5.7 109.2 + 7.6 125.1 + 4.9 116.4 + 4.4 119.4 + 18.6 115.4 + 0.1         June
p 126.5 + 6.6 114.9 + 11.6 135.5 + 3.9 121.5 + 6.5 130.8 + 17.7 118.3 + 2.7
From the domestic market
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.1 − 4.3 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.3 102.8 + 0.9 99.5 + 1.32014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.8
+ 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015 107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.7 106.3 + 4.0
2016 107.4 + 0.0 96.8 − 2.2 118.7 + 2.1 103.4 − 1.7 105.6 + 3.4 102.6 − 3.5
2016         June 108.4 + 1.1 97.0 − 3.7 121.1 + 5.8 100.7 − 1.2 101.4 + 1.4 100.4 − 2.1
         July 105.6 − 6.0 97.6 − 3.8 113.6 − 8.0 105.1 − 5.1 102.9 − 1.6 105.9 − 6.1
         Aug 99.7 + 0.7 91.0 − 2.4 107.8 + 4.2 103.0 − 3.5 101.3 + 1.6 103.6 − 5.1         Sep 104.4 − 0.9 92.8 − 3.5 116.0 + 1.5 104.0 − 3.5 115.8 + 0.7 99.8 − 5.1
         Oct 111.0 + 3.1 100.5 + 1.8 122.2 + 4.7 107.0 − 1.1 120.6 + 6.8 102.2 − 4.1
         Nov 111.3 + 0.8 102.4 + 0.4 120.9 + 1.4 107.5 − 0.7 114.6 + 5.7 105.0 − 3.0         Dec 107.3 + 9.6 86.4 + 2.7 131.0 + 16.1 91.0 + 0.2 88.9 + 6.3 91.7 − 1.8
2017         Jan 106.2 + 0.5 100.8 + 2.1 112.0 − 1.0 103.6 + 0.2 104.6 + 1.6 103.2 − 0.4
         Feb 113.5 + 7.5 108.4 + 13.9 119.3 + 3.2 109.9 + 1.9 104.3 + 3.8 111.9 + 1.4         Mar 122.5 + 4.9 111.5 + 9.2 135.3 + 1.9 111.2 + 2.0 117.6 + 1.0 109.0 + 2.4
         Apr 111.8 + 3.2 104.8 + 2.7 120.7 + 4.0 99.9 + 0.6 106.3 + 0.1 97.7 + 0.9
         May 107.8 + 2.7 102.7 + 7.2 114.0 − 0.5 101.7 − 0.8 102.9 + 8.2 101.3 − 3.6         June
p 116.1 + 7.1 105.7 + 9.0 128.2 + 5.9 105.6 + 4.9 107.9 + 6.4 104.8 + 4.4
From abroad
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.8 − 0.4 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.8 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.52014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.2 118.0 + 6.6 102.0 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.7 + 0.3 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.5 126.0 + 2.0
2016 122.4 + 1.4 108.3 + 0.6 129.4 + 1.6 125.5 + 2.8 118.8 + 7.3 127.8 + 1.4
2016         June 127.1 − 7.0 110.1 − 3.2 136.2 − 9.3 125.6 + 0.6 119.6 + 3.9 127.7 − 0.4
         July 121.0 + 0.7 107.4 − 1.6 127.4 + 1.8 127.7 + 1.8 116.2 + 5.1 131.8 + 0.9
         Aug 106.1 + 0.3 95.1 + 1.4 109.8 − 1.3 124.4 + 10.6 102.4 + 3.1 132.0 + 12.7         Sep 121.7 + 3.8 109.5 + 4.8 127.8 + 3.3 125.1 + 4.6 122.2 + 3.9 126.2 + 4.9
         Oct 124.9 + 5.4 110.3 + 2.6 132.3 + 7.7 127.2 − 2.3 137.2 + 18.0 123.7 − 8.3
         Nov 125.2 + 2.9 113.6 + 4.0 130.9 + 1.9 127.6 + 5.0 123.1 + 11.2 129.1 + 3.1         Dec 132.4 + 9.4 102.0 + 4.5 150.4 + 12.7 115.3 − 3.6 116.4 + 4.1 114.9 − 6.1
2017         Jan 122.4 + 1.7 114.3 + 3.2 126.0 + 2.2 128.3 − 6.8 125.1 − 2.2 129.4 − 8.2
         Feb 123.5 + 4.9 115.9 + 6.8 126.6 + 4.0 131.7 + 5.6 127.4 + 18.5 133.2 + 2.1         Mar 142.6 + 3.9 129.0 + 10.9 149.1 + 0.2 148.2 + 12.5 150.2 + 26.5 147.5 + 8.4
         Apr 125.5 + 7.2 118.2 + 9.4 128.2 + 5.4 134.8 + 13.0 133.6 + 3.8 135.1 + 16.4
         May 126.9 + 8.0 116.9 + 8.0 131.9 + 8.0 128.9 + 8.1 133.7 + 26.7 127.3 + 2.7         June
p 135.0 + 6.2 125.7 + 14.2 140.0 + 2.8 135.1 + 7.6 150.8 + 26.1 129.7 + 1.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2012 114.7 + 7.1 121.4 + 8.2 132.3 + 9.7 124.2 + 9.3 91.7 + 0.2 107.9 + 5.8 118.7 + 5.3 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.3 128.0 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.4 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.7 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.6 − 0.5 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.7 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.7 − 0.2 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.7 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.4 − 1.8 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
2016 142.2 + 14.5 153.8 + 15.1 193.4 + 16.9 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.7 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 126.9 + 16.1
 
2016         May 157.4 + 18.6 176.1 + 27.5 209.7 + 24.7 173.6 + 32.9 117.6 + 16.3 138.7 + 9.0 156.0 + 19.6 137.9 + 14.2
         June 165.2 + 19.9 181.1 + 24.4 223.0 + 27.6 175.0 + 25.6 117.0 + 9.6 149.3 + 14.8 161.6 + 20.4 145.6 + 15.0
         July 152.6 + 15.6 163.6 + 17.3 195.1 + 5.8 158.3 + 31.4 117.2 + 9.2 141.7 + 13.7 144.0 + 19.2 144.4 + 17.9
         Aug 138.9 + 12.2 148.6 + 14.2 184.0 + 16.7 141.7 + 15.2 99.7 + 3.1 129.2 + 9.9 132.4 + 11.0 127.5 + 11.0
         Sep 144.5 + 7.6 161.6 + 6.7 225.4 + 11.5 133.2 − 0.5 120.3 + 16.6 127.4 + 8.6 129.7 + 1.1 127.1 + 12.3
         Oct 145.3 + 23.4 156.9 + 22.6 194.5 + 22.9 147.8 + 26.9 110.2 + 7.1 133.6 + 24.4 144.7 + 20.1 126.1 + 27.9
         Nov 127.1 + 7.0 139.7 + 1.9 189.3 + 24.3 121.8 − 15.8 95.1 + 12.0 114.5 + 13.9 124.4 − 11.5 104.8 + 26.0
         Dec 131.1 + 6.2 150.0 + 10.9 171.8 + 2.8 153.8 + 22.6 95.6 − 5.5 112.2 + 0.4 141.0 + 22.8 104.6 − 8.7
2017         Jan 113.5 + 4.7 125.0 + 6.3 154.5 + 4.6 122.5 + 15.2 74.4 − 19.0 102.1 + 2.8 124.5 + 11.8 85.9 − 4.2
         Feb 130.2 + 7.9 144.2 + 14.4 176.0 + 11.6 139.0 + 20.3 97.3 + 2.6 116.2 + 0.7 127.3 + 16.1 114.8 − 2.0
         Mar 179.0 + 8.7 190.5 + 13.1 243.5 + 7.0 172.4 + 17.7 139.8 + 19.5 167.6 + 4.2 165.2 + 10.2 167.3 + 8.3
         Apr 165.2 + 9.4 170.3 + 9.6 204.6 + 4.6 166.4 + 16.7 114.5 + 0.4 160.0 + 9.1 153.8 + 9.5 160.9 + 11.8
         May 155.5 − 1.2 162.5 − 7.7 202.0 − 3.7 143.2 − 17.5 142.1 + 20.8 148.6 + 7.1 138.8 − 11.0 154.0 + 11.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *   
 
 
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which
in stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order houses
clothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 0.3 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.7 + 0.4 116.5 + 8.4
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.7 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.4 + 2.7 123.4 + 5.9
2014 108.2 + 1.9 102.7 + 1.4 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.8 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 126.2 + 2.3
2015 3 112.2 + 3.7 3 106.7 + 3.9 114.8 + 2.9 105.2 + 0.3 95.5 + 1.0 104.6 + 2.6 116.6 + 5.3 3 151.5 + 20.0
2016 4 115.0 + 2.5 108.9 + 2.1 117.1 + 2.0 104.8 − 0.4 95.5 + 0.0 106.1 + 1.4 121.4 + 4.1 166.4 + 9.8
 
2016         June 112.0 + 1.9 106.0 + 1.8 116.1 + 1.7 103.0 − 2.3 85.2 + 4.3 103.2 + 1.0 117.3 + 3.3 153.1 + 6.2
         July 115.5 + 2.1 109.8 + 1.8 119.1 + 2.9 107.2 − 0.6 89.6 − 1.2 106.3 + 2.9 124.0 + 3.7 150.0 + 0.8
         Aug 111.1 + 1.7 105.7 + 1.5 115.8 + 0.5 96.6 + 0.7 84.4 − 1.7 101.4 + 2.4 118.2 + 5.9 152.9 + 4.3
         Sep 110.6 + 0.6 104.4 + 0.1 112.3 + 2.1 100.3 − 10.6 87.9 − 5.5 101.2 − 0.9 119.7 + 5.2 156.9 − 0.7
         Oct 119.9 + 3.5 112.7 + 2.9 118.6 + 2.7 127.7 + 6.2 101.1 + 3.3 112.5 + 1.6 124.3 + 4.1 179.0 + 9.3
         Nov 120.6 + 2.2 113.4 + 1.3 118.6 + 1.9 107.6 + 3.4 109.1 − 1.3 112.4 − 1.8 126.5 + 3.2 198.8 + 7.1
         Dec 138.4 + 2.7 130.5 + 1.2 137.6 + 2.8 124.5 + 0.2 151.8 + 2.4 115.8 + 2.1 135.7 + 3.7 214.7 + 5.1
2017         Jan 107.3 + 1.8 101.2 − 0.2 108.5 + 0.4 86.6 − 4.9 114.2 + 15.9 91.0 − 2.0 119.2 + 2.6 170.4 + 8.5
         Feb 105.3 + 3.5 98.6 + 1.2 108.9 + 3.1 80.5 + 0.4 93.6 + 9.2 93.0 − 1.1 116.4 + 2.4 160.5 + 4.2
         Mar 121.6 + 5.4 113.2 + 3.5 121.6 + 3.8 108.5 + 10.8 103.8 + 14.2 116.8 + 3.8 127.0 + 2.6 180.9 + 4.8
         Apr 119.2 + 4.1 110.5 + 2.5 123.5 + 5.5 106.3 − 5.5 95.1 + 15.7 112.1 + 0.6 123.2 + 3.4 172.5 + 14.8
         May 119.6 + 4.2 110.9 + 2.6 122.8 + 3.5 107.8 − 0.6 90.6 + 14.2 110.0 + 0.4 124.5 + 5.0 172.1 + 9.4
         June 118.3 + 5.6 110.3 + 4.1 121.3 + 4.5 108.2 + 5.0 96.3 + 13.0 106.5 + 3.2 123.5 + 5.3 169.3 + 10.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added integration of a larger online retail sales based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business establishment in Germany in May 2015. 4As of January 2016 figures are provisional,
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015, for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers  4 Unemployment  5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies,  5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2012 42,062 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 171 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 r 42,319 r + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 r 42,672 r + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 r 43,069 r + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 r 43,638 r + 1.3 p 31,485 p + 2.2 p 9,022 p 21,390 p 834 p 4,805 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2014         Q2 r 42,641 r + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,829 20,255 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487
         Q3 r 42,861 r + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 800 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512
         Q4 r 42,965 r + 0.8 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 110 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015         Q1 r 42,517 r + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 310 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 r 42,998 r + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560
         Q3 r 43,286 r + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595
         Q4 r 43,476 r + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016         Q1 r 43,096 r + 1.4 31,064 + 2.3 8,927 21,120 793 4,786 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 r 43,557 r + 1.3 p 31,326 p + 2.1 p 8,983 p 21,279 p 820 p 4,824 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
         Q3 r 43,832 r + 1.3 p 31,536 p + 2.0 p 9,039 p 21,391 p 858 p 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 r 44,066 r + 1.4 32,015 + 2.2 9,137 21,772 866 4,782 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 r 43,746 r + 1.5 8 31,791 8 + 2.3 8 9,039 8 21,699 8 830 8 4,726 ... 8 43 2,734 9 987 6.2 671
         Q2 10 44,221 10 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,513 822 11 5.6 717
2014         Mar r 42,303 r + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,797 20,162 742 4,990 202 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476
         Apr r 42,499 r + 1.0 30,060 + 1.7 8,826 20,244 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485
         May r 42,658 r + 0.9 30,125 + 1.6 8,836 20,292 751 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481
         June r 42,765 r + 0.9 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495
         July r 42,792 r + 0.9 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502
         Aug r 42,815 r + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515
         Sep r 42,976 r + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518
         Oct r 43,065 r + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517
         Nov r 43,017 r + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515
         Dec r 42,813 r + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 204 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015         Jan r 42,444 r + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 327 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb r 42,470 r + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 352 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
         Mar r 42,638 r + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 251 50 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr r 42,832 r + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
         May r 43,013 r + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557
         June r 43,150 r + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July r 43,190 r + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589
         Aug r 43,245 r + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597
         Sep r 43,422 r + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600
         Oct r 43,508 r + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
         Nov r 43,545 r + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610
         Dec r 43,374 r + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan r 43,005 r + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,059 r + 1.4 31,055 + 2.3 8,921 21,116 793 4,771 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,224 r + 1.4 31,195 + 2.2 8,951 21,205 804 4,783 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,388 r + 1.3 31,299 + 2.1 8,980 21,267 809 4,808 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,577 r + 1.3 31,395 + 2.2 8,997 21,324 826 4,839 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655
         June r 43,707 r + 1.3 p 31,374 p + 2.0 p 8,991 p 21,289 p 846 p 4,864 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July r 43,689 r + 1.2 p 31,258 p + 1.7 p 8,974 p 21,188 p 852 p 4,861 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug r 43,807 r + 1.3 31,658 + 2.2 9,070 21,475 864 4,805 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep r 43,999 r + 1.3 32,009 + 2.2 9,157 21,731 869 4,770 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct r 44,086 r + 1.3 32,046 + 2.2 9,154 21,775 871 4,768 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov r 44,131 r + 1.3 32,070 + 2.2 9,147 21,809 876 4,795 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec r 43,982 r + 1.4 31,849 + 2.3 9,062 21,732 835 4,795 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan r 43,663 r + 1.5 31,709 + 2.4 9,017 21,649 825 4,720 370 43 2,777 9 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb r 43,707 r + 1.5 8 31,777 8 + 2.3 8 9,032 8 21,694 8 828 8 4,704 ... 8 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar r 43,868 r + 1.5 8 31,924 8 + 2.3 8 9,077 8 21,774 8 837 8 4,712 ... 8 44 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr r 44,047 r + 1.5 8 32,021 8 + 2.3 8 9,104 8 21,837 8 839 8 4,741 ... 8 30 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May r 44,239 r + 1.5 8 32,139 8 + 2.4 8 9,127 8 21,906 8 859 8 4,765 ... 8 26 2,498 810 11 5.6 714
         June 10 44,377 10 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,518 842 5.6 750
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and mum of 1.1 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- 0.5 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributio ns, and by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 33.9 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From January 2017,
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal persons receiving additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given unemployment benefit II at the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding the Third Book of the Social Security Code (SGB III). 10Initial preliminary estimate by
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located the Federal Statistical Office. 11From May 2017 calculated on the basis of new la-
abroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2015 bour force figures. 
and 2016, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  6 
prices of
industrial of which
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer- sold on
energy struction the prices price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food  2 Energy  3 Services rents  4 concept) index market  5 Exports Imports Energy  7 products  5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2012 9 97.5 9 94.2 98.1 107.8 95.9 96.1 9 104.1 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 10 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
 
2015         Sep 100.1 100.0 100.7 98.4 100.1 100.2 107.0 103.5 107.4 104.6 99.6 90.8 94.1
         Oct 100.1 100.4 101.2 97.6 100.0 100.3 107.0 103.1 108.9 104.4 99.3 91.6 93.4
         Nov 100.1 100.5 101.0 97.7 100.1 100.4 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.6 104.5 99.1 89.6 92.7
         Dec 100.1 100.2 100.4 95.0 101.2 100.4 107.0 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016         Jan 99.1 100.4 99.7 92.7 99.9 100.6 106.1 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 99.5 100.8 99.9 91.8 100.6 100.7 106.5 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6
         Mar 100.3 101.2 101.0 92.7 101.5 100.8 107.3 101.2 106.6 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 99.8 101.6 101.5 93.6 99.7 100.9 106.9 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 100.2 101.3 101.4 95.0 100.5 101.0 107.2 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2
         June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6
         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0 10 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.2 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5
         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017         Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 114.8 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
         Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.2 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9
         Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.6 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
         Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 104.7 119.9 106.2 102.3 100.4 110.1
         May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 116.6 104.5 120.9 106.0 101.3 93.1 104.2
         June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 104.5 121.3 105.8 100.2 85.7 100.4
         July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 ... ... ... ... 86.5 102.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 9 + 2.1 9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 9 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 10 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
 
2015         Sep − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.9 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 37.2 − 10.4
         Oct + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 8.7 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 32.5 − 11.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 29.3 − 13.1
         Dec + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.7 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 4.4 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016         Jan + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 8.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7
         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4 10 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0
         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017         Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2
         Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 13.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 33.7 + 15.3
         May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 14.1 + 2.2 + 4.1 + 12.7 + 7.2
         June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 14.0 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 ... ... ... ... + 2.5 + 2.7
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value-added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Differences from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From January 2012, increase in tobacco
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels well as tax. 10 From September 2016 onwards, provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.62012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.32013 1,167.5 3.0 778.4 2.9 389.1 0.4 1,167.5 2.0 1,719.8 1.4 154.1 − 2.2 9.02014 1,213.0 3.9 807.1 3.7 400.2 2.8 1,207.3 3.4 1,759.5 2.3 165.1 7.1 9.4
2015 1,260.6 3.9 836.6 3.6 415.5 3.8 1,252.0 3.7 1,811.2 2.9 175.2 6.1 9.7
2016 1,311.0 4.0 868.7 3.8 427.6 2.9 1,296.3 3.5 1,862.4 2.8 180.9 3.2 9.7
2015         Q4 348.7 4.2 231.6 4.5 103.5 3.1 335.1 4.0 459.3 3.0 38.4 5.7 8.4
2016         Q1 305.4 4.5 202.4 4.5 107.5 1.7 309.9 3.5 459.5 2.7 59.5 3.0 13.0
         Q2 319.4 3.5 207.5 3.7 105.2 2.7 312.7 3.4 464.7 3.4 43.7 4.3 9.4         Q3 323.4 3.9 218.8 3.6 108.2 4.2 327.0 3.8 465.9 2.4 37.9 2.2 8.1         Q4 362.8 4.0 240.1 3.7 106.7 3.1 346.8 3.5 472.3 2.8 39.8 3.5 8.4
2017         Q1 318.1 4.2 210.5 4.0 111.3 3.5 321.8 3.8 476.3 3.7 63.4 6.4 13.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2017. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.2 2.5 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.0 2.5 107.0 2.5 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.02014 110.1 2.9 110.0 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.2 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.2 112.7 2.3 114.4 2.7
2016 115.0 2.1 114.8 2.1 115.0 2.2 115.2 2.2 117.2 2.5
2016         Q1 106.4 2.0 106.1 1.9 106.5 2.3 113.9 2.3 110.6 2.9
         Q2 107.9 2.1 107.7 2.2 107.7 1.9 114.9 2.1 114.6 2.1         Q3 117.4 2.1 117.2 2.2 117.5 2.2 115.9 2.2 115.4 2.5         Q4 128.3 2.2 128.1 2.2 128.5 2.2 116.2 2.3 128.2 2.5
2017         Q1 109.0 2.5 108.8 2.5 109.1 2.4 116.8 2.5 113.2 2.4
         Q2 110.1 2.1 109.9 2.1 110.2 2.3 117.6 2.4 . .
2016         Dec 110.5 2.4 110.3 2.4 110.5 2.3 116.2 2.3 . .
2017         Jan 108.9 2.5 108.7 2.5 108.8 2.4 116.5 2.4 . .
         Feb 109.0 2.7 108.7 2.7 109.1 2.7 116.8 2.7 . .         Mar 109.2 2.3 108.9 2.3 109.3 2.3 117.0 2.3 . .
         Apr 110.3 2.5 110.0 2.5 110.3 2.6 117.5 2.6 . .
         May 110.2 2.1 109.9 2.1 110.3 2.1 117.6 2.3 . .         June 109.9 1.7 109.7 1.6 110.0 2.3 117.8 2.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2017. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-halfyear data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2013 1,902.2 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.1 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.6 1,332.6 706.0 377.5 626.6 191.0 163.1
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.8
2015 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2016 p 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.0 152.2 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 481.9 806.5 258.5 192.9
2015         H1 2,163.8 1,346.9 453.6 539.8 270.0 816.8 217.9 197.4 127.0 622.4 1,541.4 830.0 440.6 711.4 223.0 173.2
         H2 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2016         H1 2,256.6 1,381.0 462.4 549.8 272.0 875.6 226.7 195.2 140.5 607.4 1,649.2 895.4 464.6 753.8 243.9 174.9
         H2 p 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.0 152.2 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 481.9 806.5 258.5 192.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 19.8 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2016 p 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.9 8.1
2015         H1 100.0 62.3 21.0 25.0 12.5 37.8 10.1 9.1 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.4 20.4 32.9 10.3 8.0
         H2 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2016         H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.1 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
         H2 p 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.9 8.1
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 280.5 512.2 170.2 114.9
2014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.4
2015 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2016 p 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 232.5 141.0
2015         H1 1,743.3 1,047.8 293.3 432.1 257.1 695.4 201.0 151.7 103.6 487.1 1,256.2 670.0 336.1 586.2 194.9 127.3
         H2 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2016         H1 1,818.4 1,059.3 296.6 432.5 254.2 759.1 210.1 150.0 112.3 466.0 1,352.3 717.9 351.0 634.4 219.2 130.0
         H2 p 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 232.5 141.0
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.4 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2016 p 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 12.2 7.4
2015         H1 100.0 60.1 16.8 24.8 14.8 39.9 11.5 8.7 5.9 27.9 72.1 38.4 19.3 33.6 11.2 7.3
         H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2016         H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.8 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
         H2 p 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 12.2 7.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2013 378.6 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.7 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.4 20.8 48.2
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.4
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016 p 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.0 36.6 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.5 126.6 26.0 51.9
2015         H1 420.5 299.1 160.3 107.7 12.9 121.4 17.0 45.7 23.4 135.3 285.2 160.0 104.4 125.2 28.0 45.9
         H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016         H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
         H2 p 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.0 36.6 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.5 126.6 26.0 51.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 p 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2015         H1 100.0 71.1 38.1 25.6 3.1 28.9 4.0 10.9 5.6 32.2 67.8 38.1 24.8 29.8 6.7 10.9
         H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016         H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
         H2 p 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
  
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-change change centage change centage
Period in %  
3 in % 3 % points  3 % % % in %  3 % points  3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2009 1,158.6 − 10.7 135.6 − 16.9 11.7 − 0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 − 29.2 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 4.9 9.3
2010 1,321.0 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.5 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.8 12.1
2011 1,414.4 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.4 10.9 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.02012 1,533.0 6.6 189.3 3.1 12.4 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.0 11.02013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.92014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,636.2 6.9 196.4 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.6 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.5 11.3
2016
p 1,626.0 − 0.4 222.7 11.9 13.7 1.5 6.5 11.3 17.8 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.5 6.5 12.0
2012         H1 751.0 8.1 93.3 3.6 12.4 − 0.5 4.7 9.1 16.8 55.7 1.6 7.4 − 0.5 1.0 5.7 11.4
         H2 782.2 5.2 95.9 2.6 12.3 − 0.3 4.7 11.0 17.9 39.9 − 19.2 5.1 − 1.4 1.4 6.8 11.7
2013         H1 762.8 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.5 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.7 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.1 12.1
2014         H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.7 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.1 17.6 59.1 1.4 7.3 − 0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.7 5.2 93.8 − 7.5 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.7 3.9 − 2.6 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016         H1 782.3 − 2.0 111.7 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.7 10.3 17.3 65.6 2.8 8.4 0.4 1.5 6.4 11.3
         H2 p 843.8 1.1 110.9 18.3 13.2 1.9 6.1 11.8 18.8 46.4 21.2 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2009 837.7 − 11.8 94.9 − 20.6 11.3 − 1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 − 32.6 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,283.3 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.2 − 20.2 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016
p 1,267.1 − 1.1 164.4 11.2 13.0 1.4 6.5 10.8 16.0 80.5 4.4 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.2 10.4
2012         H1 580.1 9.5 73.3 5.2 12.6 − 0.5 5.7 10.5 14.9 46.8 3.5 8.1 − 0.5 1.9 6.1 10.5
         H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 − 0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2013         H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015         H1 636.8 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.8 4.9 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 647.1 5.3 63.9 − 13.3 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 10.9 15.5 16.4 − 52.5 2.5 − 3.3 1.7 6.8 10.3
2016         H1 610.8 − 2.7 83.9 1.2 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.3 15.3 50.6 − 6.6 8.3 − 0.3 1.7 6.4 9.9
         H2 p 656.4 0.5 80.5 23.8 12.3 2.3 6.1 11.0 16.8 29.9 35.1 4.6 0.9 2.7 6.3 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2009 321.0 − 7.4 40.7 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.4 5.8 45.1 8.9 13.3 0.4 5.6 10.8 19.6 22.6 46.8 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.5 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.4 10.1 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.1 13.82012 359.2 2.8 48.5 − 3.4 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 22.7 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 362.2 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.4 5.1 9.9 21.1 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.5 5.9 12.22014 368.3 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.4 4.8 14.9 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016
p 358.9 2.4 58.3 14.4 16.2 1.7 6.7 12.7 24.8 31.5 24.8 8.8 1.6 2.3 8.2 15.2
2012         H1 170.9 3.3 20.0 − 2.6 11.7 − 0.7 2.6 8.0 21.0 8.9 − 9.8 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 4.5 13.9
         H2 188.3 2.3 28.5 − 4.0 15.1 − 1.0 5.2 11.2 23.7 5.1 − 73.2 2.7 − 5.2 2.7 7.4 15.3
2013         H1 174.0 − 0.5 21.7 1.4 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.0 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.3 0.3 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.3 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.3 13.4
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.6 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.6 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.4 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.4 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.9 10.8 16.2 0.9 7.3 12.2 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.1 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 p 187.4 3.5 30.4 4.4 16.2 0.1 6.9 13.2 24.2 16.5 2.8 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 8.9 16.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory not es in the Statistical
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups in agriculture
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, and forestry. 
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May  p
Current account + 250,091 + 336,415 + 372,933 + 102,937 + 100,493 + 69,776 + 44,723 + 22,783 + 18,267A
1 Goods
Exports 1,964,242 2,110,012 2,117,767 522,363 552,786 557,533 210,978 173,342 196,313
Imports 1,723,277 1,759,899 1,741,840 430,392 458,636 485,715 173,037 148,575 167,363
Balance + 240,964 + 350,111 + 375,924 + 91,970 + 94,149 + 71,818 + 37,941 + 24,767 + 28,949
2 Services
Receipts 713,996 775,948 785,782 207,508 204,934 192,243 68,825 63,306 67,717
Expenditure 628,632 706,018 741,150 181,611 211,430 180,655 61,208 57,522 64,217
Balance + 85,363 + 69,930 + 44,633 + 25,896 − 6,494 + 11,587 + 7,616 + 5,785 + 3,500
3 Primary income
Receipts 630,047 640,729 633,740 146,548 179,093 158,025 57,775 52,114 54,289
Expenditure 564,244 590,557 543,468 126,935 132,491 133,434 47,760 44,548 60,537
Balance + 65,800 + 50,174 + 90,268 + 19,612 + 46,600 + 24,592 + 10,015 + 7,567 − 6,248
4 Secondary income
Receipts 93,022 104,279 111,062 25,989 28,979 25,819 9,659 8,458 10,645
Expenditure 235,060 238,079 248,953 60,530 62,741 64,041 20,509 23,794 18,579
Balance − 142,036 − 133,799 − 137,891 − 34,541 − 33,762 − 38,222 − 10,849 − 15,336 − 7,934
Capital account + 14,167 − 13,251 − 2,224 + 1,088 − 462 − 15,583 − 4,125 − 344 + 234B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 252,979 + 299,560 + 358,194 + 131,009 + 83,744 + 53,066 + 43,523 + 14,111 + 22,660C
1 Direct investment + 61,184 + 237,130 + 180,588 + 135,157 + 17,260 + 36,699 + 16,588 + 20,183 + 4,134
By resident units abroad + 159,981 + 847,353 + 314,753 + 55,767 + 120,135 + 147,157 + 9,250 + 27,620 + 22,219
By non-resident units in the euro area + 98,799 + 610,225 + 134,164 − 79,392 + 102,876 + 110,458 − 7,338 + 7,437 + 18,085
2 Portfolio investment + 32,867 + 122,107 + 475,619 + 112,726 + 92,866 + 76,509 + 9,313 + 50,209 + 8,287
By resident units abroad + 459,120 + 399,293 + 389,539 + 127,492 + 14,644 + 167,731 + 42,235 + 43,990 + 77,959
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 139,790 + 18,716 + 21,345 + 14,875 + 24,896 + 29,379 − 1,428 + 22,369 + 14,562
Long-term debt securities + 226,811 + 368,644 + 369,848 + 105,114 + 15,676 + 91,820 + 14,731 + 43,066 + 41,334
Short-term debt securities + 92,520 + 11,935 − 1,654 + 7,503 − 25,927 + 46,533 + 28,932 − 21,445 + 22,063
By non-resident units in the euro area + 426,255 + 277,185 − 86,080 + 14,766 − 78,222 + 91,222 + 32,922 − 6,220 + 69,672
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 318,092 + 222,371 + 126,388 + 79,678 + 25,314 + 81,828 + 31,451 + 30,540 + 46,882
Long-term debt securities + 127,440 + 99,546 − 261,466 − 63,901 − 83,234 − 37,637 − 11,330 − 37,468 + 22,164
Short-term debt securities − 19,277 − 44,733 + 48,997 − 1,010 − 20,302 + 47,032 + 12,801 + 709 + 626
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 45,722 + 90,347 + 22,630 + 23,936 + 15,168 + 15,482 + 5,214 + 1,013 + 3,222
4 Other investment + 108,848 − 160,593 − 336,099 − 148,536 − 46,128 − 73,091 + 11,845 − 52,780 + 5,615
Eurosystem + 31,510 − 25,390 − 151,070 − 34,843 − 90,066 − 26,169 − 22,674 + 30,494 + 5,795
General government + 11,832 + 19,286 + 4,059 − 652 − 2,678 + 281 − 2,829 − 2,689 − 1,143
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 99,280 − 122,527 − 152,878 − 87,784 + 45,401 − 19,752 + 23,770 − 48,463 − 10,556
Enterprises and households − 33,775 − 31,964 − 36,210 − 25,256 + 1,215 − 27,451 + 13,578 − 32,123 + 11,520
5 Reserve assets + 4,361 + 10,569 + 15,458 + 7,724 + 4,580 − 2,533 + 563 − 4,514 + 1,402
Net errors and omissions − 11,277 − 23,604 − 12,515 + 26,983 − 16,286 − 1,127 + 2,925 − 8,327 + 4,159D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob)  1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 (fob/fob)  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,606
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 189,616 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 61,969 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 36,3072014 + 218,026 + 228,361 − 5,873 − 25,323 + 56,177 − 41,188 + 2,355 + 238,630 − 2,564 + 18,2482015 + 259,963 + 261,182 − 2,668 − 18,602 + 57,370 − 39,987 − 635 + 234,603 − 2,213 − 24,7252016 + 262,401 + 271,484 − 1,434 − 21,218 + 52,136 − 40,001 + 1,112 + 235,623 + 1,686 − 27,889
2014         Q3 + 55,457 + 60,537 − 2,570 − 12,921 + 15,683 − 7,843 + 420 + 52,796 + 332 − 3,081
         Q4 + 66,413 + 60,143 − 2,536 − 3,609 + 21,123 − 11,244 − 216 + 68,678 − 1,722 + 2,481
2015         Q1 + 59,401 + 60,330 − 1,426 − 2,104 + 17,030 − 15,855 + 298 + 29,421 − 21 − 30,277
         Q2 + 59,356 + 68,659 − 1,737 − 2,871 + 611 − 7,043 + 505 + 72,121 − 465 + 12,260         Q3 + 67,057 + 67,516 + 978 − 10,628 + 16,866 − 6,697 + 701 + 67,337 − 1,455 − 421         Q4 + 74,149 + 64,676 − 483 − 2,999 + 22,864 − 10,391 − 2,138 + 65,723 − 272 − 6,287
2016         Q1 + 64,331 + 64,120 + 621 − 3,363 + 16,933 − 13,359 − 269 + 36,937 + 1,228 − 27,125
         Q2 + 70,047 + 77,864 + 242 − 4,009 + 584 − 4,393 + 1,092 + 62,620 + 761 − 8,518         Q3 + 59,069 + 67,878 − 126 − 11,696 + 13,516 − 10,630 + 228 + 61,531 − 261 + 2,233         Q4 + 68,954 + 61,621 − 2,171 − 2,150 + 21,103 − 11,620 + 61 + 74,535 − 43 + 5,521
2017         Q1 + 65,815 + 67,185 + 2,419 − 3,315 + 15,902 − 13,958 + 457 + 64,362 − 360 − 1,910
         Q2  
p + 54,553 + 67,206 − 858 − 4,076 + 4,236 − 12,813 + 28 + 61,470 + 385 + 6,890
2015         Jan + 14,983 + 15,511 − 1,117 − 873 + 4,580 − 4,236 + 28 − 2,145 + 372 − 17,156
         Feb + 16,422 + 19,540 − 767 − 993 + 5,410 − 7,535 + 65 + 10,355 + 266 − 6,132         Mar + 27,996 + 25,280 + 458 − 238 + 7,039 − 4,084 + 204 + 21,211 − 660 − 6,989
         Apr + 21,755 + 22,266 − 1,084 − 514 + 2,898 − 2,895 + 377 + 30,681 − 69 + 8,549
         May + 11,465 + 20,915 − 690 − 1,177 − 6,268 − 2,005 + 483 + 16,041 − 78 + 4,093         June + 26,136 + 25,478 + 38 − 1,180 + 3,980 − 2,143 − 355 + 25,400 − 318 − 382
         July + 25,776 + 25,151 − 896 − 3,062 + 6,027 − 2,339 + 448 + 20,865 − 1,170 − 5,359
         Aug + 14,760 + 16,897 + 661 − 4,616 + 5,265 − 2,785 + 44 + 21,976 − 180 + 7,171         Sep + 26,521 + 25,469 + 1,213 − 2,950 + 5,575 − 1,573 + 209 + 24,497 − 105 − 2,233
         Oct + 22,205 + 23,927 + 147 − 4,630 + 6,013 − 3,105 − 85 + 20,171 + 154 − 1,949
         Nov + 25,362 + 22,542 + 4 − 685 + 6,368 − 2,863 + 183 + 24,896 − 548 − 649         Dec + 26,582 + 18,207 − 634 + 2,315 + 10,483 − 4,423 − 2,236 + 20,656 + 123 − 3,689
2016         Jan + 14,614 + 13,864 − 3 − 1,527 + 4,518 − 2,241 − 37 − 2,007 − 186 − 16,584
         Feb + 20,578 + 22,729 + 724 − 226 + 5,600 − 7,525 + 520 + 18,706 + 1,478 − 2,392         Mar + 29,139 + 27,528 − 99 − 1,610 + 6,815 − 3,594 − 752 + 20,238 − 64 − 8,149
         Apr + 28,093 + 27,954 − 116 − 858 + 2,726 − 1,730 + 1,287 + 25,738 + 696 − 3,642
         May + 17,916 + 23,371 + 511 − 880 − 4,001 − 574 + 268 + 14,378 + 776 − 3,806         June + 24,038 + 26,539 − 153 − 2,271 + 1,859 − 2,089 − 463 + 22,504 − 711 − 1,071
         July + 18,297 + 20,755 + 520 − 3,503 + 4,494 − 3,449 − 139 + 18,115 + 342 − 43
         Aug + 17,016 + 21,394 − 367 − 4,965 + 5,092 − 4,504 − 126 + 18,180 + 93 + 1,290         Sep + 23,756 + 25,730 − 279 − 3,227 + 3,930 − 2,677 + 493 + 25,236 − 695 + 987
         Oct + 18,832 + 20,877 + 163 − 3,551 + 5,076 − 3,570 − 182 + 27,769 − 145 + 9,119
         Nov + 24,992 + 23,683 − 385 − 339 + 5,677 − 4,029 − 90 + 23,140 + 140 − 1,762         Dec + 25,130 + 17,061 − 1,949 + 1,740 + 10,349 − 4,021 + 332 + 23,626 − 38 − 1,836
2017         Jan + 13,979 + 16,000 + 278 − 1,271 + 6,080 − 6,830 − 262 + 16,099 − 124 + 2,383
         Feb + 20,702 + 23,105 + 993 − 777 + 3,008 − 4,635 + 271 + 3,984 − 216 − 16,990         Mar + 31,134 + 28,080 + 1,148 − 1,268 + 6,814 − 2,492 + 448 + 44,279 − 21 + 12,697
         Apr + 14,879 + 19,695 − 43 − 769 + 4,234 − 8,281 − 311 + 18,894 − 2 + 4,325
         May + 16,036 + 23,379 − 1,020 − 1,801 − 4,624 − 918 + 66 + 6,955 − 47 − 9,147         June  
p + 23,638 + 24,132 + 205 − 1,506 + 4,627 − 3,614 + 272 + 35,622 + 434 + 11,711
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fina ncial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital  account. 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2017
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2017
Ländergruppe/Land  2014  2015  2016 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,123,746 1,193,555 1,206,857 98,760 102,398 118,335 101,029 110,671 107,247
Imports 910,145 949,245 954,826 84,035 82,418 93,036 82,913 88,653 84,923
Balance + 213,601 + 244,310 + 252,030 + 14,724 + 19,980 + 25,299 + 18,116 + 22,018 + 22,324
I Exports 761,914 803,425 821,178 68,394 70,670 79,291 70,555 75,296 ...European countries
Imports 642,738 653,782 658,222 56,814 57,690 63,915 57,210 60,429 ...
Balance + 119,176 + 149,643 + 162,956 + 11,580 + 12,980 + 15,376 + 13,345 + 14,867 ...
Exports 648,446 692,493 707,694 58,731 61,267 67,960 60,851 64,273 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 527,117 543,334 551,929 46,499 47,942 53,158 47,717 50,357 ...
Balance + 121,329 + 149,159 + 155,765 + 12,232 + 13,325 + 14,803 + 13,135 + 13,915 ...
Euro area (19) Exports 413,753 434,075 442,457 37,057 38,250 42,493 38,392 40,867 ...
Imports 350,550 356,643 359,311 30,137 31,101 34,404 30,861 32,534 ...
Balance + 63,203 + 77,432 + 83,145 + 6,920 + 7,149 + 8,089 + 7,531 + 8,333 ...
of which
Austria Exports 55,807 58,217 59,804 4,728 5,015 5,555 5,216 5,396 ...
Imports 36,218 37,250 38,613 3,206 3,325 3,702 3,322 3,513 ...
Balance + 19,590 + 20,967 + 21,191 + 1,522 + 1,690 + 1,853 + 1,895 + 1,882 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,345 46,196 47,086 3,949 4,151 4,650 4,149 4,323 ...
Luxembourg Imports 42,548 40,116 41,087 3,393 3,611 4,043 3,753 3,946 ...
Balance + 4,797 + 6,079 + 5,999 + 556 + 541 + 607 + 396 + 377 ...
France Exports 100,580 102,762 101,386 8,601 8,666 9,268 8,660 9,423 ...
Imports 66,714 66,819 65,609 5,441 5,275 5,901 5,006 5,286 ...
Balance + 33,866 + 35,943 + 35,777 + 3,159 + 3,391 + 3,366 + 3,654 + 4,137 ...
Italy Exports 54,240 57,987 61,426 5,095 5,354 5,995 5,207 5,780 ...
Imports 48,522 49,038 51,797 4,169 4,460 4,844 4,526 4,736 ...
Balance + 5,718 + 8,949 + 9,630 + 926 + 894 + 1,151 + 681 + 1,044 ...
Netherlands Exports 72,736 79,191 78,972 6,813 6,818 7,745 6,885 7,229 ...
Imports 87,796 87,889 83,375 7,472 7,540 8,170 7,646 7,615 ...
Balance − 15,060 − 8,697 − 4,403 − 660 − 722 − 425 − 760 − 385 ...
Spain Exports 34,820 38,715 40,614 3,408 3,617 4,062 3,399 3,799 ...
Imports 24,804 26,442 27,829 2,442 2,609 2,985 2,352 2,792 ...
Balance + 10,016 + 12,273 + 12,785 + 965 + 1,008 + 1,077 + 1,046 + 1,007 ...
Other EU member Exports 234,693 258,417 265,238 21,674 23,017 25,468 22,459 23,406 ...
states Imports 176,567 186,691 192,618 16,361 16,841 18,754 16,856 17,823 ...
Balance + 58,126 + 71,727 + 72,620 + 5,312 + 6,176 + 6,714 + 5,604 + 5,583 ...
of which
United Exports 79,163 89,018 86,150 6,762 7,360 8,186 6,649 7,166 ...
Kingdom Imports 38,545 38,414 35,697 2,925 3,008 3,676 3,050 3,102 ...
Balance + 40,618 + 50,604 + 50,453 + 3,837 + 4,352 + 4,510 + 3,600 + 4,063 ...
Exports 113,468 110,932 113,484 9,663 9,402 11,331 9,703 11,023 ... 2 Other European
Imports 115,621 110,448 106,293 10,315 9,747 10,757 9,493 10,071 ... countries
Balance − 2,153 + 484 + 7,191 − 653 − 345 + 574 + 210 + 951 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,202 49,070 50,331 4,431 4,297 5,138 4,306 4,865 ...
Imports 39,392 42,089 43,947 4,193 3,782 4,374 3,708 3,996 ...
Balance + 6,810 + 6,981 + 6,384 + 237 + 515 + 765 + 597 + 868 ...
II Exports 358,337 387,398 382,941 30,121 31,516 38,731 30,173 35,066 ...Non-European
Imports 267,407 295,461 296,599 27,221 24,728 29,016 25,703 28,224 ... countries
Balance + 90,930 + 91,936 + 86,342 + 2,899 + 6,788 + 9,714 + 4,469 + 6,841 ...
Exports 22,505 23,897 24,504 1,894 2,352 2,385 2,606 2,510 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,242 18,307 16,670 1,571 1,562 1,872 1,656 1,708 ...
Balance + 2,263 + 5,590 + 7,834 + 323 + 790 + 513 + 950 + 803 ...
Exports 135,293 156,982 147,703 12,029 12,207 15,288 11,375 13,239 ... 2 America
Imports 74,191 85,582 83,361 7,361 6,696 8,484 7,085 8,040 ...
Balance + 61,103 + 71,400 + 64,342 + 4,668 + 5,511 + 6,804 + 4,290 + 5,199 ...
of which
Exports 95,928 113,733 106,911 8,932 8,961 11,232 8,243 9,495 ... United States
Imports 49,207 60,217 57,927 4,931 4,606 6,027 4,913 5,424 ...
Balance + 46,721 + 53,516 + 48,984 + 4,001 + 4,354 + 5,204 + 3,329 + 4,071 ...
Exports 190,973 196,297 200,357 15,405 16,138 20,077 15,246 18,393 ... 3 Asia
Imports 170,050 188,621 193,565 17,944 16,103 18,318 16,507 18,087 ...
Balance + 20,923 + 7,676 + 6,793 − 2,540 + 35 + 1,759 − 1,262 + 305 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 35,462 39,518 36,785 2,319 2,730 3,459 2,177 3,037 ...
Imports 7,865 7,330 6,581 464 511 566 571 636 ...
Balance + 27,598 + 32,188 + 30,204 + 1,854 + 2,218 + 2,893 + 1,606 + 2,401 ...
Japan Exports 16,910 16,968 18,344 1,576 1,519 1,844 1,474 1,557 ...
Imports 19,007 20,180 21,933 1,940 1,840 2,127 1,861 2,041 ...
Balance − 2,097 − 3,213 − 3,589 − 365 − 321 − 283 − 387 − 484 ...
Exports 74,369 71,284 76,088 6,277 6,295 7,885 6,097 7,481 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,828 91,930 93,885 8,823 7,444 8,229 7,521 8,366 ... of China  2 
Balance − 5,459 − 20,646 − 17,797 − 2,546 − 1,149 − 343 − 1,424 − 885 ...
Exports 48,476 51,510 51,918 3,893 4,028 5,072 4,074 4,466 ... New industrial countries
Imports 38,782 42,478 42,876 4,102 3,790 4,593 4,117 4,226 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,695 + 9,032 + 9,041 − 208 + 238 + 479 − 43 + 241 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,566 10,221 10,377 793 819 981 946 924 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,924 2,951 3,003 345 366 343 455 389 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,641 + 7,271 + 7,374 + 448 + 453 + 638 + 492 + 535 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Kore a, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
1 services property services services services  2 income income  3 of employees
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 2,187 + 61,666 + 1,005
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,205 + 1,2232014 − 25,323 − 7,301 − 37,653 + 7,008 + 3,639 + 2,785 − 1,418 + 3,024 + 451 + 54,849 + 8772015 − 18,602 − 5,476 − 36,595 + 9,331 + 4,942 + 4,037 − 3,116 + 3,106 + 783 + 56,948 − 3612016 − 21,218 − 5,962 − 38,266 + 9,189 + 6,450 + 3,312 − 3,276 + 3,119 + 652 + 53,196 − 1,712
2015         Q4 − 2,999 − 1,865 − 8,595 + 2,526 + 1,662 + 1,985 − 1,239 + 585 + 372 + 19,476 + 3,016
2016         Q1 − 3,363 − 1,660 − 6,286 + 2,095 + 1,215 + 219 − 819 + 852 + 756 + 16,817 − 640
         Q2 − 4,009 − 1,080 − 8,654 + 2,174 + 1,190 + 1,238 − 687 + 831 − 107 + 3,501 − 2,810         Q3 − 11,696 − 1,414 − 15,956 + 1,892 + 1,629 + 483 − 173 + 833 − 384 + 15,089 − 1,190         Q4 − 2,150 − 1,808 − 7,371 + 3,029 + 2,416 + 1,372 − 1,597 + 604 + 386 + 17,788 + 2,928
2017         Q1 − 3,315 − 1,260 − 5,956 + 2,016 + 1,223 + 426 − 1,464 + 723 + 740 + 16,280 − 1,118
         Q2  
p − 4,076 − 436 − 9,179 + 2,291 + 1,606 + 1,060 − 1,072 + 788 − 90 + 6,173 − 1,846
2016         Aug − 4,965 − 623 − 6,363 + 621 + 827 + 51 − 207 + 257 − 117 + 5,612 − 404
         Sep − 3,227 − 424 − 5,195 + 565 + 264 + 672 + 357 + 288 − 109 + 4,451 − 413
         Oct − 3,551 − 480 − 5,301 + 640 + 1,081 − 14 − 166 + 198 + 175 + 5,484 − 583
         Nov − 339 − 773 − 1,540 + 1,321 + 727 + 29 − 728 + 209 + 151 + 5,938 − 412         Dec + 1,740 − 555 − 529 + 1,068 + 609 + 1,357 − 702 + 197 + 60 + 6,366 + 3,923
2017         Jan − 1,271 − 470 − 1,575 + 831 + 289 − 317 − 660 + 201 + 271 + 6,219 − 410
         Feb − 777 − 298 − 1,459 + 478 + 484 + 62 − 498 + 277 + 272 + 3,072 − 335         Mar − 1,268 − 492 − 2,921 + 707 + 450 + 681 − 307 + 244 + 197 + 6,989 − 373
         Apr − 769 − 109 − 1,760 + 881 + 688 − 392 − 532 + 262 − 42 + 4,720 − 444
         May − 1,801 − 165 − 3,049 + 806 + 293 + 212 − 554 + 255 − 18 − 3,162 − 1,444         June  
p − 1,506 − 162 − 4,371 + 605 + 625 + 1,240 + 14 + 271 − 30 + 4,614 + 42
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2012 − 38,894 − 25,446 − 5,167 + 5,206 − 13,448 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,158
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,6682014 − 41,188 − 28,106 − 5,972 + 8,101 − 13,082 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,355 + 2,898 − 5422015 − 39,987 − 24,925 − 6,648 + 9,830 − 15,062 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 635 + 2,377 − 3,0122016 − 40,001 − 26,227 − 8,376 + 9,934 − 13,774 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 1,112 + 3,324 − 2,212
2015         Q4 − 10,391 − 6,832 − 2,111 + 1,002 − 3,560 − 885 − 881 − 2,138 + 279 − 2,418
2016         Q1 − 13,359 − 10,088 − 2,840 + 1,307 − 3,271 − 1,052 − 1,049 − 269 − 521 + 253
         Q2 − 4,393 − 836 − 1,567 + 5,561 − 3,556 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 1,092 + 2,219 − 1,127         Q3 − 10,630 − 6,866 − 1,702 + 1,772 − 3,763 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 228 + 887 − 659         Q4 − 11,620 − 8,437 − 2,267 + 1,294 − 3,183 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 61 + 739 − 679
2017         Q1 − 13,958 − 7,816 − 2,668 + 1,774 − 6,141 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 457 + 643 − 186
         Q2  
p − 12,813 − 2,869 − 1,370 + 5,170 − 9,945 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 28 + 466 − 438
2016         Aug − 4,504 − 2,985 − 983 + 264 − 1,519 − 350 − 350 − 126 + 145 − 271
         Sep − 2,677 − 1,576 − 268 + 1,124 − 1,101 − 351 − 350 + 493 + 653 − 160
         Oct − 3,570 − 2,830 − 659 + 329 − 740 − 352 − 350 − 182 − 11 − 170
         Nov − 4,029 − 2,910 − 451 + 27 − 1,119 − 353 − 350 − 90 + 244 − 334         Dec − 4,021 − 2,696 − 1,157 + 937 − 1,325 − 351 − 350 + 332 + 507 − 175
2017         Jan − 6,830 − 3,731 − 1,622 + 189 − 3,099 − 386 − 384 − 262 − 85 − 178
         Feb − 4,635 − 2,699 − 699 + 714 − 1,936 − 385 − 384 + 271 + 8 + 263         Mar − 2,492 − 1,386 − 347 + 871 − 1,106 − 386 − 384 + 448 + 719 − 271
         Apr − 8,281 − 1,856 − 398 + 811 − 6,425 − 385 − 384 − 311 − 37 − 274
         May − 918 + 829 − 198 + 3,216 − 1,748 − 387 − 384 + 66 + 215 − 149         June  
p − 3,614 − 1,842 − 774 + 1,143 − 1,772 − 386 − 384 + 272 + 288 − 15
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q4 Q1 Q2  p Apr May June  p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 301,030 + 249,102 + 380,469 + 30,612 + 228,744 + 36,309 − 8,337 + 12,374 + 32,272
1 Direct investment + 83,960 + 101,357 + 69,323 + 21,373 + 48,982 + 22,605 + 144 + 9,853 + 12,608
Equity + 56,733 + 67,801 + 61,655 + 15,717 + 16,835 + 16,210 + 6,160 + 5,817 + 4,232
of which
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 18,535 + 9,711 + 13,224 − 79 + 6,206 + 7,918 + 3,315 + 1,921 + 2,682
Debt instruments + 27,227 + 33,556 + 7,668 + 5,655 + 32,147 + 6,395 − 6,017 + 4,036 + 8,376
2 Portfolio investment + 146,979 + 122,005 + 96,602 − 573 + 30,952 + 20,432 + 979 + 12,444 + 7,010
Shares  2 + 8,935 + 19,561 + 17,288 + 3,383 + 5,528 − 2,426 − 5,389 + 719 + 2,244
Investment fund shares  3 + 42,057 + 34,626 + 36,586 + 9,923 + 16,923 + 4,392 + 3,788 + 481 + 123
Long-term
debt securities  4 + 95,025 + 73,519 + 48,826 − 9,718 + 5,347 + 19,099 + 2,370 + 12,284 + 4,445
Short-term
debt securities  5 + 963 − 5,700 − 6,098 − 4,161 + 3,155 − 633 + 210 − 1,041 + 198
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 31,896 + 26,202 + 32,792 + 13,473 + 0 + 2,569 + 1,478 + 1,185 − 94
4. Other investment  7 + 40,759 + 1,750 + 180,067 − 3,617 + 149,170 − 9,683 − 10,937 − 11,060 + 12,314
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 76,296 − 90,287 + 18,747 − 1,411 + 72,179 − 26,659 − 13,312 − 20,486 + 7,139
Long-term + 21,139 − 2,803 + 45,099 + 27,253 + 12,896 + 2,596 + 1,659 + 1,318 − 381
Short-term + 55,156 − 87,484 − 26,353 − 28,664 + 59,283 − 29,255 − 14,971 − 21,804 + 7,520
Enterprises and
households  9 − 2,952 − 19,122 − 10,373 − 31,064 + 794 − 12,068 − 13,481 − 3,520 + 4,933
Long-term + 6,364 + 12,513 + 1,254 + 886 − 162 − 746 + 289 − 222 − 813
Short-term − 9,316 − 31,635 − 11,627 − 31,950 + 956 − 11,322 − 13,770 − 3,298 + 5,746
General government + 17,295 − 12,205 + 1,202 − 9,717 − 567 − 2,376 + 1,467 − 497 − 3,347
Long-term − 405 − 7,557 − 5,331 − 447 − 1,253 − 1,051 − 139 − 310 − 603
Short-term + 17,700 − 4,648 + 6,533 − 9,270 + 686 − 1,325 + 1,606 − 187 − 2,744
Bundesbank − 49,880 + 123,364 + 170,491 + 38,574 + 76,764 + 31,420 + 14,389 + 13,442 + 3,588
5. Reserve assets − 2,564 − 2,213 + 1,686 − 43 − 360 + 385 − 2 − 47 + 434
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(Increase: +) + 62,400 + 14,499 + 144,846 − 43,923 + 164,383 − 25,162 − 27,231 + 5,419 − 3,350
1 Direct investment + 11,930 + 47,284 + 46,695 − 7,520 + 28,686 + 9,976 − 5,214 + 2,580 + 12,611
Equity + 23,558 + 20,935 + 12,126 − 886 + 5,627 − 217 + 1,580 − 2,252 + 454
of which
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 3,325 + 4,375 + 5,905 + 378 + 3,565 + 1,533 + 1,246 − 195 + 482
Debt instruments − 11,628 + 26,349 + 34,569 − 6,634 + 23,059 + 10,193 − 6,794 + 4,831 + 12,157
2 Portfolio investment + 13,483 − 74,941 − 111,309 − 51,609 − 20,789 − 5,161 − 15,040 + 24,303 − 14,424
Shares  2) + 6,314 + 9,725 − 985 + 6,402 + 1,460 − 2,352 + 2,380 + 1,297 − 6,028
Investment fund shares  3 − 3,790 + 7,345 − 6,928 − 449 + 136 − 1,381 − 1,309 + 625 − 697
Long-term
debt securities  4 + 14,131 − 101,208 − 95,730 − 29,253 − 12,459 + 153 − 12,324 + 13,854 − 1,378
Short-term
debt securities  5 − 3,171 + 9,197 − 7,666 − 28,308 − 9,926 − 1,581 − 3,786 + 8,526 − 6,321
3. Other investment  7 + 36,987 + 42,156 + 209,460 + 15,206 + 156,485 − 29,977 − 6,977 − 21,463 − 1,537
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 32,480 − 41,166 + 86,802 − 23,705 + 107,204 − 18,932 + 21,277 − 14,179 − 26,030
Long-term − 14,558 − 19,536 + 5,834 + 7,425 + 2,847 + 347 − 1,494 − 478 + 2,319
Short-term + 47,039 − 21,630 + 80,968 − 31,130 + 104,357 − 19,279 + 22,771 − 13,701 − 28,349
Enterprises and
households  9 + 16,355 + 10,459 + 1,988 − 3,712 + 13,837 − 16,366 − 12,927 − 4,970 + 1,531
Long-term + 2,960 + 15,960 + 6,716 + 1,142 + 3,042 + 680 + 326 + 2,469 − 2,115
Short-term + 13,395 − 5,501 − 4,728 − 4,854 + 10,795 − 17,046 − 13,253 − 7,439 + 3,646
General government − 5,575 − 11,521 + 1,796 − 7,892 + 1,161 − 548 + 4,894 − 3,797 − 1,645
Long-term − 931 − 3,942 − 2,847 − 1,041 − 2,850 − 842 − 42 − 667 − 134
Short-term − 4,645 − 7,579 + 4,642 − 6,850 + 4,012 + 294 + 4,936 − 3,130 − 1,511
Bundesbank − 6,273 + 84,383 + 118,874 + 50,515 + 34,282 + 5,869 − 20,221 + 1,483 + 24,608
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 238,630 + 234,603 + 235,623 + 74,535 + 64,362 + 61,470 + 18,894 + 6,955 + 35,622
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,9072016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,799 397,651
2014         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 400,642 282,327
         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015         Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 451,800 299,262
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 443,519 301,033         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 434,696 333,160
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,061 326,376
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 436,637 321,863         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 439,905 316,357
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 444,709 318,537
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 440,954 340,331         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 462,529 311,899
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 468,522 318,172
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,779 330,541         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,907
2016         Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,127 334,844
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,497 349,839         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,161 345,214
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,599 360,667
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,617 383,270         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,466 403,766
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,921 385,124
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,322 393,370         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,884 407,976
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,007 404,711
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,602 438,506         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,799 397,651
2017         Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,997 456,807
         Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,242 451,652         Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,526 451,513
         Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 603,092 486,052
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 604,291 494,588         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 628,709 470,171
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 619,840 472,930
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro opening
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2013 787,308 282,026 505,282 325,614 179,668 164,454 15,214 939,252 144,884 794,368 632,110 162,258 95,302 66,957
2014 833,644 279,559 554,085 365,230 188,856 174,058 14,798 959,833 154,566 805,267 636,328 168,939 102,126 66,813
2015 866,912 265,170 601,743 409,858 191,885 177,397 14,488 1,003,050 150,054 852,996 672,312 180,684 109,062 71,622
2016 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2017         Jan 861,809 239,100 622,710 422,879 199,831 185,609 14,222 1,027,892 123,897 903,995 723,238 180,757 107,842 72,916
         Feb 859,012 232,639 626,372 421,305 205,068 190,478 14,590 1,038,330 125,004 913,326 724,197 189,129 113,847 75,282
         Mar 887,996 232,783 655,213 438,025 217,189 202,812 14,377 1,068,018 128,102 939,916 743,702 196,214 121,734 74,480
         Apr 864,608 220,308 644,300 433,207 211,093 196,561 14,532 1,046,984 122,302 924,682 732,879 191,803 117,103 74,700
         May 862,375 215,937 646,438 436,547 209,892 195,247 14,645 1,044,280 119,183 925,096 734,160 190,936 115,520 75,416
         June 871,794 216,916 654,878 440,555 214,323 200,477 13,846 1,051,930 119,559 932,370 740,803 191,567 118,614 72,953
Industrial countries 1
 
2013 697,475 278,723 418,753 296,675 122,077 108,620 13,458 852,420 143,577 708,843 594,623 114,220 79,543 34,676
2014 733,191 274,660 458,531 330,034 128,497 115,398 13,099 869,392 153,412 715,980 595,396 120,583 85,122 35,461
2015 761,648 261,267 500,381 368,033 132,348 119,309 13,038 906,968 145,136 761,832 635,205 126,627 90,716 35,911
2016 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2017         Jan 752,958 235,258 517,700 380,068 137,632 125,029 12,604 936,221 120,397 815,824 689,166 126,659 89,129 37,530
         Feb 747,595 228,425 519,170 377,934 141,236 128,239 12,997 943,381 121,211 822,170 689,721 132,448 94,191 38,257
         Mar 771,527 228,776 542,751 391,878 150,873 138,047 12,826 973,574 123,684 849,890 710,107 139,783 101,848 37,935
         Apr 747,178 216,494 530,683 385,883 144,800 131,859 12,941 952,807 118,386 834,421 699,917 134,504 96,593 37,911
         May 745,902 211,998 533,904 391,173 142,730 129,749 12,981 948,825 115,512 833,313 700,437 132,875 94,797 38,078
         June 754,814 212,909 541,905 395,228 146,677 134,501 12,177 956,978 115,708 841,270 707,535 133,736 96,899 36,837
EU member states 1
 
2013 589,286 264,271 325,014 237,949 87,066 76,539 10,527 713,044 129,044 583,999 504,337 79,663 53,340 26,323
2014 617,489 259,516 357,973 266,777 91,196 80,585 10,611 724,674 138,894 585,780 502,054 83,726 56,580 27,147
2015 626,482 243,139 383,344 289,190 94,153 83,665 10,488 743,011 134,564 608,448 524,316 84,132 58,384 25,748
2016 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2017         Jan 609,464 217,258 392,206 294,482 97,723 87,860 9,863 761,687 107,975 653,712 567,612 86,100 58,805 27,295
         Feb 605,236 210,465 394,771 293,345 101,426 91,179 10,248 767,240 110,276 656,963 567,253 89,710 62,133 27,577
         Mar 618,618 209,900 408,718 301,027 107,691 97,616 10,075 793,285 109,512 683,773 588,420 95,353 68,002 27,351
         Apr 596,286 197,208 399,078 296,736 102,341 92,078 10,264 780,830 107,987 672,842 581,525 91,317 64,010 27,307
         May 590,986 193,047 397,938 297,142 100,796 90,502 10,294 778,585 105,601 672,985 582,110 90,874 63,385 27,490
         June 596,255 194,243 402,012 299,065 102,947 93,395 9,553 785,852 105,078 680,774 589,660 91,114 64,780 26,334
of which:  Euro-area 2
 
2013 428,179 197,430 230,749 174,605 56,143 49,968 6,175 603,366 101,722 501,645 448,142 53,502 36,671 16,832
2014 456,469 204,043 252,426 194,207 58,219 51,999 6,220 606,525 107,694 498,831 444,401 54,430 37,498 16,932
2015 465,919 195,751 270,168 208,862 61,305 54,730 6,575 598,884 93,947 504,937 452,298 52,639 37,994 14,644
2016 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2017         Jan 444,996 165,652 279,345 214,462 64,882 58,182 6,700 613,663 73,752 539,911 485,880 54,031 39,036 14,995
         Feb 443,805 161,817 281,989 215,485 66,504 59,343 7,161 622,955 77,170 545,785 488,796 56,989 41,686 15,303
         Mar 449,986 158,004 291,982 221,726 70,256 63,246 7,010 638,661 72,629 566,032 504,951 61,081 45,743 15,338
         Apr 437,053 149,207 287,846 220,490 67,356 60,187 7,169 631,496 70,909 560,587 501,343 59,244 43,966 15,279
         May 435,699 150,097 285,602 219,346 66,256 59,140 7,116 627,775 67,035 560,740 501,801 58,940 43,574 15,366
         June 436,797 148,454 288,342 220,617 67,725 60,570 7,155 636,899 69,736 567,163 507,402 59,761 44,548 15,213
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2013 89,826 3,303 86,523 28,937 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,829 1,307 85,522 37,487 48,035 15,755 32,280
2014 100,400 4,849 95,551 35,193 60,358 58,659 1,699 90,439 1,153 89,285 40,931 48,354 17,003 31,352
2015 104,276 3,094 101,182 41,825 59,358 57,908 1,450 91,912 947 90,964 36,908 54,057 18,346 35,711
2016 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2017         Jan 107,458 2,600 104,858 42,799 62,059 60,441 1,618 89,304 1,382 87,922 33,872 54,050 18,681 35,369
         Feb 110,007 2,942 107,064 43,359 63,705 62,113 1,593 92,355 1,446 90,909 34,276 56,633 19,625 37,008
         Mar 115,050 2,761 112,289 46,112 66,177 64,627 1,551 91,237 1,457 89,780 33,396 56,384 19,857 36,527
         Apr 115,444 2,541 112,903 46,758 66,145 64,554 1,591 91,597 1,613 89,984 32,735 57,249 20,475 36,774
         May 115,005 2,665 112,340 45,339 67,001 65,337 1,664 92,803 1,273 91,530 33,522 58,007 20,687 37,321
         June 115,500 2,742 112,758 45,293 67,464 65,795 1,669 92,085 1,240 90,845 33,069 57,776 21,677 36,099
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. r Corrected. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY  1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.89562002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2016         Sep 1.4768 1.4677 7.4819 7.4475 114.22 9.1971 9.5655 1.0919 0.85228 1.1212
         Oct 1.4470 1.4594 7.4198 7.4402 114.47 9.0009 9.7073 1.0887 0.89390 1.1026
         Nov 1.4331 1.4519 7.3883 7.4406 116.93 9.0807 9.8508 1.0758 0.86894 1.0799         Dec 1.4356 1.4070 7.2983 7.4362 122.39 9.0252 9.7095 1.0750 0.84441 1.0543
2017         Jan 1.4252 1.4032 7.3189 7.4355 122.14 8.9990 9.5110 1.0714 0.86100 1.0614
         Feb 1.3886 1.3942 7.3143 7.4348 120.17 8.8603 9.4762 1.0660 0.85273 1.0643         Mar 1.4018 1.4306 7.3692 7.4356 120.68 9.0919 9.5279 1.0706 0.86560 1.0685
         Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
         May 1.4878 1.5041 7.6130 7.4400 124.09 9.4001 9.7097 1.0904 0.85554 1.1058         June 1.4861 1.4941 7.6459 7.4376 124.58 9.4992 9.7538 1.0874 0.87724 1.1229
         July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2017
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 95.8 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.2 88.1 85.9 91.8 97.3 85.2 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.3 85.9 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.3 85.9 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.2 89.2 95.1 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.7 101.2 100.0 100.3 107.1 101.4 95.5 94.5 97.5 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.6 104.9 102.8 103.7 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.2 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 100.5 101.7 109.7 102.4 94.6 91.9 98.9 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 99.6 100.4 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.2 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.1 106.0 101.4 102.3 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.4 102.1 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.1 102.7 105.5 117.2 105.5 94.3 88.0 105.2 90.3 102.1 97.7 97.0
2009 110.7 108.8 103.8 110.5 120.2 106.6 94.6 88.8 104.4 90.9 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 95.5 102.5 111.7 97.6 92.1 88.5 98.0 87.0 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.4 101.1 112.4 97.0 91.7 88.3 97.4 86.2 98.1 92.7 91.3
2012 97.7 94.8 87.9 94.9 107.3 92.2 89.9 88.3 92.4 83.5 95.8 89.7 88.2
2013 101.0 97.7 90.6 97.5 111.8 95.1 92.2 88.7 97.7 85.4 98.1 91.4 90.1
2014 101.4 97.2 90.6 98.5 114.3 95.4 92.8 89.6 98.0 86.2 98.2 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.3 88.0 105.7 p 87.0 90.1 90.5 89.3 82.5 94.1 86.4 p 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 84.5 p 89.1 109.7 p 89.3 91.0 91.1 90.8 84.0 p 94.7 p 87.4 p 87.0
2014         Aug 101.2 96.9 89.9 97.9 113.7 94.8 92.6 89.6 97.2 86.0 98.1 91.6 90.4
         Sep 99.5 95.2 111.9 93.3 97.6 90.7 89.6
         Oct 98.6 94.3 111.3 92.5 97.2 90.1 89.1
         Nov 98.4 94.1 88.1 95.8 111.3 92.4 92.2 89.9 95.9 85.1 97.2 90.0 89.0
         Dec 98.4 94.0 112.3 93.0 97.1 89.9 89.2
2015         Jan 94.6 90.3 108.1 89.2 95.1 87.8 87.0
         Feb 92.8 88.7 82.9 89.7 106.2 87.8 90.1 90.4 89.7 82.5 94.8 87.2 86.4
         Mar 90.0 86.1 103.0 85.1 93.6 85.6 84.6
         Apr 89.1 85.3 101.7 84.0 93.4 85.2 84.0
         May 91.0 87.0 81.1 86.7 104.1 85.8 89.7 90.4 88.5 81.9 94.0 86.2 85.1
         June 91.7 87.7 105.2 86.8 94.1 86.4 85.6
         July 90.7 86.6 104.3 85.8 93.7 85.8 85.0
         Aug 92.4 88.1 82.6 88.0 107.2 88.0 90.2 90.5 89.6 82.8 94.3 86.7 86.4
         Sep 93.2 88.9 108.7 89.2 94.5 87.1 87.1
         Oct 93.0 88.8 108.2 88.8 94.6 87.1 86.9
         Nov 90.5 86.3 82.6 87.6 105.1 p 86.0 90.3 90.8 89.4 82.9 93.5 85.8 p 85.3
         Dec 91.9 87.5 107.1 p 87.5 93.7 86.2 p 85.9
2016         Jan 93.0 88.3 108.9 p 88.7 93.9 86.7 p 86.7
         Feb 94.2 89.2 84.2 p 88.9 110.3 p 89.9 90.9 91.2 90.4 83.8 94.4 87.2 p 87.1
         Mar 93.6 88.8 109.1 p 89.0 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
         Apr 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.4 94.8 87.5 p 87.0
         May 94.6 89.9 84.7 p 89.2 110.3 p 89.9 91.0 91.1 90.7 84.2 94.7 87.7 p 87.4
         June 94.4 89.7 109.9 p 89.5 94.5 87.6 p 87.2
         July 94.6 89.8 109.6 p 89.2 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
         Aug 94.9 90.1 84.9 p 89.3 110.1 p 89.6 91.1 91.1 91.1 84.2 95.0 87.7 p 87.1
         Sep 95.1 90.1 110.3 p 89.7 95.1 87.7 p 87.2
         Oct 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.5 95.4 87.8 p 87.1
         Nov 94.6 89.6 84.3 p 88.9 109.7 p 89.0 91.0 91.1 90.9 83.9 94.7 87.4 p 86.7
         Dec 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 88.2 p 94.6 p 87.3 p 86.6
2017         Jan 93.9 89.1 109.1 p 88.4 p 94.4 p 87.0 p 86.3
         Feb 93.4 88.8 82.9 p 88.0 108.2 p 87.9 90.5 90.8 90.0 83.2 p 94.4 p 87.0 p 86.1
         Mar 94.0 89.2 108.6 p 88.0 p 94.6 p 87.1 p 86.1
         Apr 93.7 p 89.0 108.3 p 87.7 p 94.4 p 87.0 p 85.9
         May 95.6 p 90.5 ... ... 110.5 p 89.3 ... ... ... ... p 95.4 p 88.1 p 87.1
         June 96.3 p 91.2 111.5 p 90.1 p 95.9 p 88.5 p 87.6
         July 97.6 p 92.4 113.4 p 91.5 p 96.5 p 89.2 p 88.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently not available due to the state of emergen-
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November cy in the national statistical system declared by the government of Arg entina on 7
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2017). For more detailed January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina is not included in the calculation of the
information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 (www.ecb.eu). EER-38 CPI deflated series from February 2016. The policy regardin g the inclusion of
A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB calculations are Argentina will be reconsidered in the future depending on further developments.
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the 5Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia,
euro against the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including Slov akia, from 2011
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from 2015 including Li thuania) as well
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the Unite d Kingdom and
United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates the United States. 6Euro area countries (see footnote 5) and countries belonging to
were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see the EER-19 group. 7Euro area countries and countries belonging to the EER-38
footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2016 see the index attached 
to the January 2017 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
August 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2016
– Distributional effects of monetary policy
– Globalisation and the transmission of global 
financial shocks to the euro- area countries 
– implications for (national)  economic policy
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2015
October 2016
– Local government finances: Development 
and selected aspects– Significance and impact of high- frequency 
trading in the German capital market
November 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Wage dynamics amid high euro-area un -
employment
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2015
January 2017
– The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the ex -
change rate of the euro
– Recent developments in the indebtedness of 
the private non- financial sector in selected 
euro- area countries
February 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2017
– German balance of payments in 2016
– Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the con -
text of the debt brakeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
83•

April 2017
– The role of banks, non- banks and the central 
bank in the money creation process
– Demographic change, immigration and the 
potential output of the German economy
May 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Design and implementation of the European 
fiscal rules
July 2017
– The market for corporate bonds in the low- 
interest- rate  environment
– The development of government interest ex -
penditure in Germany and other euro area 
countries
– Return on private financial assets taking into 
account inflation and taxes
– The danger posed to the global economy by 
protectionist  tendencies
– Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics
August 2017
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20172, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
July 20172
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to 
2016, May 20172
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2013 bis 2014 , 
May 20172, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20171, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
13/2017  
Asymmetric arbitrage trading on offshore and 
onshore renminbi markets
14/ 2017  
The effect of investing abroad on investment at 
home: On the role of technology, tax savings, 
and internal capital markets
15/ 2017  
M- PRESS- CreditRisk: A holistic micro- and macro -
prudential approach to capital requirements
16/ 2017  
CDS and credit: Testing the small bang theory 
of the financial universe with micro data
17/ 2017  
Financial crises and the dynamic linkages be -
tween stock and bond returns
18/2017  
Google data in bridge equation models for Ger -
man GDP
19/2017  
Banks’ trading after the Lehman crisis – The role 
of unconventional monetary policy
20/2017  
The Fisher paradox: A primer
21/2017  
Interest-rate pegs, central bank asset purchases 
and the reversal puzzle
22/2017  
The optimal conduct of central bank asset pur -
chases
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2017  
86•

