Monthly Report
February 2017
Vol 69  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 17 February 2017.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
Energy prices and private consumption  ..............................................................................  13
The weakness in equipment investment in the United States  ...............................................  17
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  34
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  44
Housing prices in Germany in 2016  ....................................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  56
The structural development of German public finances –  
results  of the disaggregated framework for 2016  ...............................................................  57Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
5

Overview
German economy picking up 
momentum, inflation on the 
increase
The global economy appears to have strength -
ened at the end of 2016. Growth in global eco -
nomic activity is likely to have contracted 
slightly in the final quarter of 2016 in seasonally 
adjusted terms. This, however, was due chiefly 
to the fact that the strong dynamics in the 
United States in the third quarter were being 
fuelled by special factors and were therefore 
unsustainable. No major change in pace was 
observed elsewhere, however, with a number 
of indicators pointing to an improvement in the 
global economic outlook. There were clear 
signs of an upturn in industrial activity and in 
the international trade in goods. Moreover, 
business sentiment brightened markedly and 
prices on major commodity markets went up. 
On the whole, there is therefore much to sug -
gest that the gradual strengthening of the 
global economy, which has been anticipated 
for quite some time, is now underway.
The expectation of a radical change in policy in 
the United States is seen by many as one of the 
reasons for the improved global economic pic -
ture and a number of different movements in 
the financial markets recently. Comprehensive 
tax cuts could stoke growth in aggregate de -
mand and thus also in exports to the United 
States in the short term. Given the largely nor -
mal aggregate capacity utilisation of the US 
economy, however, this is also likely to percep -
tibly increase price pressures and therefore 
interest rates. Through the interest- exchange 
rate nexus, these effects would probably also 
tend to be reflected in the partner countries, 
where the dampening impact of higher interest 
rates and lower purchasing power might con -
sequently be accompanied by an expansion of 
exports to the United States. The danger of a 
tightening of US trade policy would also have 
to be taken into account. Seen in that light, it is not only the upside risks to the global econ -
omy that have become more significant. It is 
more likely that such a change in policy would 
increase the general upward pressure on prices.
Political events and the monetary policy deci -
sions of the Federal Reserve and the Eurosys -
tem have been having a major impact on de -
velopments in the international financial mar -
kets since September last year. Added to this 
was the fact that rising energy prices over the 
course of the fourth quarter helped to allay the 
deflation fears of some market participants. In 
early November, the result of the US elections, 
in particular, led to a rapid surge in interest 
rates around the globe. The expectation of a 
loosening of US fiscal policy was a contributory 
factor in this; moreover, the Federal Reserve 
raised US key interest rates by a further 25 basis 
points and reaffirmed the possibility of a fur -
ther tightening of monetary policy this year, if 
necessary. The interest rate linkage with the 
United States led to a rise in yields in the euro 
area, too, albeit to a lesser extent. One reason 
was that the ECB Governing Council decided in 
early December to further increase the extent 
of monetary expansion. Share prices rose sig -
nificantly in some cases in this economic and 
financial market setting. The US S&P 500 index 
reached a new all- time high in mid- February. 
Financial stocks rose disproportionately in many 
cases – not least due to the expectation that 
the yield curve, having steepened again, is 
likely to have a positive effect on financial insti -
tutions’ profitability going forward. However, 
bank shares also benefited from the fact that 
the new US administration intends to loosen 
regulatory requirements, which in view of the 
experiences gained during the financial crisis 
should be seen in a critical light. On the foreign 
exchange markets, the focus of interest was on 
the development of the US dollar exchange 
rate, which recorded significant gains against 
most of the currencies of advanced and emer -
ging economies. On a weighted average, the Global economy 
gradually strengthening
Possible implica-
tions of a US policy switchFinancial markets  under the influence of monetary policy decisions and the US electionsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
6

euro fell slightly on balance (-1.4%) against 
19  major trading partners. This was largely 
attributable  to losses against the US dollar and 
a number of commodity currencies in particu -
lar, which benefited from the rebound in oil 
prices.
The ECB Governing Council left the key interest 
rates unchanged throughout the reporting 
period, but decided at the monetary policy 
meeting in December to continue its purchases 
under the expanded asset purchase programme 
in the current amount of €80 billion per month 
until the end of March 2017. From April 2017, 
net asset purchases are to continue at a re -
duced monthly volume of €60 billion until the 
end of December 2017, or beyond if necessary, 
and in any case until the ECB Governing Coun -
cil sees a sustained correction in the path of 
inflation consistent with its inflation target. The 
majority of the ECB Governing Council deemed 
the extension  of the asset purchase programme 
necessary to secure a sustained convergence of 
inflation rates towards levels below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term. The reversion to 
the initial monthly pace of APP purchases of 
€60 billion was attributed to the economic re -
covery firming.
In December, the third in the second series of 
four targeted longer- term refinancing oper -
ations (TLTRO II) was conducted. The demand 
volume of €62.2 billion was at the upper end 
of market expectations. The final operation in 
the TLTRO II series will be conducted in March 
of this year.
Developments in the monetary indicators per 
se continued to provide no indication of a 
growing need for monetary policy action. The 
broad monetary aggregate M3 again rose con -
siderably in the fourth quarter against the 
backdrop of historically low interest rates and 
the fairly robust economic recovery in the euro 
area. Monetary growth was supported, in par -
ticular, by the ongoing recovery in lending by 
the banking sector to the non- financial private 
sector; lending to non- financial corporations, especially, resumed its upward trend after a 
weaker performance during the preceding 
quarter. Securities- based lending to domestic 
non- banks, which was dominated by the Euro -
system’s APPs, gave monetary growth a further 
boost.
The pace of growth in the German economy 
picked up perceptibly towards the end of 2016. 
According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the fourth quarter of 2016 rose by a 
seasonal and calendar- adjusted 0.4% on the 
quarter and thus considerably more strongly 
than in the summer months, when the increase 
had stood at just 0.1%. In 2016 as a whole, real 
GDP increased by 1.9% year- on- year (1.8% in 
calendar- adjusted terms). Stronger growth 
stimulus was generated on the demand side 
towards the end of the year, driven primarily by 
exports after they had managed to overcome 
their third- quarter lull and post strong growth. 
The expansion in exports was broadly based in 
regional terms. German exports to euro- area 
countries rose significantly, while demand from 
non- euro- area countries was even more buoy -
ant. Construction activity also accelerated 
again in the final quarter of 2016. Private con -
sumption continued to expand given that 
labour  market and income prospects remained 
favourable. The loss of purchasing power 
resulting  from the sharp rise in energy prices 
appeared to diminish households’ strong appe -
tite for consumption only marginally. By con -
trast, investment in machinery and equipment, 
which had waned in the previous two quarters, 
remained lacklustre. Although manufacturers 
of capital goods recorded significant domestic 
sales growth in real terms, the decline in the 
number of registrations for commercial vehicles 
suggests that investment in enterprises’ motor 
vehicle fleets was very weak.
The fact that banks further stepped up their 
lending to the domestic private sector in the 
quarter under review is in keeping with this 
economic picture. Once again, this was mainly 
attributable to the rise in loans to households Monetary 
policy : ECB Governing  Council approves adjustments  to purchase programmes 
Continued 
monetary  growth in the euro areaPick- up in 
economic  
growth in 
Germany  towards year- endDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
7

for house purchase. The volume of loans ex -
tended to domestic non- financial corporations 
expanded moderately in the quarter under 
review  .
Employment rose again during the fourth quar -
ter, following a slight dip in the summer 
months. However, measured in terms of the 
developments during the first half of the year 
and the – in some cases very favourable – lead -
ing indicators, employment figures only showed 
a moderate increase. Employment subject to 
social security contributions went up only mod -
estly in the fourth quarter, and exclusively low- 
paid part- time employment continued to de -
cline. Demographic factors may go some way 
towards explaining the weaker employment 
dynamics. The reduction in the potential do -
mestic labour force observed over the last few 
years is no longer fully offset by higher labour 
market participation. In addition, according to 
the Federal Employment Agency, the increased 
demand for labour is likely to have been 
covered for the most part by immigration. The 
outlook for employment remains favourable, 
although it is becoming increasingly clear that 
it will become more difficult to fill vacant pos -
itions. Unemployment figures fell significantly 
throughout the reporting period, despite the 
large number of refugees registering as job 
seekers after their applications for asylum were 
approved.
Once again, negotiated wages rose only mod -
erately in the last quarter of 2016. Including 
additional benefits, they went up 2.2% on the 
year, thus showing just a slight increase on the 
third quarter. Actual earnings are likely to have 
risen more sharply, as was the case in the pre -
vious period. This year’s pay round will affect 
fewer employees than in 2016 and mainly 
relates  to the services sectors. Under the wage 
agreements concluded last year, 2017 will see 
low graduated increases of below 2½% in 
most cases. The figures published so far for 
trade unions’ wage demands range from 4.5% 
to 6% and are thus on a par with last year’s 
demands.Consumer price inflation as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose fairly sharply in the fourth quarter of 2016, 
climbing by 0.5% in seasonally adjusted terms 
and thus outstripping its increase in the preced -
ing quarter (+0.3%). Energy prices, in particu -
lar, rose significantly due to the rebound in 
crude oil prices. However, consumers also had 
to pay noticeably more for food owing to very 
steep increases in dairy product prices. More -
over, prices for industrial goods (excluding 
energy ) picked up again after moving sideways 
in the third quarter. This was mainly due to a 
countermovement in prices for clothing and 
footwear, which had dropped considerably in 
the preceding period, probably due to the 
unusually  warm weather in September. The 
prices of services, by contrast, went up only 
slightly owing to a remarkably sharp fall in the 
price of package holidays. Apart from this, ser -
vices prices rose at roughly the same pace as in 
the third quarter. This was also true of rents, 
which once again went up somewhat more 
sharply than the longer-  term average. Annual 
headline HICP inflation increased significantly 
from 0.4% to 1.0%. Over the course of the 
quarter, the rise from 0.5% in September to 
1.7% in December was even more pronounced. 
The fact that prices for fuel and heating oil had 
fallen markedly at the end of 2015 played a 
role here. Excluding energy and food, the year- 
on- year rate remained at just over 1% in the 
fourth quarter.
Growth in the German economy is likely to pick 
up further in the first quarter of 2017. Given the 
very dynamic intake of new orders, major im -
petus is expected to emanate from industrial 
activity, in particular. This is also likely to be 
reflected  in exports, as indicated by enterprises’ 
optimistic export expectations. Enterprises are 
also expected to invest more in machinery and 
equipment in view of the now significantly 
above- average capacity utilisation. Construc -
tion activity is also likely to remain exceptionally 
lively in the first quarter, as long as it is not 
heavily affected by unfavourable weather con -
ditions. Finally, the sustained improvement in Slight increase 
in employment, unemployment continues to decline
Moderate rise 
in negotiated wages continuesSharper rise in consumer prices in the final quarter  owing to higher energy and food prices
Renewed 
stronger economic  growth likely in early 2017Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
8

labour market conditions, employees’ favour -
able income prospects and the healthy con -
sumer climate all point to a continuation of 
brisk consumption, even though higher infla -
tion is constricting consumers’ scope for spend -
ing.
On the back of continued very favourable con -
ditions for public finances, Germany last year 
generated a third consecutive general govern -
ment surplus (+0.6% of GDP according to pro -
visional data). On the one hand, pressure on 
government budgets was eased by favourable 
cyclical developments and by interest ex-
penditure  falling again. On the other hand, the 
underlying fiscal stance was expansionary. All in 
all, public finances benefited from significant 
revenue increases, especially from profit- related 
taxes. However, expenditure also rose fairly 
steeply in some cases, chiefly in relation to the 
provision of support for refugees, but also with 
regard to pensions and healthcare, for instance. 
A similar surplus looks set to be recorded for 
the current year. The fiscal policy stance re -
mains moderately expansionary, although   this 
is likely to be partially obscured by continued 
drops in interest expenditure. The debt ratio is 
likely to decrease further.
The average rate of interest on government 
debt fell from 4¼% in 2007 (pre- crisis) to 2% 
recently, resulting in budget relief of 1½% of 
GDP , in arithmetical terms, in 2016 alone. How -
ever, the very favourable interest rate level at 
present belies the long- term burdens of gov -
ernment debt. Rising social spending driven by 
demographics in Germany presents a con -
tinued argument for rapidly scaling back the 
government debt ratio. The current planning, 
which envisages moderate structural surpluses, 
thus does not appear too ambitious. At the 
same time, structural policies that strengthen 
the forces of growth are desirable. These in -clude investment to maintain good infrastruc -
ture; this could be financed without having to 
increase debt, but it is chiefly a question of fis -
cal policy priorities.
Looking at the Federal budget, it did not seem 
advisable to top up the refugee reserve again 
using the 2016 surplus. Using the entire reserve 
– which apparently is not needed to finance 
refugee- related burdens – to repay debt in the 
budget would have reliably ensured lower 
interest expenditure. The additional outlays 
that have already been specified elsewhere 
–  for example, in the course of the planned 
new state government revenue- sharing scheme – 
are also an argument in favour of resolutely 
securing  relief when it comes to debt servicing, 
at least.
In order to safeguard sound public finances, a 
debt brake was introduced in Germany and 
fiscal  rules were agreed upon in the EU. How -
ever, the European fiscal rules are continuing to 
lose their binding force. With its recent call for 
a distinct loosening of the euro area’s fiscal 
stance, the European Commission explicitly 
set  aside the objective of sustainable public 
finances  in favour of a coordinated economic 
fine- tuning approach. According to the Euro -
pean Commission’s assessment, the modest 
economic slack in the euro area as a whole will 
also be reduced next year even without any 
additional fiscal stimulus. However, the debt 
ratios in various member states are still very 
high. In many cases, there is no sign as yet of 
these ratios being rapidly reduced as a precau -
tion against a potentially resurgent interest rate 
level, amongst other reasons. Binding fiscal 
rules equally borne by all member states, not to 
mention a credible no- bail- out clause, remain a 
key prerequisite for a euro area focused on 
stability  .Public finances: 
third consecutive annual surplusUse Federal 
budget surpluses 
to repay debt
Effective fiscal 
rules a key prerequisite  for a stable euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The global economy appears to have ended 
2016 on a stable note. Growth in global eco -
nomic activity is likely to have contracted 
slightly in the final quarter of 2016 in seasonally 
adjusted terms. This, however, was due chiefly 
to the fact that the strong dynamics in the 
United States in the third quarter were being 
fuelled by one- off factors, and were therefore 
unsustainable. No major change in pace was 
observed elsewhere. Aggregate output con -
tinued to grow considerably in the euro area, 
and fairly robustly in the United Kingdom; in 
Japan, it saw a renewed moderate increase. 
Key emerging market economies (EMEs) de -
livered varying performances, as before. In 
China, real gross domestic product (GDP) in -
creased last quarter, too, at a high and remark -
ably stable rate by international standards. In 
India, on the other hand, government meas -
ures to reform the cash economy seem to have 
put a strain on economic activity.
Beyond the normal fluctuations in quarterly 
GDP figures, a host of indicators have recently 
been pointing to a brightening global eco -
nomic outlook. In particular, industrial activity 
and international trade in goods looked set to 
pick up. According to data from the Dutch 
Centraal Planbureau, average global industrial 
production and international trade in October 
and November grew markedly compared with 
the average of the summer months; at +2¾% 
each, November saw the highest year- on- year 
increases since the fourth quarter of 2014 and 
first quarter of 2015. In addition, a distinct im -
provement in sentiment was observed. At the 
end of 2016 and start of 2017, the global Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index for the manufactur -
ing sector was at its highest level since Febru -
ary 2014, and its counterpart for the services 
sector also rose markedly in the autumn 
months. Prices on key commodity markets also 
increased. Higher proceeds from exports of pri -mary goods are set to boost the economy in a 
number of EMEs, in particular. On the whole, 
then, there is much to suggest that the gradual 
strengthening of the global economy, already 
anticipated for some time, is now underway.1
In keeping with this, the International Monet -
ary Fund (IMF) in January stayed true to its pro -
jections for global economic growth in 2017 
and 2018, which were contained in the Octo -
ber 2016 edition of its World Economic Out -
look (+3.4% and +3.6% respectively at pur -
chasing power parity exchange rates, com -
pared with +3.1% in 2016). As before, the EMEs 
were perceived to be the main driving force 
behind this improvement. Nonetheless, IMF 
staff downgraded primarily the short- term out -
look for individual EMEs, particularly for Saudi 
Arabia, India and a number of Latin American 
countries. By contrast, the growth forecast for 
the Chinese economy this year was revised up -
wards slightly. Among the industrial countries, 
IMF staff lifted their 2017 projection for the 
United Kingdom markedly, but reduced the 
forecast for 2018 – probably assuming that 
dampening effects stemming from the Brexit 
referendum would materialise later on. Under 
the assumption of a fiscal policy loosening, the 
US economy’s growth prospects were assessed 
more favourably, chiefly for 2018.
The expectation of a radical change in policy in 
the United States is seen by many as the reason 
for the brighter economic outlook recently. 
Comprehensive tax cuts could stoke growth in 
aggregate demand and thus also in exports to 
the United States in the short term. Given the 
largely normal aggregate capacity utilisation of 
the US economy, however, this is likely to per -
ceptibly increase price pressures and therefore 
interest rates. Through the interest- exchange Global GDP 
growth probably down slightly, …
… but 
underlying  
cyclical  trend 
is likely to be 
sound …… in line with IMF projections
Possible 
implications  of a 
US policy shift
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The slowdown in global eco -
nomic growth and the decline in commodity prices, 
Monthly Report, November 2015, pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
10

rate nexus, specifically a US dollar appreciation, 
these effects would probably also tend to be 
reflected in partner countries, where the damp -
ening impact of higher interest rates and lower 
purchasing power might consequently offset 
the impact of an expansion of exports to the 
United States. The risk of a more restrictive US 
trade policy also has to be considered, espe -
cially with respect to those economies that 
have close ties with the United States. Seen in 
that light, it is not only the upside risks to the 
global economy that have become more sig -
nificant. It is more likely that such a change in 
policy would increase the general upward pres -
sure on prices.
An expected fiscal stimulus in the United States 
and a strengthening of the economy, especially 
in the manufacturing sector, are consistent 
with a major increase in the prices of industrial 
raw materials. In January, a corresponding 
index compiled by the Hamburg Institute of 
International Economics, or HWWI (on a US 
dollar basis), was 20% higher than in October 
and exceeded  its prior- year level by more than 
40%. By comparison, the prices of food and 
beverages barely changed in the reporting 
period. The spot price for a barrel of Brent 
crude oil soared in late November and early 
Decem ber, and has hovered around the US$55 
mark since then. This price surge was largely 
due to the agreement between key oil-  
producing countries both within and outside 
OPEC to cut output. This also flattened the for -
ward curve. Owing to the latest price rise and a 
base effect caused by the price drop in early 
2016, the year-  on- year rate of increase in the 
spot price stood at over 70% in January 2017, 
although this would decline again considerably 
in the coming months in the absence of an -
other price hike.
Movements in the price of energy were a key 
factor in the consumer inflation rate in the in -
dustrial countries climbing from 0.9% in Sep -
tember 2016 to 1.6% in December. Excluding 
energy and food prices, inflation remained sub -
dued (+1.5%). In January 2017, headline infla -tion probably rose again markedly, according 
to the available data for individual countries. 
Without the base effect in the year- on- year 
comparison, it is likely to contract again in the 
coming months. Nonetheless, fears of defla -
tion, which had at times been directly associ -
ated with the preceding slump in prices on the 
oil market, have become less significant, 
whereas upside inflation risks have more clearly 
come to the fore recently. For consumers in the 
industrial countries, the turnaround in the 
energy  price trend means that real income 
poten tially will not increase on the same scale 
as in the past two years, resulting in the loss of 
a factor that has perceptibly boosted consump -Prices of 
industrial  raw materials and crude oil up sharply
Consumer price 
inflation in industrial countries  up substantiallyWorld market prices for crude oil,industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 10 February 2017, or 1 to 14 February 2017 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201730405060708090100110US dollar basis, 2011 = 100,
monthly averages, log scale
405060708090100110
60708090100110Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
11

tion and aggregate growth (see the box on 
pages 13 to 15).
Selected emerging market 
economies
Economic growth in China remained remark -
ably stable in the final quarter of 2016, too. 
Accord ing to the official estimate, real GDP 
rose by 6.8% year- on- year, and thus more or 
less exactly as strongly as in the three preced -
ing quarters (+6.7% each). However, other in -
dicators are signalling that initially weak activity 
strengthened as the year progressed. For ex -
ample, imports of goods improved noticeably, 
and sentiment in industry and the services 
sector  brightened markedly. The considerable 
acceleration in nominal GDP growth – from 
+6.4% in the fourth quarter of 2015 to +9.6% 
at last report – also gives rise to certain doubts 
about the reported real GDP growth rates, 
accord ing to which domestic price pressures 
would have risen distinctly in 2016. However, 
the picture could be distorted by problems with 
the deflation of domestic value added.2 The 
rather  slow pace of consumer price inflation 
also suggests that this is the case. In the fourth 
quarter of 2016, the consumer price index (CPI) 
surpassed its prior- year level by 2.3%.
The robust upswing in the Indian economy is 
likely to have been abruptly interrupted by the 
government’s surprise move in November 2016 
to declare a large portion of its cash no longer 
legal tender. The measure was aimed at neu -
tralising illegal cash holdings, which the gov -
ernment believe had been accumulated by 
means of corruption and tax evasion. However, 
production and distribution of the new bank -Official estimate 
reports stable economic growth in China
Cash reform 
likely to have impaired India’s economyConsumer pricesin the industrial countries
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 The United States, EU-28, Japan, Canada, Norway and 
Switzerland. 2 Excluding energy and food; EU-28: HICP exclud-
ing energy and unprocessed food; Japan: including alcoholic beverages.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.5
+++++
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5+3.0
0.500.51.01.52.0
–++++
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0+2.5
0.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
–++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly
JanJan
JanIndustrial countries (total) 1
Headline inflation
Core inflation 2
of which
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
Japan
2 China’s National Bureau of Statistics uses output price 
indices to deflate domestic value added. In this simplified 
procedure, the impact of the prices of imported intermedi -
ate goods is not deducted. This means that commodity 
prices, which experienced significant volatility in the past 
few months, could have distorted the real economic pic -
ture. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European set -
ting, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp 14-15; and IMF 
(2017), Measure up: A better way to calculate GDP , Staff 
Discussion Note 17/ 02.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
12

Energy prices and private consumption
Observers had very mixed expectations 
regarding  the impact on the real economy 
of the halving of crude oil prices in the 
second half of 2014. Optimists hypothe-
sised that consumers would respond to the 
easing of pressure on their pocketbooks caused by lower fuel prices by spending more on (other) goods and services. This 
stimulus would counteract any dampening 
effects since those economies which them-
selves produce oil could be expected , at least in the directly affected commodity 
sector, to see a drop in investment.1
On the other hand, pessimists had their 
doubts about the positive effects on private 
consumption. Their assumption was that consumers would boost their savings for 
purposes such as paying down debt as their spending on fuels declined. This kind of be-haviour is what is expected of, in particular, those agents who see rising real incomes as 
only a temporary phenomenon because, for instance, they expect energy prices to rebound quickly. There were additionally 
fears that a temporary dampening of infl  a-
tion expectations – following on from the reduction in the prices of oil products  – would, given a binding interest rate fl  oor, 
increase real interest rates and thus dampen current consumption.
A look at the past two years vindicates the 
optimists. An important factor in this con-
nection is that the reduction in oil prices has 
proved largely persistent. Looking at the 
United States, the euro area, Japan and the 
United Kingdom together, households in-
creased their consumer spending in each of 
2015 and 2016 by around 2% after price 
adjustment.2 This represented the highest 
growth rates since 2006. This meant that 
private consumption, in purely arithmetical terms, was the key driver in the acceleration 
of real GDP growth in this group of coun-
tries from just under 1¾% in 2014 to 2% in the subsequent year. Although the pace of 
aggregate growth diminished again in 
2016, this was caused mainly, however, by 
sluggish growth in fi  xed investment, specif-
ically in the United States and the United Kingdom.
3 The considerable slowdown in 
investment growth in those countries was directly attributable in part to adjustments in the domestic oil industry (see also the box on page  17).
4 By contrast, euro- area 
invest ment expenditure in 2016 was even 
up from the previous year, provided invest-
ment in Ireland, which had jumped owing 
to the relocation of multinational enter-prises’ activities  in 2015, is excluded from 
the calculation.5
Private consumption goes up if, with given 
real incomes, households increase their pro-
pensity to consume, ie they reduce their 
saving ratio, or if, with saving behaviour un-
changed, nominal disposable incomes rise 
1 See here, and further on, Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Potential  impacts of the fall in oil prices on the real 
economy, Monthly Report, February 2015, pp 12-14.
2 The data were taken from the OECD’s Economic 
Outlook of November 2016 via Haver Analytics. Projec-
tions were inserted there for the fourth quarter of 
2016. The aggregation across individual countries is based on nominal weights (and market exchange 
rates) for 2010.3 In addition, there was a marked dampening impact 
of inventory dynamics on real GDP growth, which 
could have been associated with the weakness in the global industrial sector – especially in the commodities 
sector. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Recent trends 
in world trade in goods, Monthly Report, March 2016, pp 23-24.
4 See, in particular, Deutsche Bundesbank, The effect 
of one- off factors on real GDP growth in the USA in 
the fi  rst quarter of 2015, Monthly Report, May 2015, 
p 17; and Deutsche Bundesbank, Global and European setting, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 19-20.5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of the euro- 
area national accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, 
Novem ber 2016, pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
13

faster than consumer prices. An arithmetic 
decomposition enables the quantifi  cation 
of the contribution to private consumption 
growth by each individual factor.6 In the 
long run, consumption growth ends up 
largely being dictated by income expansion. 
Infl  ation generally dampens real growth 
considerably relative to nominal growth. By 
contrast, only in isolated years does saving 
behaviour change distinctly enough to have 
a perceptible impact on the dynamics of 
private consumption.
In 2015 and 2016 the saving ratio in the key 
advanced economies rose only little, buck-
ing some forecasts, thus depressing con-
sumption growth by, on average, merely 0.2 percentage point – virtually the same margin as in 2014. Although nominal dis-posable income picked up moderately in 
the past two years, its growth was percep-tibly slower than in 2014. Its contribution to 
consumption growth was 0.4  percentage point lower than in that reference year. Consequently, the marked acceleration of 
price- adjusted expenditure (by 0.4 percent-age point) is due solely to the fact that infl  a-
tionary pressures eased quite considerably and dampened consumption growth only minimally (-0.5 percentage point on aver-
age for 2015-16 following -1.3 percentage 
points in 2014).
Falling energy prices in the aftermath of the 
slide in crude oil prices were the main driv-
ing force tempering consumer price infl  a-tion; this effect  is likely to have been felt throughout the aforementioned group of countries.
7 Furthermore, in the individual 
economies, in some cases very different 
factors were at play. For instance, the mod-erate increase in the aggregate saving ratio 
over the past two years is attributable to 
Japan and the United States; in these coun-
tries, the propensity to consume rose sharply, particularly in 2013 in connection 
with fi  scal measures, which means that the 
subsequent adjustments should be inter-preted more as a normal isation.
8 By con-
trast, in the last two years, the saving ratio 
in the euro area remained  broadly stable, 
even declining in the United Kingdom.
In the euro area as a whole – but also in the 
largest member states  – the marked in-
crease in disposable income, which in 2012 
6 The Shapley- Siegel decomposition is performed for 
three determinants. See also T Knetsch and A Nagen-
gast, On the dynamics of the investment income 
balance , Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper 
No 21/ 2016.7 Baumeister and Kilian (2017) likewise present empir-
ical evidence that the decline in oil prices stimulated real private consumption in the United States. See 
C Baumeister and L Kilian (2017), Lower oil prices and 
the U.S. economy: Is this time different?, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
8 In the United States, extensive tax cuts and reduc-
tions in social security contribution payments expired 
in 2013, resulting in a temporarily severe strain on dis-
posable income growth. In Japan, the consumption tax was hiked considerably in early 2014, which im-
pacted signifi  cantly on saving and infl  ation dynamics.Real GDP in key advanced economies*
Year-on-year change
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on OECD data (Eco-
nomic Outlook, November 2016) and Haver Analytics. * United 
States, euro area (15 member states), Japan and the United 
Kingdom; data for 2016 projected by the OECD. Aggregated 
using nominal weights (based on market exchange rates) for 2010. 1 Public consumption, net exports and changes in in-
ventories.
Deutsche Bundesbank00.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.4
Change in 
real GDP in %
peAll other components1
Gross fixed capital formation
Private consumptionContribution in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
14

had virtually ground to a halt, was a key 
factor behind the rebound in private con-
sumption. In addition, even before oil prices began to fall, the slowdown in headline in-fl  ation had, in and of itself, boosted private 
consumption as, in the aftermath of the 
reces sion and adjustment processes in some 
member states, domestic cost pressures subsided and excise duty hikes to consoli-
date public budgets were no longer a major 
factor. Absent the relief afforded by the consumer- friendly price trends, notably through real income transfers by way of 
lower energy prices, private consumption in the euro area would not have risen so con-siderably.
The arithmetical decomposition presented here masks important interdependencies 
between the determinants of consumption. 
Thus, for instance, the weak infl  ation over 
the past few years could also have re-strained nominal income growth.
9 More-
over, other macroeconomic interactions are 
neglected. Simulations using traditional 
structural models, such as the NiGEM model 
of the global economy developed by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, however, likewise suggest that low energy prices have stimulated oil- 
importing economies, especially also those 
in the euro area.
Following the latest increase in crude oil prices and the base effect caused by oil prices temporarily having been particularly 
low a year earlier, infl  ation rates in the key 
industrial countries rose markedly at the 
turn of 2016-17. Given that wage dynamics are normally more on the sluggish side, the 
resurgent general infl  ationary pressures are 
likely to initially eat into real income growth 
and, through that channel, also weigh on 
private consumption. Further down the 
line, though, wage growth may be ex-
pected to accelerate, thereby contributing to a further move towards macroeconomic 
normality. With regard to the outlook for global growth, the stabilising effect of higher commodity prices on exporting 
economies could be more important than a 
possible moderation of the consumption 
dynamics in the importing countries.10
9 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Wage dynamics 
amid high euro- area unemployment, Monthly Report, 
December 2016, pp 33-55.10 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The slowdown in global 
economic growth and the decline in commodity 
prices, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp 16-17.Real private consumption in key advanced economies
*
Year-on-year change
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on OECD data (Eco-
nomic Outlook, November 2016) and Haver Analytics. * United 
States, euro area (15 member states), Japan and the United 
Kingdom; data for 2016 projected by the OECD. Aggregated 
using nominal weights (based on market exchange rates) for 2010. Arithmetically decomposed using the Shapley-Siegel de-composition.
Deutsche Bundesbank2101234
––++++
Change in real private 
consumption in %
pePrivate consumption deflator
Propensity to consume
Nominal disposable incomeContribution in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
15

notes progressed only sluggishly, resulting in 
considerable disruptions in the cash cycle. The 
ultimate impact of this measure on GDP re -
mains to be seen. The shortfall in demand 
stemming from the cash reform probably also 
dampened price inflation somewhat. Con -
sumer price inflation declined from 5.2% in the 
third quarter to 3.7% in the fourth.
In Brazil, the severe recession probably con -
tinued in the second half of 2016. After GDP 
declined by 0.8% in seasonally adjusted terms 
in the third quarter, the indicators available 
thus far suggest a further contraction in the 
final quarter. The economic crisis, which has 
now lasted three years, has left deep traces on 
the labour market, with 12% of the labour 
force now unemployed. What is more, the 
public finance situation tightened drastically. 
An ambitious fiscal consolidation programme 
seems to be inevitable. Nevertheless, inflation 
continued to subside in the past few months. 
An inflation rate of 5.4% was calculated for 
January 2017, compared with just under 9% in 
mid-2016. This has allowed the central bank to 
continue loosening monetary policy.
Economic activity virtually stabilised in Russia 
last year. According to an initial estimate by the 
Russian Federal State Statistics Service, real 
GDP fell by 0.2%, after having tumbled by 
nearly 3% in 2015. While no quarterly results 
are yet available, a variety of indicators suggest 
that the economy once again grew slightly in 
the second half of 2016. The recovery in crude 
oil prices is likely to have played an important 
part in strengthening the economy. Consumer 
sentiment also improved recently, probably due 
in large part to weaker consumer price infla -
tion. Having stood at 14.5% in the final quarter 
of 2015, the inflation rate shrank to 5.7% in the 
quarter ended.
USA
As expected, in the fourth quarter the US econ -
omy was unable to build on the third quarter’s high pace of growth. Seasonally- adjusted real 
GDP growth decelerated from 0.9% to 0.5% 
quarter-  on- quarter, according to a first official 
estimate. This was largely because exports re -
turned to normal levels after a surge that was 
concentrated on a small number of products.3 
This exceptional development masks the indi -
cations of a gradual economic stabilisation in 
the United States. For example, private final 
domestic  demand, which is often used as a 
barometer, expanded at a somewhat more 
lively pace in the fourth quarter. For the first 
time in more than a year, both aggregate pri -
vate gross fixed capital formation and spending 
on commercial equipment increased again 
markedly. These had previously been held back 
mainly by adjustments in industries whose 
earnings prospects were damaged by the low 
level of many commodity prices (see the box 
on page  17). Against the backdrop of less 
consumer- friendly price developments, the in -
crease in real spending by consumers was no 
longer quite as substantial. In January, headline 
CPI inflation climbed to 2.5%; excluding energy 
and food, it was 0.2 percentage point lower. At 
the start of the year, the unemployment rate of 
4.8% was within the bounds of natural un -
employment by common estimates. At the 
same time, growth in hourly wages in the pri -
vate sector remained moderate. After a hike in 
December, the Federal Open Market Commit -
tee of the US Federal Reserve left the target 
range for its federal funds rate unchanged at 
last report.
Japan
The Japanese economy continued to expand at 
a moderate pace in the fourth quarter. Accord -
ing to a provisional estimate, real GDP in -
creased by 0.2% on the quarter after adjust -Recession in 
Brazil  not yet 
over
Slight recovery 
in economic activity in RussiaModeration of growth at end 
of year
Moderate growth driven 
by foreign trade
3 Exports of food products, animal feed and beverages 
experi enced strong fluctuations recently. Excluding these 
products when calculating real GDP produces a quarterly 
increase of just over 0.6% for both the third and fourth 
quarters of 2016.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
16

The weakness in equipment investment in the United States
In the debate on the state of the US econ-
omy, many observers regarded the weak-
ness in commercial equipment investment as a particular cause for concern, as this 
was less impaired by capacity adjustments 
in the oil industry than investment in non- 
residential structures.1 The decline in such 
expenditure in the previous calendar year (by 2.8% after price adjustment) was 
assessed  to some extent as an indication of 
a more general reluctance to invest, which 
could be regarded as being the harbinger of a slowdown in the economic upturn.
One argument against this interpretation is 
that key components of equipment invest-
ment have recently displayed extremely 
uneven  growth. What makes this hetero-
geneity even more striking is that it breaks 
with the pattern of the current economic cycle. After investment budgets were cut across the board in 2009, the subsequent 
and initially substantial upswing was broadly 
supported. In 2016, by contrast, expend-iture on industrial equipment as well as 
informa tion processing equipment was ex-
panded markedly in real terms, whereas spending on transportation and other 
equipment was slashed severely.
The diagnosis of a broadly based invest-
ment slump also appears questionable be-
cause setbacks in the segments mentioned 
above are probably, to a considerable de-
gree, a refl  ection of corrections in industries 
whose profi  t outlook was dented by the 
preceding slide in commodity prices. Such a relationship would appear to make sense especially for investment in equipment for mining and the extraction of crude oil as well as in farming machinery, which was already  down drastically for the second consecutive year. Moreover, there are 
probably  key indirect effects at play since 
production cutbacks in resource- extraction 
sectors of the economy also impact on 
downstream sectors. For example, the halv-
ing of expend iture for rolling stock and 
components in 2016 might not least have 
been a reaction to declining railroad freight 
volumes caused in the main by shrinking 
coal production in the United States.
Given the recent recovery in commodity prices, the outlook for equipment invest-
ment has also brightened markedly. Indeed, the slump already seems to have bottomed 
out. In the last quarter of 2016, price- adjusted expenditure in all key categories 
was up from the previous quarter.
1 Expenditure in connection with the drilling of shafts 
and wells is reported in the US GDP statistics as invest-
ment in non- residential structures. In 2016, expend-
iture in this area by the oil and gas industry alone was 
more than four times higher than the value of total 
equipment investment for mining and crude oil extrac-tion.Real commercial equipment investment in the United States
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.  1 Approximated  decomposition  based  on  real  growth 
rates and nominal expenditure shares from the previous year.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016420246
––+++Year-on-year change
Industrial equipment
Transportation equipment
Information processing equipment
Other equipmentPercentage change in 
commercial equipment investment
Contribution in percentage points1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
17

ment for seasonal factors. As in the preceding 
period, growth was almost exclusively attribut -
able to foreign trade; price- adjusted exports 
were again up sharply on the quarter, whereas 
domestic demand stagnated. Private consump -
tion, in particular, did not gain any momentum; 
real consumption is still noticeably lower than 
in the quarters prior to the increase in the con -
sumption tax rate in the spring of 2014. The 
upturn in gross fixed capital formation was re -
strained by another reduction in public expend -
iture. While the unemployment rate remained 
at an extremely low 3.1% in December, domes -
tic inflationary pressures stayed weak. The CPI 
inflation rate excluding energy and food fell to 
zero in December, while the headline inflation 
rate was only slightly higher, at +0.3%. The 
year-  on- year change in the GDP deflator was 
still slightly negative in the fourth quarter. 
Against this backdrop, the Japanese central 
bank kept its monetary policy on an exception -
ally expansionary track.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the widely feared eco -
nomic slowdown in the second half of 2016 
failed to materialise. According to a provisional 
estimate, real GDP increased in the fourth quar -
ter by 0.6% on the quarter after adjustment for 
the usual seasonal factors, therefore maintain -
ing the growth pace of the preceding period. A 
key factor in this was the continued robust 
expan sion of the services sector, which is par -
ticularly important to the UK economy. There 
was also a marked rise in manufacturing out -
put after it had fallen considerably in the previ -
ous quarter. Real gross value added in the con -
struction sector was somewhat higher recently. 
Aggre gate output grew by 2.0% on average 
for the year, which was the strongest growth 
among the major industrial countries. Consist -
ent with its robust economy, the unemploy -
ment rate remained at its cyclical low point of 
4.8% in the autumn, while inflation continued 
to increase at the same time. The inflation rate, 
as measured by the year- on- year change in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), 
stood at +1.8% in January. The Bank of Eng -
land left its monetary policy unchanged.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),4 the up -
swing picked up speed again towards the end 
of the year. The main reason for this cyclical 
improvement in the final quarter of 2016 was 
the industrial sector’s rapid recovery from its 
summer slowdown. Construction output also 
stabilised. It had fallen sharply in the previous 
three quarters because the flow of EU funds to 
finance infrastructure projects had ground to a 
halt on account of the transition to a new 
multiannual financial framework. The decline in 
consumer prices in the EU-6, caused by energy 
prices, came to a stop at the end of the year. 
Average HICP inflation for the quarter rose by 
0.4% on the year; in the summer it had fallen 
by 0.3%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, the robust economic growth 
continued as 2016 approached its end. Accord -
ing to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the 
fourth quarter of 2016 was up by 0.4% on the 
quarter and by 1.7% on the year after seasonal 
adjustment.5 Thus, the output gap in the euro 
area is likely to have narrowed further. The 
steady pace and improved sentiment among 
households and firms suggest that economic 
recovery is stabilising. On an annual average 
for 2016, real GDP growth at 1.7% looks set to 
have increased somewhat less strongly than in 
the previous year. Nevertheless, just under Sustained robust 
economic upswingAutumn upturn 
picked up speed 
again
Signs that 
the economic recovery  is stabilising 
4 This group comprises the non- euro- area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Repub-
lic, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.
5 A quarterly growth rate of 0.3% was originally calculated 
for the third quarter. After Ireland’s quarterly results were 
ascertained (+4%), this rate was then increased to 0.4%. 
Relocations by multinationals were the cause of Ireland’s 
high growth rate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
18

0.4  percentage point of the relatively high 
growth rate of 1.9% recorded for 2015 was 
attrib utable to the increase in the level of Irish 
GDP as a result of multinationals relocating 
their activ ities.6 Excluding this effect, the pic -
ture for the year as a whole shows economic 
growth in the euro area to be strengthening.
Private consumption appears to have bounced 
back towards the end of the year after experi -
encing weaker growth in the second and third 
quarters. In any case, seasonally adjusted real 
retail sales rose sharply by 0.9% after only 
modest growth in the previous quarter. In add -
ition, new registrations of motor vehicles were 
up. Improvements in consumption were also 
driven by noticeable advances in consumer 
confidence, especially with regard to the out -
look for labour markets and economic activity.
Investment budgets are likely to have received 
more funding in the period under review. In -
vestment in equipment may have seen a rise 
following a decrease in the preceding quarter 
after price adjustment. At the very least, sea -
sonally adjusted capital goods production in -
creased by 0.3%. Construction invest ment 
appears  to have lost momentum; after sea -
sonal adjustment, construction rose in autumn 
by 0.8% from the preceding quarter, in which 
it had increased by 1.8%.
Following a period of stagnation in the third 
quarter, there was a notable increase in the 
momentum of exports. Revenue from the ex -
ports of goods to non- euro- area countries 
increased  much more sharply in recent months 
compared to export prices, meaning that a sig -
nificant volume effect can be expected to have 
arisen. This is likely to have been aided and 
abetted by strengthened global industrial activ -
ity. Imports also experienced a marked increase 
in line with the overall economic growth in the 
euro area. Trade between member states in the 
final months of last year also recorded strong 
growth.Industrial activity in the euro area remained on 
a path of growth in the final quarter of 2016. 
Seasonally adjusted output rose by 0.8% from 
the previous quarter, with a 1.9% increase on 
the year. Output growth was broadly based, 
and only the production of consumer goods 
fell slightly.
The economic situation improved in most 
euro-area member states. The French economy 
notice  ably increased its rate of growth in the Private 
consumption  significantly more buoyant
Increased 
investment 
Marked pick- up 
in foreign tradeIndustrial activity  on growth path
Upturn 
regionally  
broadly basedAggregate output in the euro area
Source:  Eurostat.  1 Affected  by  jump  in  Irish  GDP  since 
2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 1698100102104106Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data,
log scale
9698100102104106
94969810010210498100102104106108
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area1
of which
6 See: Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of the euro- area 
national accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, November 
2016, pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
19

fourth quarter, while real GDP rose by 0.4% on 
the quarter after seasonal adjustment. Private 
consumption was up quite steeply by 0.6% and 
there was a marked increase in government 
consumption. Gross fixed capital formation 
grew strongly once again, which is likely to be 
associated with an extension of the rules for 
depreciating extraordinary items. Exports also 
increased perceptibly. In Italy, the sluggish 
economic  recovery continued, with real GDP 
rising by just 0.2%. Growth was probably 
driven by both private consumption and ex -
ports. Although industrial  activity has con -
tinued to strengthen, so far there is no indica -
tion of an upturn in construction. Increasing 
unemployment also suggests that the macro -
economic upswing is lacking in strength. In 
Spain, the strong economic upswing continued 
at a stable pace, with economic output increas -
ing by 0.7% from the previous quarter after 
seasonal adjustment. Driven by buoyant for -
eign demand, its industrial output rose consid -
erably, while its consumption activity appears to have slowed down somewhat. Develop -
ments were largely positive across other euro- 
area member states as well. There was fairly 
strong economic growth in the Baltic States, 
Slovakia, Austria and Portugal, and the Nether -
lands, Cyprus and Belgium recorded  consider -
able increases. Only Finland and Greece saw a 
quarter- on- quarter contraction in economic 
output.
The euro area’s labour market situation is con -
tinuing to improve gradually. The standardised 
unemployment rate fell to 9.6% by the end of 
the year from as high as 10.5% in December 
2015. Employment rose only slightly in the third 
quarter of 2016, though there was still an in -
crease of 1.2% from the previous year. Labour 
costs were up by 1.5% in the same period and 
hourly wages also increased more strongly 
year- on- year than in the second quarter.
Consumer prices in the euro area rose in au -
tumn 2016 by 0.4% after seasonal adjustment. 
This was thus the third consecutive period of 
marked growth. This was primarily due to 
energy  , which became significantly more ex -
pensive in the wake of higher crude oil prices 
especially in December. In addition, prices of 
services rose by 0.2%. By contrast, consumers 
did not have to spend much more on food and 
industrial goods (excluding energy) than in the 
summer. Annual HICP inflation showed a fairly 
steep growth of 0.4 percentage point to +0.7% 
overall. This was partly due to the decline in 
energy prices in the autumn of 2015. Excluding 
energy and food, the annual growth rate stood 
at +0.8%, as in the previous two quarters.
On average for 2016, energy still had a heavily 
dampening effect, however, meaning that 
overall consumer price inflation was only 
slightly higher than in 2015, at 0.2%. By con -
trast, consumer prices excluding energy con -
tinued to rise moderately by 0.9%, where the 
prices of services grew the most at 1.1%, fol -
lowed by food at 0.9% and industrial goods 
(excluding energy) at 0.4%. Six countries still 
faced falling prices, and the inflation rate in all Unemployment 
down, employ-ment up
Further marked 
rise in prices in autumn mainly due to energy
Energy still 
muted, other components moderately more expensive on average in 2016Sentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17–30–25–20–15–10–50Percentage balances, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
3530252015105051015
–––––––+++
Consumer confidenceManufacturingServices sectorBusiness confidence
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
20

other countries stood between 0% and 1%, 
with the exception of Belgium, with a rate of 
over 1%. Germany was just above average in 
terms of both headline and core inflation rates.
In January 2017, the inflation rate in the euro 
area increased sharply. Annual HICP inflation 
grew to +1.8% according to preliminary data 
from Eurostat. The main reason for this was the 
steep rise in energy prices once again as a re -
sult of higher crude oil prices. Moreover, there 
was also the base effect caused by the fact that 
energy prices had fallen considerably in January 
2016. Furthermore, consumers also had to pay 
considerably more for unprocessed food on 
account  of exceptionally poor weather condi -
tions in some countries. Excluding energy and 
food, inflation remained moderate; the year-  
on- year rate increased only slightly to +0.9%.
The markedly improved sentiment among 
households and firms promises a good start to 
2017. In both industry and services, sentiment 
indicators are well above their long- term aver -
ages, albeit short of past peaks. This is remark -
able given the fact that at the same time, a 
considerable level of uncertainty has been 
recog nised on account of enormous political 
changes and unknown factors. However, ex -
perience has shown that the connection be -
tween political uncertainty and aggregate eco -
nomic dynamics is not necessarily that close in 
the short term.7 The fact that domestic growth 
stimuli in the euro area and global industrial 
activity  are becoming increasingly more stable 
is likely to be more important. The rather buoy -
ant consumption is likely to lose some momen -
tum this year because the extremely consumer- 
friendly price trends up to the middle of 2016 were an important driver of this momentum. 
Nevertheless, investment may pick up more 
strongly with an ever- narrowing output gap. 
A  somewhat stronger impetus is also to be 
expected  from foreign trade. However, the 
potential  growth path, which is flat on account 
of structural problems, is likely to prevent sus -
tainably high economic growth in the euro 
area.Inflation up 
sharply in January  , mainly 
due to energy
Economic 
growth in the first quarter of 2017 probably fairly robustConsumer prices in the euro areaby category of goods
Source: ECB. 1 Bundesbank estimate according to Eurostat da-
ta.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 171.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––+++++++Year-on-year change
Energy Food
Industrial goods
ex energyServices
Jan1Percentage change in HICPContribution in percentage points
7 For more information on this topic, see, for instance, 
P Meinen and O Röhe (2017), On measuring uncertainty 
and its impact on investment: Cross- country evidence from 
the euro area, European Economic Review 92, pp 161-179.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept its policy rates on hold in the 
reporting period, leaving the main refinancing 
rate at 0% and the rates for the marginal lend -
ing and deposit facilities at 0.25% and -0.40%, 
respectively. The Governing Council continues 
to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain 
at present or lower levels for an extended 
period of time, and well past the horizon of the 
Eurosystem’s net asset purchases.
At its meeting on 8 December 2016, the Gov -
erning Council decided to continue the pur -
chases under the expanded asset purchase pro -
gramme (APP) at the current monthly pace of 
€80 billion until the end of March 2017. From 
April 2017, net asset purchases are intended to continue at a monthly pace of €60 billion until 
the end of December 2017, or beyond, if neces-
sary, and in any case until the Governing Coun -
cil sees a sustained adjustment in the path of 
inflation consistent with its inflation aim. As 
agreed in December 2015, the net purchases 
will be made alongside reinvestments of the 
principal payments from maturing securities 
purchased under the APP . The majority of the 
Governing Council deemed the extension of 
the asset purchase programme necessary to 
secure   a sustained convergence of inflation 
rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term. The reversion to the ini -
tial monthly pace of APP purchases of €60 bil -
lion was put down to the Governing Council’s 
assessment that the recovery in the economy 
was firming.
This decision was founded upon a comprehen -
sive assessment of the growth and inflation 
outlook and the monetary policy stance based 
on the regular economic and monetary ana -
lyses. One of these was the December 2016 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, 
which determined that the baseline scenario 
for GDP growth and inflation in the euro area 
was largely unchanged against the September 
projections. These projections expect the an -
nual rate of inflation according to the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the 
euro area to average  1.3% this year and to 
come to 1.5% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019. How -
ever, given the considerable rise in oil prices 
after the projections went to press, it appears 
today as though consumer prices will pick up 
more quickly than projected in December, 
especially  in 2017.
With a view to safeguarding the smooth imple -
mentation of purchases, the Governing Council 
also decided to decrease the minimum remain -
ing maturity for eligible securities under the 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP) from 
two years to one year, starting in January 2017, ECB Governing 
Council leaves policy rates on hold …
… and decides 
to extend APP purchases until December 2017 at a lower monthly volume
Parameter adjustments to safeguard smooth imple-mentation of purchasesMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 13 February 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 20170.500.2500.250.500.751.00
––++++
025Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1,2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 26  October 2016 and 24  January 2017 saw a marked increase in euro- area 
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors (see the table below). Compared with the average of the reserve period September- October 2016, the liquidity 
needs increased by €77.9 billion to an aver-
age of €901.1 billion in the period Decem-
ber 2016-January 2017. Here the sum of 
the autonomous factors in the period under 
review  fl  uctuated within a broad corridor 
between €819.9 billion and €936.7 billion. 
The increase in the average liquidity needs 
resulted mainly from the decline by €78.7 billion in the combined total of net 
foreign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together because of liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects. Another liquidity- 
absorbing factor was the increase in bank-notes in circulation, typical for the Christ-mas period, by €24.4 billion, which was 
somewhat greater than in the previous year 
(+€20.4 billion). Liquidity was provided, on 
the other hand, by the €25.2 billion net 
decline  in government deposits to an aver-age of €143.1 billion. The minimum reserve 
requirement rose across the two reserve periods by €1 billion to €118.8 billion on 
the previous period, thus additionally push-ing up the calculated liquidity needs.
Overall, the outstanding tender volume 
increased  by €42.6 billion on balance to an 
average of €583 billion during the period under review (see the charts on pages 25 and  26). Demand in the third targeted 
longer- term refi  nancing operation (TLTRO II) 
in mid- December 2016, which was high due to the attractive interest rate in com-
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2016/2017
26 October
to
13 December14 December
to 
24 January
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –)  –   8.4 –  16.0
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +   8.6 +  16.6
3 Net foreign assets
1 –   0.4 –  12.7
4 Other factors 1 –  29.6 –  36.0
Total –  29.8 –  48.1
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –   3.4 +   0.6
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +   8.3 +  37.1
(c) Other operations + 123.2 + 100.6
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +   0.1 +   0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  52.1 +   5.0
Total +  76.1 + 143.3
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  46.5 +  95.1
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +   0.4 –   1.4
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14• and 15• of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
23

parison to four- year market interest rates, 
contributed to this substantial growth to 
the tune of €62.2 billion (net liquidity effect  €48.0 billion). The overall volume of TLTRO I 
and II consequently rose to €545.2 billion. 
However, the volumes of the standard ten-ders decreased further, which was also due to liquidity provision from the purchase pro-
grammes. The one- week main refi  nancing 
operation therefore decreased from the be-ginning of the period under review by €3.7 billion net to €32.3 billion, while the three- 
month tender fell by €3.6 billion to €11.4 billion, with the demand for the main tender  always rising  temporarily prior to 
report ing dates and month- ends.
By far the greatest share of the Eurosys-
tem’s liquidity provision came via the mon-
etary policy purchase programmes. In the reserve period December 2016-January 
2017, their balance sheet holdings reached 
an average of €1,671 billion in total, which equates to double the fi  gure from the com-
parable period of the preceding year. This was equivalent to a share of 74% of the 
total central bank liquidity provided through 
open market operations during this period 
on average. Of the liquidity stemming from 
the purchase programmes, €1,549 billion was accounted for by the expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP). Of this, €1,269 
was attributable to the government bond- 
buying programme. (For the positions and 
changes in the individual programmes, see 
the adjacent table.)
Excess liquidity continued to increase, which 
was mainly due to liquidity provision on the supply side under the purchase programmes, although this was curbed by liquidity needs stemming from autonomous factors, which 
rose by an average of €78 billion. In the Decem ber 2016-January 2017 reserve 
period, excess liquidity averaged €1,235 bil-lion, which was €188 billion higher than the average of the period preceding the period 
under review. Around two- thirds of the 
credit institutions’ excess liquidity was held 
as excess reserves in their central bank accounts  and approximately one- third in 
the deposit facility.
In light of the very high and still rising liquidity  surplus, overnight rates in the 
period under review continued to move in Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 9 February 
2017
Active programmes
 PSPP  189.4 1,350.8
CBPP3 10.9 210.6
CSPP 21.0 62.5
ABSPP 1.7 23.3
Completed programmes 
 SMP – 1.4 99.4
CBPP1 – 3.0 11.0
CBPP2 – 0.3 6.8
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankSep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
2016 20170.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn%
1,0001,1001,2001,300Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for 
the reserve
maintenance period 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketStoxx GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
24

line with the deposit facility rate (see the 
chart on page 24). Amidst low turnover in 
both periods, Eonia averaged -0.35%, pla-
cing it fi  ve basis points above the deposit 
rate. By contrast, secured overnight money 
(GC Pooling Overnight, ECB basket) in the 
period December 2016-January 2017 fell below the deposit facility rate, averaging 
-0.41%, representing a decline of one basis 
point compared with the previous period. This could be attributable to the fact that 
some banks want to continue repo trading 
with high- quality collateral, amongst other 
reasons. Overall, liquidity- driven money market turnover decreased considerably compared with the corresponding period last year. The GC Pooling Overnight turn-
over in both periods came to €5.2 billion on average (2015/ 2016: €11.6 billion). Unlike in 
the previous year, the average turnover in 
the ECB EXTended basket, which contains a broader pool of collateral, was higher than 
in the ECB basket. The interest rate in the ECB EXTended basket in the period under 
review was, on average, around half a basis 
point higher than the rate in the ECB bas-
ket.
The new reserve period (January- March 
2017) began with excess liquidity of around 
€1,260 billion, matching the level of the fi  nal days of the preceding period, with 
continued very low secured overnight rates on GC Pooling (amounting to -0.45% in the 
ECB basket at the end of January 2017). 
This suggests that as a whole, banks affi   li-
ated to GC Pooling continue to show little 
interest in taking on additional liquidity, par-ticularly on reporting dates.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor purchase programme (CSPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The 
marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, daily data
Excess liquidity 2
1,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,500
–––+++++
July August September October November December January February
2016 2017Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 3Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancingoperations
Three-month 
tenders
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations(TLTRO I)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
25

and to permit, to the extent necessary, pur -
chases of securities under the APP with a yield 
to maturity below the interest rate on the de -
posit facility. The Governing Council fleshed out 
this decision in greater detail following its Janu -
ary meeting by making clear that purchases of 
assets with yields below the deposit facility rate 
will only be conducted under the PSPP and not 
as part of the other programmes making up 
the overarching APP programme.1
On 21 December 2016, the third out of a total 
of four in the second series of targeted longer- 
term refinancing operations (TLTRO II) adopted 
in March 2016 was conducted. This operation 
saw 200 institutions taking up an overall vol -
ume of €62.2 billion, which was slightly higher 
than market expectations. At the same time, 
voluntary repayments of funds provided under 
the first series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO I) amounted to €14.2 
billion in total, thus producing a net liquidity 
effect of €48 billion. The fourth and final oper -ation in the TLTRO II series will be conducted in 
March of this year.
On 10 February 2017, the Eurosystem’s asset 
holdings under the PSPP came to €1,354.2 bil -
lion. The average residual maturity of the PSPP 
portfolio declined again slightly to 8.3 years at 
last count. Assets purchased to date under the 
third covered bond purchase programme 
(CBPP3) and the asset- backed securities pur -
chase programme (ABSPP) came to €211 billion 
and €23.3 billion, respectively. As for the cor -
porate sector purchase programme (CSPP), 
asset purchases totalled €62.9 billion by 10 Feb -
ruary. In sum, the volume of assets purchased 
under the APP is thus in line with the targeted 
average monthly volume of €80 billion.200 banks 
borrow  €62.2 billion in third TLTRO IIPurchase volumes  still in line with 
announced 
target Outstanding liquidity following open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve periods. The last period displayed 
is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 1702004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,0002,2002,400€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
1 See also the ECB press release dated 19 January 2017: 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/ 2017/html/
pr170119_1.en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
26

Excess liquidity during the period under review 
continued the upward trend observed since the 
APP was launched, climbing by €176 billion to 
€1,324 billion. This increase was mainly pro -
pelled as hitherto by the continued asset pur -
chases and given a further boost by the posi -
tive net liquidity effect stemming from the 
TLTROs, while volumes in the standard tender 
operations eased again slightly. Excess liquidity 
should carry on increasing for the rest of this 
year on account of the monthly APP purchases.
The unsecured overnight rate in the money 
market (Eonia) once again hovered in a narrow 
range of between -0.32% and -0.35% during 
the period under review, which was not far off 
the deposit facility rate, while the secured over -
night rate (Stoxx GC Pooling) was still less than 
the Eonia rate and slightly below, but close to, 
the deposit facility rate. The three- month Euri -
bor hit a fresh all- time low of -0.33% during 
the period, which was roughly 2 basis points 
down on the rate observed at the end of the 
prior period. Money market forward rates rose 
distinctly across the entire maturity spectrum in 
the autumn quarter, but this has given way to 
a sideways movement of late. Judging by this, 
market participants are not anticipating any 
further drop in the deposit facility rate, but 
increas ingly expect this rate to be lifted for the 
first time towards the end of 2018.Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 continued 
to grow considerably in the fourth quarter of 
2016, the annual growth rate of 5.0% ob -
served at the end of December matching the 
pace recorded since back in April 2015. The 
sustained expansion of the money stock can be 
explained by the money- holding sector’s on -
going strong preference for overnight deposits 
given low opportunity costs. A glance at the 
counterparts reveals that lending by the MFI 
sector –  including the Eurosystem  – to non-  
banks has emerged as the major driver of mon -
etary growth. The fairly robust economic up -
swing and the very low level of interest rates 
helped keep loans to the private sector in the 
euro area, in particular, on an upward trajec -
tory. At the same time, securitised lending to 
general government continued to grow sub -
stantially on the back of the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchases.
Strong inflows into overnight deposits once 
again had a major bearing on the expansion of 
the monetary aggregate M3 in the fourth quar -
ter. As in the preceding quarters, much of these 
inflows originated from households and non-  
financial corporations. By contrast, other short- 
term deposits held by the non- financial private Excess liquidity 
continues upward trend
Market partici-
pants expecting no further inter-est rate cutsAccommodative monetary policy shapes monet -
ary dynamics
Overnight 
deposits still main driver of M3 growthConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2016 Q4 2016 Q3
Central government deposits 7.6 –  9.6
Monetary aggregate M3 116.6 134.5
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 159.8 140.1
Other shorter-term bank deposits 
(M2-M1) – 57.7 – 13.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 14.6 7.8
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 28.6 – 53.9
of which
Capital and reserves 14.1 15.6
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 42.7 – 69.5Assets 2016 Q4 2016 Q3
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 82.7 112.6
Loans 61.3 69.6
Loans, adjusted 1 63.4 71.5
Securities 21.4 43.0
Credit to general government in the euro area 154.9 69.2
Loans – 20.2 –   7.3
Securities 175.3 76.3
Net external assets – 44.7 – 107.3
Other counterparts of M3 – 97.5 –   3.3
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
27

sector – an item which comprises short- term 
time deposits and savings deposits – suffered 
stronger declines than in previous quarters. The 
increase in overnight deposits has accounted 
for the lion’s share of monetary growth for five 
years running now. This is probably mainly 
down to the constellation of interest rates – 
the very narrow yield spread offered by long-  
term government bonds over the rate of inter -
est on the monetary components makes it 
attract ive per se  to hold money. Besides that, 
interest rates on other short- term deposits have 
moved less favourably than those on overnight 
deposits, spurring shifts within M3 into the 
highly liquid monetary component.
Turning to the supply of credit to the private 
sector, one notable development in the quarter 
under review was the ongoing recovery in 
loans to private non- MFIs (adjusted for securi -
tisation and other one- off effects), which saw 
the annual growth rate climb to 2.3% at the 
end of the year. This narrowed the gap be -
tween money and credit growth to 2¾  per -
centage points, though this is still a high level 
by historical standards.
One factor behind this credit growth in the 
quarter under review, besides lending to house -
holds, was the substantial upturn in the volume 
of loans to non- financial corporations; loans to 
financial corporations, on the other hand, stag -
nated (see the adjacent chart). Following a lull 
in the previous quarter, they continued to trend 
higher in the autumn quarter, with medium 
and long- term lending accounting for the bulk 
of growth, on balance. All in all, the year- on- 
year growth rate of loans to non- financial cor -
porations at the end of December came in at 
2.3%, which was almost two percentage points 
higher than at the end of 2015. This is consist -
ent with evidence from the Bank Lending Sur -
vey (BLS) that demand for bank credit among 
non- financial corporations picked up markedly 
in the fourth quarter – primarily on account of 
the low general level of interest rates and 
brisker demand for funding for mergers, acqui -
sitions and corporate restructuring – and that Loans to private 
non- MFIs recover further
Loans to non- 
financial corpor-ations continue to rise after 
weaker previous 
quarterMonetary aggregates and counterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial  
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change; end-of-quarter data; seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations
HouseholdsSecurities-based lending to
general governmentPercentage 
growth in M3
Percentage
growth in M3Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Contribution of counterparts 
in percentage points
Percentage change in loansto the private sector
 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
28

the surveyed institutions had left their lending 
standards for corporate customers largely un -
changed.
As in the preceding quarters, it was chiefly the 
contributions by the two largest member states 
which drove the positive development shown 
by loans to non- financial corporations in the 
euro area in the autumn months (see the adja -
cent chart). In Germany, this was primarily 
accom panied by the acquisition of financial 
assets (see page  33), while in France, it was 
particularly channelled into funding invest -
ment, given the comparatively low level of 
internal  finan cing in that country. Italy and 
Spain, on the other hand, once again did very 
little to stimulate the growth of loans.
The other key pillar of lending to the private 
sector in the quarter under review was loans to 
households, the annual growth rate of which 
(adjusted for securitisation and other one- off 
effects) increased slightly to 2.0% at the end of 
December. In particular, the upward trend in 
loans for house purchase further consolidated 
and was once again driven by Germany and 
France. However, at an annual rate of 2.7% at 
year- end, it is still moderate by historical stand -
ards. The bank managers surveyed in the BLS 
again reported lively household demand for 
loans for house purchase in the fourth quarter, 
which they attributed mainly to the low gen -
eral level of interest rates, the outlook on the 
housing market and the anticipated house 
price trend as well as sound consumer confi -
dence. Credit standards were not adjusted.
Consistent with the expansionary underlying 
trend in private consumption, consumer credit 
saw a renewed significant increase in the fourth 
quarter. According to the banks surveyed as 
part of the BLS, demand for consumer credit 
increased perceptibly. The respondents reported 
that this increase was mainly due to the low 
general level of interest rates and the high pro -
pensity to purchase. Standards in this segment 
were eased somewhat.Taken in isolation, the most significant contri -
bution to monetary growth again came from 
securitised lending to general government, 
reflect ing the continued purchases under the 
PSPP . Since Euro system purchases of assets 
from commercial banks’ portfolios do not 
affect  the MFI sector’s consolidated balance 
sheet, the persistent rise in this counterpart 
suggests that a sizeable share of the monetary 
policy- related purchases of government bonds 
continued to be from holders outside the do -
mestic banking sector (see the chart on page 30).
Unlike securitised lending to general govern -
ment, securitised lending to the private sector 
recorded only moderate inflows on balance in 
the reporting quarter. These inflows were 
driven by the Eurosystem’s continued bond 
purchases, while credit institutions – as in the 
previous quarter – saw a smaller volume of net 
corporate bond sales. However, the purchase 
volume recorded for the CSPP , which became 
operational in June 2016, was considerably Discernible 
country- specific differences in credit dynamics
Moderate 
growth in loans to households; upward trend in housing loans reinforced
Considerable 
increase in consumer  creditSecuritised lending  to general  govern-ment still dominated  by Eurosystem government  bond purchases
Securitised 
lending  to the 
private sector records moderate  inflowsLoans to non-financial corporationsin the euro area
*
60402002040
–––++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Loans  adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Additionally adjusted for po-
sitions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by 
MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankEuro area 1... France
... Italy
... Spain
... GermanyMFIs in ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
29

below that of the PSPP; correspondingly, the 
CSPP has a weaker impact on the growth of 
the broad monetary aggregate M3. Added to 
this is the fact that the CSPP per se  exerts pres -
sure on bond yields, which means that there is 
an incentive for non- financial corporations with 
capital market access to substitute loans with 
bond- based forms of financing. Evidence of 
such effects potentially playing a role is that the 
euro area as a whole experienced something of 
a recovery in issuing activity in the market for 
these corporate bonds in the fourth quarter.
The positive impact of longer- term financial 
liabil ities on the monetary aggregate, which 
has been observed since the end of 2011, con -
tinued in the reporting quarter. The money-  
holding sector further significantly reduced its 
stock of longer- term time deposits and savings 
deposits as well as longer- term bank debt 
secur ities. Both of these developments are 
likely to have been boosted largely by the inter -
est rate constellation and the Eurosystem’s 
TLTRO II series, which represents an attractive 
form of funding to the banking sector.
On the other hand, the continued reduction in 
the MFI sector’s net external asset position per 
se again put a damper on monetary growth. 
Despite persistently high current account sur -
pluses, this counterpart has been diminishing since mid-2015, mainly due to capital exports. 
The balance of payments data for October and 
November 2016 available to date suggest that 
non- resident investors sold a discernible vol -
ume of euro- area government bonds to the 
Eurosystem under the PSPP; the impact of the 
PSPP on the monetary aggregate is therefore 
not as substantial as the increase in securitised 
lending to general government might suggest.2 
However, unlike previous quarters, demand for 
foreign securities on the part of domestic non- 
banks appears to have receded in the fourth 
quarter.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic  customers
Once again, there was a rise in banks’ deposit 
business in Germany in the fourth quarter of 
2016. However, the increase was not quite as 
dynamic overall as it had been in the previous 
quarters since the renewed strong expansion in 
overnight deposits was offset by net outflows 
in all other types of deposit. The distinct prefer -
ence for highly liquid deposit types continued 
to be supported by the interest rate environ -
ment.
From a sectoral perspective, it was once again 
chiefly households that built up these deposits, 
which, in addition to the interest rate constella -
tion, was supported by their currently relatively 
high disposable income. By contrast, the in -
crease in overnight deposits of non- financial 
corporations was only marginal. Although non- 
financial corporations benefited from the cur -
rently favour  able earnings position, they used 
the funds received less for building up bank 
deposits  than for investment in tangible assets 
and the acquisition of shares and other equity.Continued 
outflows  in longer- term financial liabilities 
Contribution 
from net external  asset position still negativeDeposit growth driven solely by 
increase in 
overnight  
deposits
Expansion 
in overnight deposits almost exclusively attributable to householdsSecurities-based lending to general government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 20161000100200300400500600
–++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
... the Eurosystem
... other MFIsExtended by ...MFI sector as a whole
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, How asset purchase pro -
grammes affect the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI 
sector, Monthly Report, November 2016, pp 28-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
30

Financial corporations whose investment be -
haviour is characterised more strongly by return 
considerations once again had a negative im -
pact on deposits. At the end of the year, this 
development was mainly attributable to in -
surers and pension funds, which experienced 
substantial net declines in their overnight and 
time deposits across all maturities.
Banks’ lending to the domestic non- bank sec -
tor, too, further expanded at the end of the 
year. However, this expansion was compara -
tively moderate owing to the significant reduc -
tion in business with general government – not 
least due to the favourable budgetary situation. 
Conversely, lending to private non- banks saw 
an increase of a similar magnitude to that of 
the preceding quarters. In particular, banks also 
markedly increased their holdings of securities 
issued by the private sector in the reporting 
quarter, acquiring mainly shares and other 
variable- yield securities.
After a strong third quarter, lending to the pri -
vate sector expanded moderately in the final 
quarter. The driving force behind this increase 
again took the form of loans to households, 
especially for house purchase. Net quarterly 
growth in loans to households has been rela -
tively constant since the summer of 2015; as a 
result, the year- on- year growth rate also re -
mained static at 3.7%. The demand for loans 
for house purchase continued to be supported 
by stable consumer confidence and the excep -
tionally low interest rate level; at 1.7%, the 
interest rate for long- term loans for house pur -
chase at the end of the final quarter stood only 
slightly above its all- time low since the intro -
duction of the harmonised MFI interest rate 
statistics in 2003. In addition, the bank man -
agers surveyed in the BLS cited households’ 
continued positive assessment of the outlook 
for the housing market and residential property 
price developments as factors boosting de -
mand. By contrast, households’ increased use 
of savings for housing loans, amongst other 
things, had a slightly dampening effect. Over -
all, demand for loans for house purchase rose slightly in the fourth quarter, according to BLS 
data. The surveyed institutions left their credit 
standards unchanged on balance.
Consumer credit granted to households re -
corded slight inflows in the reporting quarter, 
as it has since the beginning of 2015. This is 
consistent with the fact that, according to the 
BLS, demand for these loans edged up margin -
ally in the fourth quarter on balance. According 
to the bank managers surveyed, demand, 
taken in isolation, was supported by house -
holds’ stable propensity to purchase, continued 
robust consumer confidence and low general 
interest rate levels. Although the banks also Decline in 
deposits in the financial sector dominated by insurers
Further expan-
sion in lending to domestic non- banks
Lending to the 
private sector continues to be driven by loans for house purchase 
Consumer credit records slight inflowsLending and deposits of monetary  fi  nancial institutions in Germany
*
3-month accumulated fl  ows in € billion, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2016
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 28.4 30.7
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 6.4 – 5.7
over 2 years – 3.6 – 2.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 0.5 – 0.6
over 3 months – 2.3 – 2.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 1.5 – 8.2
Securities – 5.3 – 5.9
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 22.1 15.4
of which to households 3 10.7 9.5
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 7.8 4.0
Securities 0.8 5.3
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
31

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised euro-area MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was 
calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the re-
ported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the num-
ber of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respond-ents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2017 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 20171.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30+60–300+30+60
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 171.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
3003060
–++
300306090
–+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial
    rate fixation of over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to households
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
32

reported  several factors with a dampening 
effect  on demand, the actual impact on de -
mand appears to have been minor. The stand -
ards for consumer credit were eased slightly.
Lending business with domestic non- financial 
corporations, too, saw a marked expansion at 
the end of the year. Once again, long-  term 
loans experienced the largest growth, thus 
continuing their positive underlying trend. The 
data available on corporate financing indicate 
that enterprises are currently using their finan -
cial resources not only to invest in fixed capital 
but also to build up financial assets, including 
the acquisition of equity in other companies. 
This is consistent with bank managers surveyed 
in the BLS reporting that the marked increase in 
demand on the part of enterprises – alongside 
other factors – was also spurred by the finan -
cing needs for mergers, takeovers and corpor -
ate restructuring. Furthermore, the BLS data 
suggest that demand continued to be primarily 
supported by the low general level of interest 
rates. For example, at the end of December, 
domestic enterprises paid interest amounting 
to 2.5% for small- volume and 1.3% for large-  
volume loans in the short- term segment, while 
interest on long- term loans stood at 1.8% and 
1.6% respectively of late. Credit standards for 
lending to enterprises remained unchanged.
The January BLS round contained ad hoc  ques -
tions on the banks’ funding conditions, the im -
pact of the new regulatory and supervisory 
activ ities (including the capital adequacy re -
quirements defined in the Capital Requirements 
Directive IV/Capital Requirements Regulation 
and the requirements resulting from the ECB’s 
comprehensive assessment), as well as the 
banks’ participation in the TLTRO I and TLTRO II 
series. The German banks reported that, given 
the situation in the financial markets, their 
funding situation showed little change com -
pared with the preceding quarter. As for regu -
latory and supervisory activities, the second 
half of 2016 saw the banks making a further reduction in their risk- weighted assets on bal -
ance and further strengthening their capital 
position. The TLTRO II in December 2016 was 
met with moderate interest by the surveyed in -
stitutions, which cited the attractive TLTRO 
conditions as their reason for participating. 
Accord  ing to the information they provided, 
the borrowed funds were to be used chiefly for 
lending, in keeping with the objective of the 
monetary policy measure. Overall, the partici -
pating banks’ financial situation improved 
slightly, although institutions are expecting only 
a minimal impact on their credit standards.Perceptible 
increase in lending  to non- financial corporations  with unchanged credit standards
German BLS 
banks show moderate inter-est in TLTRO II2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016–10+1+2+3+4Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
non-financial private sector
32101234
–––++++Non-financial corporations 1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholdsUp to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
33

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Political events and the monetary policy deci -
sions of the Federal Reserve and the Eurosys -
tem have had a major impact on developments 
in the international financial markets since Sep -
tember of last year. In addition, rising energy 
prices contributed to allaying the deflationary 
concerns of some market participants over the 
course of the fourth quarter. In early Novem -
ber, the result of the US election, in particular, 
led to a rapid surge in interest rates across the 
globe. The reason behind the higher yields was 
that many market participants expected the 
new US government to lower taxes and raise 
government expenditure, which increased the 
term premium on government bonds. Further -
more, the Federal Reserve – having first raised 
interest rates at the end of 2015 – announced 
in Decem ber 2016 that it would hike key US 
interest rates by a further 25 basis points and 
also reiterated the possibility of a further tight -
ening of monetary policy over the course of 
this year, if necessary. The interest rate linkage 
with the United States led to a rise, albeit a 
smaller one, in yields in the euro area. One 
reason  for this was that the Governing Council 
of the ECB decided  at the start of December to 
increase the degree of monetary expansion 
once again. The new measures provide, 
amongst other things, for securities purchases 
of €60 billion per month from April 2017 until 
(at least) the end of December 2017, which is in 
addition to the purchases already approved 
until March 2017 under the expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP). Share prices rose 
significantly in some cases in this economic and 
financial market setting, with the US  S&P 500 
index reaching a new all- time high in mid-  
February. Financial stocks outpaced the market 
in many cases – not least on the expectation 
that the now steeper yield curve would have a 
positive effect on the earnings position of 
finan cial institutions going forward. However, 
bank shares also benefited from the fact that the new US government intends to loosen 
regulatory requirements, which is not unprob -
lematic in view of what happened during the 
financial crisis. On the foreign exchange mar -
kets, interest focused on developments in the 
US dollar, which recorded significant gains 
against the currencies of most industrial coun -
tries and emerging economies. On a weighted 
average, the euro fell slightly on balance 
(-1.4%) against 19 major trading partners. This 
was largely attributable to depreciation against, 
in particular, the US dollar and several com -
modity currencies, which benefited from the 
recovery in oil prices.
Exchange rates
In the fourth quarter of last year, the euro-  
dollar rate stabilised at over US$1.10 until the 
US presidential election on 8 November 2016, 
after which it came under pressure. The pro -
spect, held out by President- elect Trump, of 
sizeable tax cuts and investment in US eco -
nomic infrastructure had led to increasing term 
premiums, which supported the US dollar on a 
broad basis. In addition, the US dollar was also 
strengthened by the publication of unexpect -
edly favourable economic data for the US 
economy, while the euro was placed under 
strain by the constitutional referendum in Italy 
and related political uncertainty.
Following severe market reactions in the imme -
diate aftermath of what was, for many obser -
vers, a surprising outcome of the US presiden -
tial election, there was a temporary correction 
on the foreign exchange markets at the end of 
November, which allowed the euro to recover 
somewhat. However, in early December the 
single currency depreciated once again when 
the ECB Governing Council decided to extend 
the asset purchase programme with an overall 
volume that exceeded the expectations of 
some market participants. While the interest Financial 
markets  impacted by political events and divergent monetary  policies 
Euro exchange rate movements against the US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
34

rate hike carried out by the Federal Reserve in 
mid- December was fully priced into market 
participants’ expectations, the proposed speed 
of interest rate increases announced at the 
press conference following the monetary policy 
meeting was unexpectedly rapid. This caused 
the euro to fall under the US$1.04 mark and 
thus to its lowest level in 14 years. However, 
the publication at the beginning of January of 
the minutes of the US Federal Reserve’s most 
recent monetary policy meeting, showing that 
several members of the Federal Open Markets 
Committee had warned of the economic con -
sequences of the dollar’s strength, dampened 
any fantasies of soaring US interest rates and 
buoyed the euro-  dollar exchange rate. As this 
report went to press, the single currency stood 
at US$1.07, which is 4.6% below its level at the 
end of September 2016.
Following the US presidential election, the yen 
weakened markedly against the euro and 
numer  ous other currencies – particularly the US 
dollar – until the end of the year. The main rea -
son for this was that the Japanese central bank 
has actively managed the yield curve since Sep -
tember of last year and has held the interest 
rate on ten- year Japanese government bonds 
close to 0% ever since. By contrast, yields on 
US government bonds and –  via the inter -
national interest rate linkage  – yields in the 
euro area and other currency areas have risen 
substantially since the US presidential election, 
further widening the yield spread vis- à- vis Jap -
anese government bonds. Meanwhile, the 
euro- yen rate lacks a clearly discernible trend, 
moving in a fairly narrow range of between 
¥119 and ¥123 since the start of the new year. 
As this report went to press, the euro stood at 
¥121, up 7% on its level at the end of Septem -
ber 2016.
The exchange rate developments in the euro 
against the pound sterling during the reporting 
period were driven by shifting assessments of 
the economic implications of the forthcoming 
negotiations on the United Kingdom’s with -
drawal from the EU. The euro initially depreci -ated against the pound sterling after a court 
judgement at the beginning of November ruled 
that the British government could not officially 
initiate negotiations on the UK leaving the EU 
on its own, but only with Parliament’s consent. 
On the markets, the judgement had raised 
hopes that the UK’s chief negotiators would 
pursue a more business- friendly negotiation 
strategy. However, at the beginning of the year 
the mood reversed again in favour of the euro, 
when existing concerns were reinforced that 
withdrawing from the EU single market was a 
price the British government was willing to pay 
in the negotiations and that this would deal a 
corresponding blow to the UK economy. That 
said, in the second half of January, the euro lost 
a large part of its previous gains following a 
keynote speech in which the UK Prime Minister 
said she would seek a customs agreement with 
the EU and comprehensive free trade agree -
ments as part of the exit negotiations. At the 
end of the reporting period, the euro stood at … against 
the yen …
… and 
against the pound sterling Euro exchange rate
Source: ECB. 1 According to ECB calculations vis-à-vis the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 15 – 10 – 5 0 + 5 + 10 + 15As at 16 February 2017
US dollar
Pound sterling... the end of September 2016
Yen
Mexican peso
Turkish lira
Rouble
Nominal effective
exchange rate1... the US presidential election (8 November 2016)Percentage change since …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
35

£0.85 and thus 1.2% below its level at the end 
of September 2016.
Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro depreciated by 1.4% 
overall compared with the end of September 
2016. Marked gains against the Japanese yen 
were offset by losses, in particular, against the 
US dollar and several commodity currencies, 
which benefited from the rebound in oil prices. 
The price competitiveness of euro- area sup -
pliers improved somewhat as a result of the 
euro’s depreciation, but in terms of the long-  
term average the competitive position can cur -
rently be regarded as broadly neutral overall.
Following the US presidential election, the cur -
rencies of key emerging market economies also 
came under downward pressure vis- à- vis the 
US dollar. This was partly due to the increase in 
yields and rising interest rate expectations in 
the United States, as many emerging market 
economies hold US dollar- denominated debt and refinancing it becomes more expensive 
when interest rates rise. In addition, concerns 
about a more protectionist US trade policy and 
the resulting uncertainty surrounding future 
trade links were also a factor. For example, the 
Mexican peso has fallen 8.5% against the US 
dollar since the US election. The decline experi -
enced by the Turkish lira has been even greater; 
it has lost 13.5% against the US dollar and 
10.4% against the euro over the same period. 
This is attributable, not least, to the high degree  
of political uncertainty and terrorist attacks in 
Turkey. By contrast, the rouble has appreciated 
by 11.6% against the US dollar and by 15.6% 
against the euro. The recovery of oil prices is 
likely to have been a key factor buoying the 
rouble.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Yields on government bonds around the world 
have moved away from the lows they reached 
in the summer of last year. Since the end of 
September 2016, there has been a particularly 
strong upsurge of 86 basis points in interest 
rates in the United States. As this report went 
to press, yields on ten- year Treasuries stood at 
2.5%, which is the highest level in roughly two 
years. The last time yields rose this fast was in 
the summer of 2013, when market participants 
surmised that the Federal Reserve might scale 
back its then asset purchase programme more 
quickly than they had previously believed. 
However, changed expectations regarding the 
stance of monetary policy were not a decisive 
factor in the recent increase in yields in the 
United States, with investors continuing to 
expect  a gradual normalisation of the Federal 
Reserve’s  key interest rate target. What was de -
cisive was the sharp rise in the term premium, 
ie the premium that investors receive for pur -
chasing a security with a longer maturity rather 
than securities with shorter maturities whose 
redemption and interest payments are continu -
ously reinvested over the investment period. 
Part of the increase in this premium was due to Effective euro 
exchange rate
Currencies 
of various emerging  market  economies  under pressure following US electionGovernment bond yields higher around the globe …
… and above 
all in the United StatesYields* in euro area and selected 
countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 170.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.7
–+++++++++% pa, weekly averages
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
36

the fact that the higher crude oil prices led to 
rising inflation, thus helping dissipate deflation -
ary worries. However, political events have 
been more important, with observers expect -
ing a more expansionary fiscal policy from the 
new US government. Overall, the ten- year real 
interest rate in the United States has also risen 
markedly by just under 70 basis points and is 
now once again in positive territory.1
The interest rate linkage with the United States 
meant that yields on ten- year Federal securities 
also rose, albeit considerably more mildly (by 
+53 basis points to 0.3%). One reason why the 
development is more subdued is that the Euro -
system still has in place an expansionary mon -
etary policy. This can be seen, for example, on 
the days of the ECB Governing Council deci -
sions of 8  December 2016 and 19  January 
2017. Although the yields on Federal bonds did 
rise somewhat on the days of the ECB Govern -
ing Council’s monetary policy meetings, these 
increases were considerably smaller than the 
gain of just over 10 basis points, overall, that 
ten- year US Treasuries recorded on these two 
days. The currently somewhat looser connec -
tion is also reflected in the yield spread be -
tween the two currency areas’ benchmark 
bonds. At the end of last year, the Treasury/
Bund spread reached its widest mark since the 
start of monetary union, at just over 235 basis 
points; it is thus currently considerably above 
its five- year average.
Yields in the United Kingdom also rose starting 
at the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2016 
(+51 basis points), as the economy proved very 
robust despite the political uncertainty about 
the modalities of leaving the EU. The smallest 
rise in yields was in Japan (+17 basis points), 
where the Japanese central bank had decided 
in September last year to actively manage the 
yield curve and maintain the interest rate on 
ten- year Japanese government bonds close to 
0%.
Yield differentials between ten- year Federal 
bonds and ten-  year government bonds of other euro- area countries have developed fairly 
heterogeneously since the end of September 
2016, but have risen on the whole. Measured 
in terms of the GDP- weighted yield of the euro 
area (excluding Germany), the spread stood at 
118 basis points at last count (compared with 
90 basis points at the end of September 2016); 
it was thus also higher than the average of just 
over 90 basis points since 22 January 2015, the 
date on which the APP was announced. 
Country- specific factors are the main reason for 
the renewed growth in yield spreads in the 
euro area. In Italy, political uncertainty and the 
large stock of loans at risk of default held by 
the Italian banking sector weighed on the 
prices of government bonds. In mid-  January 
2017, the last of the four external credit assess -
ment institutions accepted by the Eurosystem 
lowered its assessment of Italy’s creditworthi -Interest rates 
on Federal securities rose less strongly
Widening of yield spreads between euro- area countriesSpreads of ten-year government bonds over German Federal bonds
Source: Thomson Reuters.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 201702004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,800Basis points, daily data
Italy
SpainIreland Portugal
FranceGreece
1 The monthly real interest rate is calculated on the basis of 
nominal daily yields at mid- month and weighted survey-  
based inflation expectations (Consensus Forecast).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
37

ness by one notch to BBB (high), citing prob -
lems in the banking sector. As a result, Italy’s 
yield spread has widened by just over 51 basis 
points to 180 basis points since September 
2016. The prices of French government bonds 
have also been under pressure, given the grow -
ing uncertainty in the run- up to the presidential 
elections. Here, the yield differential increased 
by 36 basis points to just under 70 basis points, 
bringing it above the five- year average (51 basis 
points). The risk premium on Greek bonds 
– which, however, are not very liquid and are 
scarcely traded – changed depending on the 
regular news reports on the state of negoti -
ations between the Greek government and 
creditors and remained close to 740 basis 
points. Further payments will depend on 
whether the regular programme reviews are 
successfully concluded. The discussion on the 
sustainability of Greece’s debt has therefore 
also weighed on prices. The IMF has made its 
participation in a third assistance package for 
Greece conditional on a further haircut, which 
the German government does not regard as 
necessary in light of the interest rate relief and 
the extension of maturities already granted.
The Federal securities yield curve steepened 
considerably during the period under review. 
The spread between ten- year and two- year 
bonds stood at 118 basis points at last count, considerably higher than at the end of Septem -
ber (50 basis points).2 Yields at the short end of 
the yield curve have fallen slightly again. This 
was largely due to the ECB Governing Council 
decisions of 8 December 2016 permitting the 
Eurosystem to now also purchase securities 
with a residual maturity of one year. Previously, 
the minimum remaining maturity was two 
years. In addition, there has been a loosening 
of the restriction limiting securities purchases 
to those with a yield to maturity above the 
interest rate on the ECB’s deposit facility, which 
currently stands at -40 basis points. This thresh -
old had been binding particularly for Federal 
securities, in some cases for maturities of up to 
eight years, and had considerably restricted 
their eligibility for purchase. According to the 
December decision, securities with yields lower 
than the deposit facility rate can now also be 
purchased if necessary to achieve the APP’s 
monthly purchasing volume. Ultimately, both 
measures imply a shift in the potential purchas -
ing volume along the matur ities spectrum for 
Federal bonds, from longer term maturities to 
medium and short- term ones.
On balance, market- based inflation expect -
ations increased in the period under review. 
The five- year forward inflation rate in five years 
derived from swaps for the euro area, which 
had been 1.35% at the end of September 
2016, stood at 1.77% as this report went to 
press. The forward inflation rate in the United 
States followed a similar trend, increasing by 
42 basis points to 2.44%. The virtually identical 
upward trajectory of market- based inflation 
measures in both currency areas suggests that 
global factors such as rising commodity prices 
and higher risk premiums are likely to have 
been the key drivers behind these develop -
ments. Survey-  based measures of inflation ex -
pectations six to ten years ahead came in most 
recently at just under 1.9% in the euro area 
and just under 2.3% in the United States. Infla -
Yield curve of 
Federal bonds steepens considerably Forward inflation  rates riseYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 ECB Governing 
Council decision permitting – to the extent necessary – pur-
chases of securities with a yield to maturity below  the interest 
rate on the deposit facility. 2 Current interest rate on the de-
posit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.4
––––++
Residual maturity in years16 Febuary 201730 September 20168 December 2016 1%
2 On average, the yield differential between ten- year and 
two- year bonds since the start of monetary union stands at 
just over 120 basis points.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
38

tion risk premiums, which can be approximated 
by the difference between survey- based and 
market- based inflation expectations, have risen 
significantly and are now only slightly negative 
(euro area) or have even turned positive again 
(United States). The concerns about deflation 
expressed by some investors, which had 
throughout much of 2016 resulted in markedly 
negative inflation risk premiums, have now dis -
sipated for the most part.
On balance, yields on European corporate 
bonds continued to rise, having initially em -
barked on this upward path in the middle of 
2016. Yields on corporate bonds with a residual 
maturity of seven to ten years and a BBB rating 
latterly stood at 2.0%, 40 basis points higher 
than at the end of September 2016. Compared 
with their five- year average of just over 3%, 
however, the financing conditions for these en -
terprises remain highly favourable by historical 
standards. Corporate bond spreads developed 
differently depending on the sector in ques -
tion. While the yield spreads of BBB- rated 
non- financial corporate bonds with a residual 
maturity  of seven to ten years over Bunds of 
the same maturity increased slightly by 12 basis 
points to 1.5 percentage points compared with 
the end of September 2016, the corresponding 
spreads of corporate bonds in the financial sec -
tor narrowed by 22 basis points to 2.9 percent -
age points. In addition to this, in an environ -
ment of rising capital market yields, returns on 
high- yield bonds came down, falling to all- time 
lows. Aside from the improved economic out -
look and diminishing risk aversion, this devel -
opment was probably also driven by the Euro -
system’s corporate sector purchase programme 
(CSPP), under which the Eurosystem purchases 
debt securities issued by non- financial corpor -
ations with high credit quality ratings.3 In this 
context, portfolio rebalancing effects also have 
an impact on the yields of bonds not eligible 
for the asset purchase programme such as 
those issued by financial enterprises and entities  
with a poor credit rating.Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2016 was well down on 
the previous quarter. Overall, German borrow -
ers issued paper worth €231 billion, compared 
with €310 billion in the preceding three 
months. Net of redemptions and changes in 
issuers ’ own holdings, domestic issuers re -
duced their capital market borrowing by €26 
billion. The outstanding volume of foreign debt 
securities in the German market fell by €14 bil -
lion in the fourth quarter. On balance, the total 
outstanding volume of bonds in Germany thus Financing 
conditions  for enterprises remain very favourable despite  higher interest rates
Net redemptions of German debt securitiesForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 1 Brent blend (for delivery in 
one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 172.42.73.0
1.82.12.4Weekly averages
US$%
80100120
25406080
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swapsConsensus inflationexpectations in6 to 10 years
United StatesEuro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1
Difference between 
forward inflation rates in the United States and the euro areaPer-
cent-age
pointsUS$1.21.51.82.12.4
%
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial markets, Monthly 
Report, August 2016, p 43.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
39

shrank by €40 billion in the quarter under 
review  .
German credit institutions reduced their capital 
market debt by €15 billion in the reporting 
quarter, by redeeming mainly debt securities 
issued  by specialised credit institutions (€8 bil -
lion). In addition, volumes of public Pfandbriefe 
and other bank debt securities which can be 
structured flexibly fell to the tune of €3½ bil -
lion in each case, while mortgage Pfandbriefe 
were also redeemed in net terms, although vol -
umes were smaller.
The public sector redeemed debt instruments 
totalling €15 billion net in the quarter under 
review  . The Federal government and the reso -
lution agency classified as part of central gov -
ernment redeemed five- year Federal notes 
(Bobls; €9½ billion), Treasury discount paper 
(Bubills; €7 billion) and two- year Federal Treas -
ury notes (Schätze; €6 billion). This contrasted 
with net issuance of 10 and 30-year Bunds in 
the amount of €7½ billion and €1½ billion 
respect  ively. State governments issued debt 
secur ities with a net value of €2 billion.
In the fourth quarter of 2016, domestic enter -
prises issued bonds worth €4 billion net. On 
balance, most of this issuance was long- term 
paper, with non- financial corporations, in par -
ticular, issuing debt securities. Meanwhile, 
other financial institutions scaled back their 
debt borrowing.
The Bundesbank was the sole net purchaser of 
debt securities in the fourth quarter of 2016. 
Under the APP , it acquired instruments worth 
€49½ billion net, principally in the form of 
public sector bonds (€43½ billion). Domestic 
credit institutions and non- banks disposed of 
paper worth €19½ billion net and €12½ billion 
net respectively. While the credit institutions 
chiefly parted with German instruments, the 
non- banks mainly sold foreign securities. For -
eign investors offloaded domestic fixed- income 
securities in the amount of €57½ billion net. 
The bulk of this was again accounted for by Fall in credit 
institutions’ capital  market debt
Net public 
sector  redemptions 
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securitiesYield spreads of corporate bondsin the euro area
*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with residual maturity of seven to 
ten years. 3 Brexit referendum. 4 US presidential election.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 170100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating category
4 3Basis points, daily data
Investment activity in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2015 2016
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents –  1.2 34.6 17.6
Credit institutions – 48.4 – 24.2 – 19.6
of which
Foreign debt securities –  1.1 – 14.1 –  6.1
Deutsche Bundesbank 36.6 48.9 49.5
Other sectors 10.5 10.0 – 12.3
of which
Domestic debt securities 3.6 –  5.1 –  1.7
Non-residents – 54.5 – 27.9 – 57.4
SharesResidents 6.9 12.1 2.7
Credit institutions 1.4 0.6 1.8
of which
Domestic shares 0.1 0.1 3.5
Non-banks 5.5 11.4 0.9
of which
Domestic shares –  2.5 0.4 –  8.4
Non-residents 5.0 1.2 6.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 30.6 17.4 33.8
Investment in retail funds 11.0 3.8 6.0
of which
Equity funds  6.4 1.9 3.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
40

public debt securities (€50 billion), some of 
which were acquired by the Bundesbank.
During the period under review, the inter -
national stock markets were driven by the ex -
pectation that global growth would gradually 
strengthen in the course of 2017. The broad 
S&P 500 equity index in the United States rose 
by 8.3% compared with the end of September 
2016 and reached a new all- time high in mid- 
February, largely on the back of the healthy US 
economy along with expectations of future 
economic growth measures courtesy of the 
new US administration. In addition, analysts 
upped their projection of 12 months earnings 
per share by 3.6%, while their assessments of 
long-  term earnings growth (over three to five 
years) deteriorated somewhat by 0.3 percent -
age point. The largely positive surprises re -
vealed in the first few quarterly reports recently 
published by US firms confirmed the positive 
outlook in the short term. The Federal Reserve’s 
decision to raise its policy rate in December, on 
the other hand, did not dampen stock market 
developments perceptibly. Against the back -
drop of higher inflation expectations, possible 
further rate increases during 2017 seem to 
have been priced in.
The prospect of a continued economic upturn 
in the euro area drove up European stock 
prices, as demonstrated by the broad Euro 
Stoxx index, which gained 9.3%, thus outper -
forming its US counterpart. Analysts’ forecasts 
of earnings per share 12 months ahead rose by 
4.4% over the reporting period. The equity risk 
premium, which is determined for the Euro 
Stoxx on the basis of a dividend discount 
model, contracted by almost 77 basis points on 
balance and is now slightly below its five-  year 
average. Increases in German shares heavily 
influenced  the direction of the European equity 
market. Compared with the end of September 
2016, the CDAX recorded price gains of 10.4%. 
Political uncertainty in a number of European 
countries therefore hardly dampened develop -
ments in the market as a whole. Compared 
with their respective five- year averages, earn -ings yields on both sides of the Atlantic suggest 
that shares are fairly highly valued.
Against the backdrop of more stable economic 
growth and the yen’s weak external value, the 
Japanese stock market also remained on the 
upward trajectory it had embarked upon in the 
summer. Of the indices of all major economies, 
the Nikkei saw the strongest growth during the 
period under review and stood 17.6% above its 
level of the end of September 2016 as this 
report  went to press. Given the country’s 
robust  economic outlook, the UK decision to 
leave the European Union and the ongoing 
uncer tainty about its future links to the EU Clear gains on 
international stock markets
Japanese stock 
market sees 
strong riseEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Im-
plied equity risk premiums determined using dividend discount 
models  on  the  basis  of  profit  and  dividend  expectations 
(I/B/E/S). 2 Brexit referendum. 3 US presidential election.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Risk premiums on
the stock market  1Bank indices
%
2015 2016 17Beginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
Overall market indicesWeekly averages
60708090100110120130
48121690100110120130Euro area (Euro Stoxx 300)
United Kingdom (FTSE All-Share)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
3 2total total
banks banksEuro Stoxx 300 S&P 500Euro area
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
41

hardly affected the British stock market. The 
FTSE  All-  Share index was up by 5.5% from 
Septem ber 2016 and marked an all- time high 
at one point.
Stock markets were driven not only by assess -
ments of global economic developments, 
sector- specific events also had a major impact. 
In the banking sector, the recovery observed in 
the previous quarter continued apace. At 
26.7% and 37.8% respectively, bank stocks in 
the euro area and the United States rose appre -
ciably. Nevertheless, the projection of 12 months 
earnings per share fell significantly short of 
actual  share price growth. This led to a sharp 
decline in the equity risk premium, calculated 
on the basis of a dividend discount model, in 
the order of 2.5 percentage points in the euro 
area and of 1.3 percentage points in the United 
States. The resolution of legal disputes affect -
ing individual institutions in Germany as well as 
first injections of liquidity for ailing Italian banks 
are likely to have helped boost prices in the 
euro area, as did the anticipated improvement 
in banks’ earnings situation as a result of the 
steepening of the yield curve. The recent publi -
cation of disappointing quarterly reports by a 
number of European banks, on the other hand, 
has somewhat dampened market dynamics in 
the euro area. In the United States, the admin -
istration’s announcement of its intention to roll 
back banking regulations gave rise to an upbeat  
mood in the markets. This was also reflected in 
the US banking sector’s equity risk premium, 
which has fallen below the level for the market 
as a whole.
Uncertainty among market participants regard -
ing further stock market developments –  as 
measured by the implied volatilities of equity 
indices calculated from options – has receded 
considerably around the world since the US 
presidential election, more than offsetting the 
spike in uncertainty witnessed in the run- up to 
the election. In the United States, price uncer -
tainty has thus returned to a level last seen be -
fore the onset of the financial crisis. Height -
ened political uncertainty across the globe has Bank sectors 
record strong price gains on both sides of the Atlantic
Reduced price 
uncertainty in the stock market despite greater political uncertainty Major items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2015 2016
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I Current account + 72.2 + 61.2 + 68.4
1 Goods 1 + 64.1 + 67.9 + 62.5
2 Services 2 –  6.7 – 12.9 –  4.7
3 Primary income + 24.9 + 16.8 + 22.4
4 Secondary income – 10.0 – 10.7 – 11.8
II Capital account –  2.2 +  0.4 –  0.1
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 58.3 + 57.7 + 74.4
1 Direct investment + 25.5 + 12.5 + 29.1
Domestic investment 
abroad + 29.6 + 21.3 + 21.5
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  4.1 +  8.7 –  7.6
2 Portfolio investment + 66.8 + 48.8 + 50.8
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 17.7 + 19.8 –  0.7
Shares
3 +  7.6 +  8.2 +  3.4
Investment fund shares 4+  4.6 +  8.9 +  9.9
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  1.7 –  0.5 +  2.6
Long-term debt  securities
5 +  6.0 +  5.9 –  9.8
of which
Denominated in euro 6 +  2.5 –  4.4 –  7.8
Short-term debt  securities
7 –  0.5 –  3.1 –  4.1
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 49.1 – 29.0 – 51.4
Shares 3 +  4.9 +  1.2 +  6.4
Investment fund shares +  0.6 –  2.3 –  0.4
Long-term debt  securities
5 – 32.6 – 23.9 – 29.1
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 18.8 – 20.0 – 43.0
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 – 21.9 –  4.0 – 28.3
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  5.5 + 10.0 + 13.3
4 Other investment 10 – 39.2 – 13.4 – 18.7
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 – 11.2 – 30.4 + 22.3
Enterprises and  households
12 – 28.0 + 12.2 – 28.9
General government –  2.0 +  7.9 –  2.1
Bundesbank +  2.0 –  3.2 – 10.0
5 Reserve assets 13 –  0.3 –  0.3 0.0
IV Errors and omissions 14 – 11.7 –  4.0 +  6.1
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
42

thus far evidently failed to translate into stock 
price uncertainty.
On balance, funding raised on the German 
stock market totalled €1½ billion in the final 
quarter of 2016. The volume of foreign shares 
in the German market rose by €7½ billion over 
the same period. Equities were purchased 
primarily   by foreign investors (€6½ billion). 
Domestic  credit institutions added €2 billion 
worth of equities to their portfolios, all of 
which were German shares on balance. Resi -
dent non- banks bought shares for €1 billion 
net, with a particular focus on foreign secur -
ities.
In the final quarter of 2016, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a net inflow of €40 
billion, compared with €21 billion in the previ -
ous quarter. On balance, the vast majority of 
the fresh funds were channelled to specialised 
funds reserved for institutional investors (€34 
billion). Of the various asset classes, mixed 
secur ities funds, in particular, registered large 
net inflows of capital (€21 billion), as did, albeit 
to a lesser extent, open- end real estate funds 
(€6 billion), equity funds and funds of funds 
(€5½ billion each). The outstanding volume of 
foreign mutual fund shares in Germany rose by 
€10 billion in the period under review. On bal -
ance, investment fund shares were bought 
exclusively  by domestic non- banks, which 
added paper worth €51½ billion to their port -
folios in net terms. Most of this paper was 
issued  by domestic mutual funds. By contrast, 
German credit institutions and non- resident 
invest ors sold paper totalling €1½ billion and 
€½ billion net respectively.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows to the tune of €51 bil -lion in the fourth quarter of 2016, net capital 
exports were likewise recorded in the field of 
direct investment; these amounted to €29 bil -
lion.
Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises came to €21½ billion net in the final 
quarter of 2016. Domestic investors boosted 
their equity capital in subsidiaries abroad by 
€17 billion. To some extent, reinvested earnings 
contributed to this development (€2 billion). In 
addition, domestic enterprises stepped up their 
intra- group lending by €4½ billion, of which 
€2½ billion were used to expand trade credits 
and €2 billion as a means to grant additional 
financial loans. Countries receiving substantial 
direct investments from Germany included the 
United States (€5 billion), China and Luxem -
bourg (€3½ billion each).
Foreign investors scaled back their direct invest -
ment in Germany from October to December 
2016 by €7½ billion, largely by reducing claims 
arising from debt instruments (-€7½ billion). 
Redemptions of financial credits (€13½ billion) 
were partially balanced out by an increase in 
trade credits (€6 billion). Meanwhile, the level 
of equity capital held by foreign direct investors 
in Germany fell by €½ billion as the liquidation 
of existing equity capital was not fully compen -
sated by new investments and reinvested earn -
ings. In regional terms, investors based in Lux -
embourg (-€11 billion), Switzerland and Ireland 
(-€1½ billion in each case) downscaled their 
direct investment in Germany. Other countries, 
meanwhile, including the United Kingdom 
(€3½ billion), made additional direct invest -
ment.Stock market 
funding at low level
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund sharesDirect 
investment  sees 
capital exports
German direct 
investment abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in 
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
43

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The pace of growth in the German economy 
accelerated perceptibly at the end of 2016. 
Accord ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the fourth quarter of 2016 rose by a 
seasonally and calendar- adjusted 0.4% on the 
quarter and thus considerably more strongly 
than in the summer, when the increase stood 
at just 0.1%. In 2016 as a whole, real GDP 
increased  by 1.9% year- on- year (1.8% in 
calendar- adjusted terms). This means that the 
upswing in the German economy with growth 
rates significantly above the rate of potential 
growth has been under way for three years 
now, and overall capacity utilisation is now 
exceeding  normal levels.Stronger growth stimulus was generated on 
the demand side towards the end of the year, 
driven primarily by exports, which overcame 
their third- quarter lull and posted strong 
growth. Construction activity also picked up 
momentum again in the final quarter of 2016. 
Private consumption continued to expand 
given that labour market and income prospects 
remained on an expansionary path. By con -
trast, investment in machinery and equipment, 
which had waned in the previous two quarters, 
remained lacklustre.
Following subdued growth in the summer 
months, seasonally adjusted German exports 
expanded sharply on the quarter at the end of 
2016. According to the figures available up 
until November, the increase in the value of 
exports  was broadly based in regional terms. 
German exports to other euro-  area countries 
rose significantly, while demand from non-  
euro- area countries was even more buoyant. 
German enterprises , for example, considerably in -
creased the value of their exports to the United 
States. One possible factor behind this might 
have been that the US dollar appreciated mark -
edly against the euro during the period under 
review. German exporters also saw strong 
growth in trade with China, Japan and other 
export markets in Asia. Exports to the OPEC 
countries likewise showed positive growth. By 
contrast, the value of goods exported to the 
United Kingdom underwent a marked decline, 
which is likely to have been connected with the 
continuing weakness of the pound sterling. 
Exports  of goods to Russia also showed a 
marked drop following their strong upward 
movement in the third quarter.
Against the backdrop of still subdued growth 
in industrial output, despite the strong increase 
in new orders, investment in machinery and 
equipment remained sluggish in the final quar -
ter of 2016 after declining in the second and 
third quarters. Although manufacturers of cap -Pick- up in 
economic  growth at year- end 2016 …… thanks to 
stronger exports 
and ongoing 
buoyant domestic  demand
Strong growth 
in exports
Lull in invest -
ment in machin-
ery and equip-ment not yet overcomeOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201698100102104106108110112
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
% Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
44

ital goods posted significant domestic sales 
growth in real terms, the decline in the number 
of registrations of commercially used vehicles, 
both for passenger cars and utility vehicles, 
suggests that investment in enterprises’ motor 
vehicle fleets was very weak.
Construction investment accelerated signifi -
cantly at the end of 2016 compared with the 
rather modest pace of the third quarter. This is 
likely to have been due primarily to housing 
construction. Measured in terms of turnover in 
the construction sector – figures for which are 
available up until November  – investment in 
commercial construction, which has been 
trending downwards in recent years, may also 
have shown an increase.
Private consumption at the end of 2016 con -
tinued its upward movement on the back of 
ongoing favourable income and labour market 
prospects. The loss of purchasing power result -
ing from the sharp rise in energy prices evi -
dently did little to dampen households’ strong 
appetite for consumption. In the retail sector, 
textiles, clothing and footwear were in par -
ticular demand following subdued sales of 
such  goods in September on account of the 
weather. Trade in information and communica -
tion technology (ICT) equipment was also flour -
ishing. By contrast, consumers were probably 
more cautious in terms of their spending in the 
hotel and restaurant sector. The same goes for 
motor vehicle purchases, as is indicated by the 
decline in the number of new registrations in 
the case of households.
Imports saw a sharp rise in price and seasonally 
adjusted terms in the final quarter of 2016. This 
was probably due mainly to the renewed pick- 
up in export activity as well as ongoing buoy -
ant domestic demand. There was greater de -
mand for goods from virtually all major eco -
nomic regions. In terms of value, imports from 
non- euro- area countries showed a particularly 
strong rise. The surge in domestic demand 
chiefly benefited Chinese exporters, who saw 
quite substantial increase in their exports to Germany. Considerably more goods were also 
imported from the United Kingdom. The value 
of imports from the OPEC countries and Russia 
were pointing markedly upwards. This is likely 
to have been due to higher energy prices. Im -
ports of goods from the United States and 
Japan stagnated, however.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output was still not fully taking off in 
the fourth quarter either. Following a period of 
stagnation in the summer months, industrial 
output in the final quarter of 2016 fell slightly Marked increase 
in construction investment
Private con-
sumption still showing strong 
momentum
Stronger pace 
of growth in imports
Industrial output proving weak owing to pro-duction cut- backs in December90100110 110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 
1 Adjusted using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016Oct-
Nov90100110120130
Oct-
Nov
90100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 190100110 110120130140
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
45

on the quarter (-¼%) in seasonally adjusted 
terms. The weak result was, however, due 
solely to the sharp cutback in production in 
Decem ber. This is likely to have been due, 
above all, to many manufacturers, as is cus -
tomary, shutting down their plants between 
Christmas and the New Year and the number 
of working days affected by this last year being 
greater than on a longer- term average. Output 
of capital and consumer goods fell consider -
ably in the quarter as a whole (-¾%). By con -
trast, manufacturers of intermediate goods 
saw a marked increase in output (+¾%).
According to Ifo Institute data, there was a dis -
tinct rise in the capacity utilisation of tangible 
fixed assets in manufacturing. At 86% in Janu -
ary 2017, it reached its highest level since mid-
2011 and was therefore well above its longer- 
term average. Manufacturers of intermediate 
and consumer goods reported a higher level of 
utilisation than in the previous quarter, whereas capacity utilisation in the capital goods sector 
contracted somewhat.
Seasonally adjusted construction output in the 
final quarter of 2016 rose substantially on the 
quarter by 1½%, with output in the main con -
struction sector posting particularly strong 
growth (+2¾%). Building construction, which 
also includes residential housing, was the dom -
inant factor in this regard with marked rates of 
growth. Substantial growth rates were also re -
corded in civil engineering, however. On the 
whole, the situation in the construction indus -
try is still exceptionally favourable, with the Ifo 
Institute’s assessment of the business situation 
in the construction sector being at its highest 
level since 1991. Equipment utilisation in the 
construction sector is also persisting at a record 
high. This is consistent with the rising trend in 
construction prices in the final quarter of the 
year, even though the rates of increase are still 
relatively moderate. Compared with the previ -
ous year, they were up by 2.2%. At the begin -
ning of 2016, the rate stood at 1.7%. Property 
prices continued to rise unabated. According 
to the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks 
(Verband deutscher Pfandbriefbanken – vdp), 
the prices of owner- occupied housing rose by 
6.6% on the year. More detailed comments on 
housing price developments last year may be 
found on pages 51 to 53.
Economic activity in the fairly heterogeneous 
services sector is likely to have picked up dis -
tinctly in the final three months of the year. In 
the wholesale trade, sales are beginning to 
show a clear increase in real terms after declin -
ing twice successively, which is due also, 
in  part, to foreign trade activity becoming 
stronger again. This is consistent with the fact 
that the Ifo Institute’s assessment of the busi -
ness situation showed an improvement again 
towards the end of the year. Motor vehicle 
sales – statistical data for which are available 
up until November  – also showed a marked 
upward  movement, although the number of 
newly registered motor vehicles decreased. 
Real retail sales (exclud ing motor vehicles) rose Industrial 
capacity  utilisation  at a high levelConstruction activity still 
buoyant
Services sector 
in good shapeOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016Industry
9095100105110115
9095100105110115120125
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
46

moderately, as they did in the third quarter. 
Other services, exclud ing trade, probably fin -
ished the year 2016 quite buoyantly. This is 
suggested at all events by the clear improve -
ment in enterprises’ business expectations in 
this sector.
Labour market
Employment rose again during the fourth quar -
ter of 2016, following a slight dip in the sum -
mer months. However, measured in terms of 
developments during the first half of the year 
and the – sometimes very optimistic – leading 
indicators, the employment figure showed only 
a moderate increase. Employment subject to 
social security contributions posted only a 
modest increase in the fourth quarter, and 
exclu sively low- paid part- time employment 
continued to fall. Following years of decline, 
self- employment showed something of a re -
covery after picking up slightly, as it had also 
done in the previous quarter. The outlook for 
employment is still favourable, although it is 
becoming increasingly clear that it is becoming 
more difficult to fill vacant positions. Unemploy-
ment fell significantly throughout the reporting 
period, despite the large number of refugees 
registering as job seekers after their applica -
tions for asylum had been approved.
Employment in Germany in the fourth quarter 
of 2016 rose by a seasonally adjusted 51,000 
persons, or 0.1%, compared with the third 
quarter, when there was a small decline by 
6,000 persons. The year-  on- year increase 
shrank to 267,000 persons (+0.6%). Employ -
ment subject to social security contributions, 
which had been the main driver of employ -
ment growth up until the middle of the year, 
showed only a small increase. According to the 
initial figures of the Federal Employment 
Agency, the number of employees subject to 
social security contributions in October and 
November rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.1% 
(or 28,000 persons) compared with the aver -
age of the third quarter.Slight increase 
in employment, further decline in unemploy-ment
Employment 
subject to social security contributions  increased only slightly in Q4Labour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17Jan40.541.041.542.042.543.043.5
27.528.028.529.029.530.030.531.031.5–5000+500+1,000
2.53.03.5
–5000+500JanSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JanMillion
Million
Million300400500600700Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change 1Officially unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change 1
Oct-
NovDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
47

Sectoral heterogeneity has increased. Three 
sectors of the economy, including manufactur -
ing and trade, have been reporting a significant 
decline in employment subject to social security 
contributions since June 2016. In the preceding 
quarters, the number of persons employed 
under regular employment contracts was 
pointing clearly upwards, or was at least 
broadly stable, in almost all sectors of the econ -
omy. The health and welfare sectors reported a 
positive, albeit somewhat muted, development 
in employment in the final quarter of 2016. 
Other services sectors continued to recruit new 
staff on a sizeable scale, such as in business-  
related services (including temporary agency 
employment), logistics, hotels and restaurants, 
and the information and communication sec -
tor. Employment in the construction sector 
picked up again further of late owing to the 
high level of capacity utilisation.
Demographic factors may go some way towards   
explaining the weaker employment dynamics. 
The reduction in the potential domestic labour 
force observed over the last few years will no 
longer be fully offset by rising labour market 
participation, and, according to the Federal 
Employment Agency, the increased demand for 
labour is likely to have been met very largely by 
immigration,1 with a prominent role being 
played by EU nationals. The number of persons 
in employment subject to social security contri -
butions or working in low- paid part- time jobs 
coming from the most significant war- torn and 
crisis- stricken countries of Asia and Africa went 
up by no more than 55,000 in November in 
comparison with the previous year.2 The fre -
quent limited employability of refugees in the 
German labour market probably also played a 
part in this.
Unemployment fell perceptibly during the 
fourth quarter of 2016. Taking the average of 
the reporting period, 2.65 million persons were 
registered as unemployed in seasonally ad -
justed terms, which is 31,000 fewer than in the 
third quarter. The unemployment rate declined 
by 0.1 percentage point to 6.0%. In January 2017, the unemployment figure showed a fur -
ther significant fall, with the unemployment 
rate currently standing at 5.9%. In addition to 
the favourable economic setting, labour supply 
effects are also likely to have played a signifi -
cant role in the fall in the unemployment figure 
of 143,000 compared with the same month 
last year. The number of registered unemployed 
persons with German nationality declined by as 
much as 215,000 within the past 12 months, 
while the number of unemployed persons 
origin ating from the most significant war- torn 
and crisis- stricken countries went up by 
87,000.3
According to the leading labour market indica -
tors, the upward movement in employment 
should continue in the next few months. The 
Ifo employment barometer, which surveys the 
employment plans of trade and industry over 
the coming three months, is at an exceptionally 
high level and the IAB labour market barometer 
is well into expansionary territory, too, despite 
a slight decline in the past few months. The 
Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job index, 
which contains information on both the exist -
ing number of reported vacancies and their 
dynamics , is rushing from one record high to 
another. Even so, it is noticeable that the num -
ber of job vacancies reported to the Federal 
Labour  Agency in recent quarters was rising 
more quickly than the aggregate supply of jobs 
as determined by the IAB Job Vacancy survey. 
This implies that the growth in job vacancies 
reported  to the Federal Labour Agency could 
be due in part to a higher reporting rate by 
enter prises; in an environment of hardly any 
further growth in the labour supply, enterprises High level 
of sectoral heterogeneity 
Weaker 
dynamics , also as a result of 
demographic 
trends
Significant 
decline in unemployment, especially among German nationalsPositive employ-ment outlook with slower momentum
1 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung, Der Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt in 
Deutschland  – Monatsbericht, January 2017, p 9.
2 See Institute for Employment Research (IAB), Zuwande -
rungsmonitor Januar 2017, Aktuelle Berichte des IAB . The 
Middle Eastern countries of Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan 
and Pakistan as well as the African countries of Eritrea, Ni -
geria and Somalia as classed as being among the most sig -
nificant countries at war or in crisis.
3 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung, Der Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt in 
Deutschland  – Monatsbericht, January 2017, p 15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
48

are increasingly making use of the Federal 
Employ ment Agency’s placement efforts. Job 
growth could continue overall, although it is 
unlikely to match its momentum of a year ago. 
The unemployment subcomponent of the IAB 
labour market barometer is currently well 
above the neutral threshold. The downward 
trend in unemployment is therefore likely to 
remain  intact over the coming months.
Wages and prices
Once again, negotiated wages rose only mod -
erately in the final quarter of 2016. Including 
additional benefits, they went up 2.2% on the 
year and thus hardly any more strongly than in 
the third quarter. By contrast, at 2.3%, the an -
nual rate for basic negotiated rates of pay, 
which are less subject to special factors, was 
again slightly higher than in the two preceding 
quarters. Actual earnings are likely to have risen 
more sharply, as was the case in the previous 
quarter.
Negotiated pay rates also showed only moder -
ate growth when looking at last year as a 
whole. Including additional benefits, the in -
crease, at 2.1% year- on- year, was marginally 
weaker than in 2015. This was due chiefly to 
the predominantly moderate new agreements 
along with the small increases in negotiated 
rates of pay from the second stage of earlier 
wage rounds. No less significant, moreover, 
were months when there was a pay freeze with 
lagged wage increases. One probable factor 
behind moderate growth in negotiated wages 
– measured by the favourable situation on the 
labour market – is that in a number of sectors, 
the social partners reached supplementary 
agreements which entail additional costs for 
employers and are of benefit to employees in 
the medium and longer term, but which are 
not reflected directly in the remuneration 
tables. These agreements often include modi -
fied regulations to boost occupational pension 
schemes. The wage drift remained clearly posi -
tive in 2016 at 0.4  percentage point, which was probably due largely to cyclical factors. 
Accord ing to the provisional data of the Federal 
Statistical Office, growth in actual earnings, at 
2.5%, was distinctly stronger than it was in 
nego tiated pay rates, even though they went 
up at a slightly slower pace than in the previous 
year.
At the beginning of 2017, the Federal Govern -
ment raised the statutory minimum wage from 
€8.50 to €8.84 per hour. The Minimum Wage 
Act provides for exemptions, which can still be 
applied under certain conditions until the end 
of 2017, to allow specific sectors and profes -
sions, such as agriculture, forestry, horticulture 
and the meat industry, to pay rates below the 
general minimum wage. With effect from 
1 January 2018, these special regulations will 
cease to apply to paid employees.
This year’s pay round will affect fewer employ -
ees than last year and mainly covers the ser -
vices sectors. Under the wage agreements con -Only moderate 
rise in negoti-ated wages in fourth quarter too
Negotiated 
pay rates only moderately  higher in 2016
General minimum  wage raised by 4%
“Small” 2017 
pay round mainly affects service providers2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201600.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (actual earnings) and Deut-
sche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
49

cluded last year, 2017 will see low phased in -
creases of less than 2½% in most cases. The 
figures released so far for trade unions’ wage 
demands are within a range of 4.5% to 6% 
and are thus on a scale similar to last year.
Consumer price inflation as measured by the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
rose quite sharply by a seasonally adjusted 
0.6% in the fourth quarter of 2016, which was 
more than in the preceding quarter (0.2%). 
Energy  , in particular, became significantly more 
expensive as a result of the rebound in crude 
oil prices, especially as the price increase was 
even higher in euro terms owing to the euro’s marked depreciation. However, consumers had 
to pay noticeably more for food, too, because 
of very steep increases in the prices of dairy 
products. Moreover, prices of industrial goods 
(exclud ing energy) accelerated again after mov -
ing sideways in the third quarter. This was 
mainly due to a countermovement in the prices 
of clothing and footwear, which had fallen 
considerably in the preceding quarter, probably 
on account of the unusually warm weather in 
Septem ber. The prices of services, by contrast, 
went up only slightly owing to a notable fall in 
the prices of package holidays. Apart from 
that, prices of services rose at roughly the same 
pace as in the third quarter. This was also true 
of rents, which once again went up somewhat 
more sharply than on the long- term average. 
Annual headline HICP inflation increased sig -
nificantly overall from 0.4% to 1.0%.4 Over the 
course of the quarter, the rise from 0.5% in 
September to 1.7% in December was even 
more pronounced. The fact that prices of fuel 
and heating oil fell markedly at the end of 2015 
played a part in this. Excluding energy and 
food, the year- on- year rate remained at some -
what over 1% in the fourth quarter.
On an average of 2016, consumer prices 
showed barely any upward movement. Overall, 
annual HICP inflation increased to no more 
than 0.4%, following 0.1% on average in 2015 
(CPI: 0.5%, from 0.3%). The main reason for 
the low inflation rate was the fall in crude oil 
prices, although an oversupply of certain food 
products played a part, too. Excluding these 
volatile components, annual inflation remained 
at 1.1%, thus corresponding to the long- term 
average, even though overall capacity utilisa -
tion exceeded its normal level. As was the case 
in 2015, relief was provided by international 
effects  in the shape of lower commodity prices, 
excess global capacity and lower hotel prices 
when travelling abroad. Furthermore, the rise Sharper rise in 
consumer prices in the final quarter  owing to higher energy and food pricesInflation low again on aver-age for 2016, mainly due to energy costsExport pricesImport, export, producer and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 1795100105110
95100105110
9095100105
0+1+2+32010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
Import prices
%
Jan100105110
Jan
4 The annual rate of consumer inflation according to the 
national Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose from 0.5% in the 
third quarter to 1.1% in the final quarter of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
50

Housing prices in Germany in 2016
Residential property prices increased mark-
edly last year. The growth in housing price 
infl  ation was broadly based, both in regional 
terms and across the various housing types. 
Ultimately, the expanding housing supply 
was not enough to curb the price pressures 
emanating from the continuing strong de-
mand for residential property. In towns and cities, residential property prices are likely to 
have deviated even further from the level that would appear reasonable based on longer- term economic and demographic 
factors.
According to data from the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher 
Pfandbriefbanken, vdp), prices for owner- occupied housing in Germany rose by 6% 
in 2016, compared with a 4½% increase in 2015. Other regionally broad housing price 
indicators also show that residential prop-
erty prices in Germany rose more sharply in the year under review than previously. After 
having grown by 4¾% in 2015, the house 
price index of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce 
(Destatis) was 5½% higher in the fi  rst three quarters of 2016 than in the same period a year earlier. Hypoport AG’s Europace house 
price index (EPX) indicates that housing prices in Germany rose by 8% in 2016, meaning that their growth was 2½  per-
centage points stronger than in the year be-
fore. All three indicators reveal that last year’s housing price infl  ation was signifi  -cantly higher than the average annual 
growth rate recorded since the onset of the property boom in 2010.
The upsurge in housing prices was once 
again particularly rapid in Germany’s towns 
and cities. According to calculations based 
on data provided by bulwiengesa AG, resi-
dential property prices rose by 8% there, compared with an average increase of 6¾% between 2010 and 2015.
1 Above- average price rises were again recorded in 
Ger many’s seven biggest cities, where housing price infl  ation had already been strongest over the past few years.
2 This 
continued to affect mainly freehold apart-
ments in the major conurbations. The rate 
of increase for rented apartments likewise 
rose markedly in towns and cities. The pace of growth of multiple- family house prices in Germany as a whole, by contrast, was more 
or less unchanged at a high level. Price increases  for single- family houses are also likely to have converged across regions in 
the reporting year.
In addition, the urban housing markets saw 
substantial rent increases for new and re- 
rentals at a rate of 4¾%. The last time rents 
in German towns and cities had grown so 
fast was during the early stages of the last 
surge in housing demand in 2011-12. The 
big cities, which had recorded marked rent 
increases up until 2014, saw much more 
moderate rent rises over the past year than 
the cities and towns as a whole.
The persistently strong demand for housing 
remains broadly in line with households’ 
positive income prospects and the favour-
able labour market conditions. The ratio of 
property purchase prices to annual rents, which has been elevated since 2013, re-mained largely static in 2016 on balance. 
While the prices of residential property rose faster than households’ average disposable income in the past three years, the ongoing 
extremely favourable fi  nancing conditions 
1 Price statistics for housing in the 127 towns and 
cities  in 2015 have been adjusted upwards quite sub-
stantially by an average of 1½ percentage points in 
line with the latest data.
2 The seven biggest cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-gart.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
51

relieved pressure on property purchasers.3 
The average mortgage rate, which had 
already  reached an all- time low, fell even 
further to 1.6% in 2016. Given the limited 
returns available from alternative invest-ments, investors may have focused more 
attention on the major conurbations, which are both relatively liquid and promise strong 
growth. In addition, demographic factors seem to have again infl  uenced demand in 
2016. Population density in the major con-urbations is likely to have increased further in the past year. Between 2011 and 2015, it grew by a further 3.8% in the biggest cities 
from an already high base.4 Moreover, the 
bulk of the immigrants who came to Ger-many over the past two years may have 
settled  in urban areas.5
Housing supply surged again in 2016. It probably exceeded the rise in 2015, when 
almost 250,000 new dwellings were com-
pleted. At almost 380,000, the number of 
planned housing units was almost one- 
quarter higher than the number of building permits granted in 2015, which had already 
surpassed the 2014 fi  gure by 7.7%.6 The 
planned new construction also refl  ected the 
housing demand component relating to the  infl  ux of refugees. In the category of residential homes, which includes refugee accom modation, well over twice as many 
3 See the Deutsche Bundesbank’s System of indicators 
for the German residential property market, available 
at http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/  
Enterprises_and_households/System_of_indicators/
system_of_indicators.html.
4 See Regional database of the Federal Statistical 
Offi   ce . The percentage of the population living in towns and cities as a whole also increased in the 
period from 2011 to 2015, while it fell slightly in rural areas.5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Housing prices in Germany 
in 2015, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp 53-56. 
Although  the urban- rural ratio of foreign residents fell slightly between 2011 and 2015 on balance, in 2015 it was still around twice as high as the ratio for German nationals.6 The number of building permits may also have been 
infl  ated by frontloading to forestall the tightening of energy standards for new residential buildings from 
the start of 2016.Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price data provided by bulwiengesa AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 20162010 = 100, annual data, log scale
95100105110115120125130135140145150155160165
95100105110115120125130
95100105110115120125130135140
95100105110115120125130
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
Quarterly data7 major citiesTotal
127 towns and citiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
52

in unit labour costs decelerated somewhat in 
Germany.
At the beginning of the year, consumer prices 
as measured by the Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices (HICP) remained unchanged in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Energy prices rose 
moderately. Prices of mineral oil products 
edged up further in line with crude oil prices 
and electricity tariffs for households were raised 
against the backdrop of higher network 
charges. Rents were also rising again some -
what more sharply. By contrast, prices of food 
and industrial goods (excluding energy) showed 
very little change. Services (excluding rents) 
were distinctly cheaper in fact, mainly due to 
legislative changes in long- term care services. 
Lower energy prices at the beginning of 2016 
also played a part in annual headline inflation, 
as measured by both the HICP and CPI, going 
up from 1.7% to 1.9%.Under the current underlying conditions, an -
nual HICP inflation is likely to fluctuate around 
the 2% mark in the coming months. This is 
partly due to the waning base effects from last 
year. Forward quotations for crude oil suggest 
that there is very little scope for further energy 
price increases but, excluding energy, inflation 
could gain pace slowly. For example, the im -
port prices of capital and non- food consumer 
goods, which are a major determinant of con -
sumer prices for “industrial goods excluding 
energy”, were showing a marked rise at the 
upstream stages in the final quarter of 2016. 
This was probably due chiefly to the depreci -
ation of the euro. Even though this increase 
has not yet passed through to industrial produ -
cer prices, it is likely to be reflected in consumer 
prices in the foreseeable future. Prices of en -
ergy and intermediate goods have already been 
picking up owing to markedly higher prices for 
crude oil and industrial commodities at both 
import and producer levels, leading to trans -
port and materials becoming more expensive, Consumer prices 
unchanged in January 2017Upward tendency  at upstream stages points to slow 
acceleration in 
consumer price inflation exclud-ing energybuilding applications were submitted in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2016 alone than on average 
in 2015. The extremely high level of cap-acity utilisation as well as the backlog of 
construction orders suggest, however, that 
the supply of additional housing cannot be 
stepped up very easily. Prices for construc-
tion work on new residential buildings rose somewhat in 2016, after increasing moder-
ately in the preceding years. In some regions , the scale of new building con-
struction is also linked to the limited avail-
ability of land. According to data from the 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce, the price of build-
ing plots jumped by 5% in the fi  rst half of 
2016, thus accelerating considerably in rela-
tion to the annual average growth rate between  2010 and 2015. In addition, the 
price- dampening effect of mobilising vacant  
properties in urban areas is likely to have largely worn off. Data from the Federal Institute  for Research  on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development indicate housing vacancy  rates in 2015 of no more 
than 1% in some big cities.7
Overall, the accelerating housing price 
dynamics  in the year under review probably 
surpassed the growth rate consistent with 
the demographic and economic fundamen-tals, which can only partly be explained by the further fall in borrowing costs. Accord-
ing to current estimates, housing in German 
towns and cities was overpriced by be-
tween 15% and 30% in 2016. The size of 
the price exaggerations increased notably in the case of freehold apartments in the big-gest cities.
7 See Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban 
Affairs and Spatial Development, Wohnungsleer-
stände, February 2017, available at http://www.bbsr.
bund.de/BBSR/DE/WohnenImmobilien/Immobilienmarktbeobachtung/ProjekteFachbeitraege/
Wohnungsleerstand/wohnungsleerstand.html. In the urban municipalities, the vacancy rate was probably 
below 3% in 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
53

for example. However, consumer prices exclud -
ing energy are likely to reflect this only with a 
considerable time lag and in a more moderate 
form.
Orders received and outlook
Growth in the German economy is likely to 
strengthen further in the first quarter of 2017. 
Given the very dynamic intake of new orders, 
major impulses are expected from industrial 
activity  , in particular. This is also likely to be 
reflected  in exports, as indicated by enterprises’ 
optimistic export expectations. Enterprises are 
also expected to invest more in machinery and 
equipment in view of the fact that capacity util -
isation is now significantly above- average. Con -
struction activity is also likely to remain excep -
tionally buoyant in the first quarter, as long as 
it is not severely affected by adverse weather 
conditions. Finally, the sustained improvement 
in labour market conditions, employees’ 
favourable  income prospects and the healthy 
consumer climate all point to a continuation of 
buoyant consumption, even though the higher 
rate of inflation is constricting consumers’ 
scope for spending.
The sentiment indicators for the German econ -
omy paint a predominantly optimistic picture 
after the start of the year. According to the Ifo 
Institute, industry’s assessment of the business 
situation and expectations about output and 
exports in the short term are at a high level. By 
contrast, business expectations have deterior -
ated. In the main construction sector, too, the 
clearly lower expectations at the end of the 
period under review stand in contrast to the 
extremely favourable assessment of the busi -
ness situation, which is setting one record high 
after another. In the trade and services sectors, 
the slight deterioration in sentiment is likewise 
mainly due to lowered business expectations. 
It  is not clear whether these more cautious 
expecta tions are a reflection of growing con -
cerns and uncertainty about possible global 
trade restrictions. By contrast, the economic Further expan-
sion in eco-nomic growth likely at start of 2017
Positive 
sentiment  at start of yearDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201690100110120
–100+10+20+30
90100110120130
90100110120
Oct-
Nov
Oct-
Nov90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scale
Main construction ordersLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
54

outlook is clearly more optimistic according to 
the latest survey by the Association of German 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK), in 
which both the business situation and business 
expectations show an improvement on the 
autumn  survey.
Seasonally adjusted industrial orders posted an 
exceptionally steep increase of 4¼% in the final 
quarter of 2016 compared with the third quar -
ter. The inflow of orders was broadly based, 
meaning that there were only a few branches 
of industry that received fewer new orders 
than in the third quarter. Even excluding large- 
scale orders, German enterprises on the whole 
were able to record strong growth in orders on 
the same scale. In regional terms, domestic im -
pulses had the upper hand. Nonetheless, there 
was also a substantial flow of orders from the 
euro area and non- euro- area countries. In this 
respect, the German motor vehicle manufac -
turers were especially prominent, reporting 
considerably more orders from all three eco -
nomic regions. The order capacity index, which 
measures the deviation of new orders from 
production capacity in order-  based industry, 
climbed to its highest level since the Great Re -
cession. This suggests that industrial activity 
will pick up significantly in the first few months 
of this year and that there will be an expansion 
in both exports and investment in machinery 
and equipment.Construction activity is also likely to remain 
favourable  in the first quarter of 2017. This is 
indicated, amongst other things, by the steep 
increase in new orders reported by the main 
construction sector in the previous quarter. The 
number of building permits issued and their 
estimated  costs also went up sharply. These de -
velopments were broadly based and affected 
all subsectors of the construction industry. It is 
therefore hardly surprising that the assessment 
of the business situation reached a new peak 
since German reunification. Given such an ex -
tremely high level, it comes as no surprise that 
there was a decline in the percentage of enter -
prises expecting a further improvement in busi -
ness.
Private consumption is likely to remain a main -
stay of growth at the beginning of the new 
year, too. Labour market conditions remaining 
favourable and significant income growth are 
the key factors in this. This is also reflected in 
the consumer climate as determined by the 
market research institution Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK), which recently in -
creased moderately from an already very high 
level. By contrast, higher energy prices are likely 
to have a negative impact, as they restrict the 
financial scope of consumers.Industry with 
strong inflow of orders on broad basisContinuing positive  outlook in the construc-tion sector
Private 
consumption  remains a key growth factor in new yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
55

Public finances*
General government budget
On the back of continued very favourable con -
ditions for public finances, Germany last year 
generated a third consecutive surplus. Accord -
ing to provisional data, the balance was virtu -
ally unchanged at 0.6% of gross domestic 
product (GDP). On the one hand, pressure on 
government budgets was eased by favourable 
cyclical developments and by interest expend -
iture being lower again. On the other hand, the 
underlying fiscal stance was expansionary, meaning that the surplus shrank once adjusted 
for cyclical impacts and interest expenditure 
(see also pages  57 and  58). All in all, public 
finances  benefited from significant revenue 
increases , not least from profit- related taxes. 
However, expenditure also rose fairly steeply in 
some cases, chiefly in relation to the provision 
of support for refugees, which rose consider -
ably after immigration reached its peak in 
autumn  2015 and continued into last year – 
albeit  at a significantly lower rate. This was 
compounded by substantial additional expend -
iture in areas such as pensions and healthcare. 
The debt ratio stood at 69.4% at the end of the 
third quarter of 2016, well below the level at 
the end of 2015 (71.2%).
A similar surplus looks set to be recorded for 
the current year, and the debt ratio is expected 
to continue its marked downward trend. On 
the one hand, economic activity and continued 
drops in interest expenditure are likely to ease 
the strain on public coffers. On the other hand, 
the fiscal policy stance remains moderately 
expan sionary. This is attributable to significant 
expenditure hikes caused, for instance, by the 
expansion of the benefits provided under the 
public long- term care insurance scheme, the 
sharp pension rise in mid-2016 and increased 
funding for childcare, infrastructure and the 
military.1
Thanks in part to the positive budgetary devel -
opments observed over recent years, it has 
already  been possible to significantly reduce 2016 brought 
to a close with another marked surplus
Further fall in debt ratio
Similar surplus 
likely in 2017 if debt ratio continues  to drop
Rapid scaling- 
back of debt ratio …General government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties.
Deutsche Bundesbank4344454647
432101
––––+As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure 
Revenue 
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016Fiscal balance38394041
Taxes and social contributions 1
* The section entitled “General government budget” relates 
to data from the national accounts and the Maastricht 
debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting on the 
budgets of central, state and local government and of the 
social security funds is based on the figures as defined in 
the government finance statistics (which are generally in 
line with the budget accounts).
1 In addition to uncertainties at the international level, Ger -
man public finances are exposed to risks stemming, in par -
ticular, from court rulings in connection with the phasing- 
out of nuclear energy and in relation to the nuclear fuel 
tax.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
56

The structural development of German public fi  nances – 
results  of the disaggregated framework for 2016
According to provisional data, Germany’s 
general government budget posted a sur-
plus once again in 2016.1 At 0.6% of gross 
domestic product (GDP), this roughly 
matched the previous year’s level (0.7% of 
GDP). The role played by cyclical infl  uences 
and specifi  c temporary effects is estimated 
using the “disaggregated framework” for analysing public fi  nances.
2 Any further 
changes in the revenue and expenditure ratios are classifi  ed as structural, and their 
major determinants identifi  ed. The main re-sults of this analysis for 2016 are presented below.
3
The cyclical infl  uence on the year- on- year change in the fi  scal balance was slightly positive. After adjustment for cyclical and 
temporary effects (the latter of which were 
unremarkable last year), there was a slight 
deterioration in the structural fi  scal balance 
in relation to trend GDP . The structural surplus  was thus roughly the same as the 
unadjusted value.
The unadjusted revenue ratio increased by 
0.3 percentage point; the structural change was similar. A signifi  cant increase in the tax 
and social contributions ratio contrasted 
with a slight decline in other revenue. The 
latter was depressed by lower interest in-
come and the Bundesbank’s reduced profi  t distribution.
4 The increase in the tax and so-
cial contributions ratio was largely attribut-
able to slight structural shifts within GDP 
which had a positive effect on its “revenue richness” and, in particular, surprisingly high growth in profi  t- related taxes. The develop-ment of entrepreneurial and invest ment in-come (used here as a macroeconomic refer-ence variable) and the estimated impact of 
legislative changes would have led one to expect a signifi  cantly more subdued devel-
opment (residual: +0.2 percentage point). The ratio was increased slightly by fi  scal 
drag,5 while it was reduced in net terms by 
legislative changes (income tax shortfalls on the one hand and higher additional contri-bution rates applied by the statutory health insurance institutions on the other).
The unadjusted expenditure ratio rose by 
0.3 percentage point and thus slightly less 
than the structural ratio, which was primar-ily due to the GDP’s denominator increasing slightly more strongly than its trend because 
of cyclical infl  uences. Interest expenditure 
fell again, which was due fi  rst and foremost 
to the benefi  cial funding conditions.6 The 
structural ratio of other expenditure went 
up by 0.7 percentage point overall. This was 
chiefl  y because of signifi  cant net increases 
in social expenditure, which were predom-
inantly linked to support for refugees and a rise in pension and healthcare expenditure. Despite subdued price developments, inter-mediate consumption also increased, appar-ently partly as a result of additional expend-
1 As defi  ned in the national accounts.
2 For a more detailed description of the framework 
and the standardised method of determining the 
cyclical  component used in the Eurosystem, see Deut-
sche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for 
analysing public fi  nances: Germany’s fi  scal track record 
between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 
2006, pp 61-76.
3 These results are subject to amendments arising 
from revisions to the national accounts fi  gures or to 
the macroeconomic outlook.
4 While the quota share was somewhat higher than in 
the previous year, the fi  gure in the national accounts 
(after factoring out a release of provisions) saw a con-siderable decline.
5 In this context, the term “fi  scal drag” encompasses 
the total (positive) revenue effect of income tax bracket 
creep and the (negative) impact of the fact that spe-
cifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices.
6 The breakdown of the change in interest expend-
iture for 2016 is not shown as the debt ratio for the 
year’s end is not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
57

iture on refugees. By contrast, there was a 
decline in transfers to the EU budget, some 
of which were retroactively cut in accord-
ance with the Own Resources Decision for 
the 2014-2020 fi  nancial framework, which 
was ratifi  ed last year.
To sum up, Germany’s public fi  nances re-
corded a notable surplus in 2016, both in 
unadjusted and structural terms. A positive 
cyclical trend and a further decrease in 
interest expenditure outweighed the expan-sionary budgetary policy stance. In com-
parison with 2007, ie prior to the fi  nancial 
and economic crisis, the structural fi  scal bal-ance saw a marked improvement of around 
one percentage point. However, interest expend iture relief increased by half over that period, while the structural primary 
surplus ratio deteriorated by ½ percentage 
point.Structural development*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016Total 
2008 to 
2016
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 1.0 3.3 0.9 – 0.2 0.5 0.4 – 0.1 0.4
Cyclical component 1 0.4 – 1.7 0.2 0.8 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4
Temporary effects 1 – 0.3 0.2 – 1.0 1.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0
Fiscal balance – 0.4 – 1.5 – 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.2 0.8 0.0 – 0.2 0.9
Interest payable 2 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 1.4
Owing to change in average 
interest rate – 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 . – 1.6
Owing to change in debt level 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 . 0.3
Primary balance – 0.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 1.4 0.7 – 0.1 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5
Revenue 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2 1.2 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.3 1.1
Taxes and social contributions 0.2 – 1.0 – 0.4 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.8
Fiscal drag 3 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.7
Decoupling of macroeco-nomic reference variables 
from GDP 0.2 – 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.1 0.4
Legislative changes – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.6 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 1.7
Residual 0.5 – 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.5
of which profi  t-related taxes
4 0.5 – 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 1.0
Non-tax revenue 5 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.3
Primary expenditure 0.7 0.8 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 0.3 – 0.3 0.2 0.7 1.6
Social payments 6 0.2 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.9
Subsidies – 0.0 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1
Compensation of employees 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.0
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.9
Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Other expenditure 7 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.1 – 0.2 0.3 – 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
Memo itemPension expenditure
8 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 0.4
Healthcare expenditure 9 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.9
Labour market expenditure 10 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.9
Long-term care expenditure 11 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.2
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. 1 Year- on- year change in the ratio to nominal GDP . 2 The breakdown for 2016 is not shown as the debt ratio for the year’s end is not yet available. 3 In this context, the term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the overall revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the impact 
of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 4 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business 
tax, investment income tax. 5 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 6 Including other current 
transfers to households. 7 Other current transfers, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 8 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, spending on recipients of civil servant pensions as well as payments by 
the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 9 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assis-
tance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 10 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the reintegration payment paid to central government (from 2008 to 2013)) and central government expenditure on unemployment welfare 
benefi  t (II) and on labour market reintegration measures. 11 Spending by the public long-term care insurance scheme.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
58

the debt ratio from its record level of more 
than 80% in 2010. By 2020, it should be back 
below the 60% mark again for the first time 
since 2002. While any decline in the debt ratio 
reduces the interest burden, the key driver be -
hind this reduction in recent years has been 
considerably more favourable funding costs, in 
particular. The average rate of interest on gov -
ernment debt fell from 4¼% in 2007 (pre- crisis) 
to 2% recently. In arithmetical terms, this re -
sulted in interest savings of 1½% of GDP (€47 
billion) in 2016 alone. However, the very low 
interest rate level at present belies the long-  
term burdens of government debt and paints 
an overly favourable picture of public finances.
Rising social spending caused by demographics 
in Germany presents a convincing argument 
for rapidly scaling back the government debt 
ratio. The current planning, which envisages a 
structural surplus of ¼% to ½% of GDP , does 
not appear too ambitious. At the same time, 
structural policies that strengthen the forces of 
growth are desirable.2 These also include in -
vestment to maintain good infrastructure; this 
could, however, be financed without having 
to increase debt, but it is chiefly a question of 
fiscal  policy priorities.
One factor that has likely been instrumental in 
reversing the debt trend of the previous dec -
ades is the introduction of the debt brake. Its 
purpose is to safeguard sound public finances 
and prevent the offloading of an ever greater 
share of the burden onto future generations. 
With this in mind, it is advisable to generally 
factor in moderate structural surpluses as safety 
margins so that some room for manoeuvre 
within the scope of normal budget limits can 
be retained in the event of unfavourable devel -
opments. This became apparent, by way of ex -
ample, back when the budget was initially ex -
pected to suffer a significant deterioration in 
response to high numbers of incoming refu -
gees. The available safety margin made it pos -
sible to first wait and see how this situation 
progressed – something that was difficult to 
gauge in advance. As things currently stand, for the time being it may even be possible to 
dispense with measures that would leave a 
hole in the budget.
The European fiscal rules are continuing to lose 
their binding force, however. With its call back 
in autumn 2016 for a distinct loosening of the 
euro area’s fiscal stance, the European Com -
mission explicitly set aside the objective of sus -
tainable public finances in favour of a coordin -
ated economic fine- tuning approach.3 In the 
past, however, such attempts to steer the 
economy have met with little success due to a 
number of fundamental issues.4 The upswing 
in the euro area’s economic activity has re -
cently grown stronger, while unemployment 
has fallen markedly compared with its peak 
level during the crisis. According to the Euro -
pean Commission’s assessment, the modest 
economic slack in the euro area as a whole will 
also be reduced next year even without any 
additional fiscal stimulus. However, the debt 
ratios in various member states are still very 
high. In many cases, there is no sign as yet of 
these ratios being rapidly reduced as a precau -
tion against a resurgent interest rate level, 
amongst other reasons. In addition, the major -
ity of medium- term budgetary objectives re -
main far from being met. In this respect, public 
finances in some countries still represent a 
major source of uncertainty. This is also partly 
reflected in risk premiums on government bond 
yields. Binding fiscal rules equally borne by all 
member states, not to mention a credible no-  … advisable not 
least in view of demographic trends
Great import -
ance of effective 
fiscal rules and consistent com-pliance with them at both 
the national …… and Euro-
pean level
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
Report , November 2016, pp 62-63.
3 See Communication from the Commission to the Euro -
pean Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and 
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, 
Towards  a positive fiscal stance for the euro area, Brussels, 
16 November 2016, COM (2016) 727 final.
4 Using fiscal policy to actively stimulate the economy 
should be reserved for exceptional situations and requires 
that public finances have a solid foundation. For more in -
formation, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Fiscal policy, Monthly 
Report, October 2010, pp 81-82.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
59

bail- out clause, remain key prerequisites for a 
euro area focused on stability.5
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue6 recorded a significant rise of 4½% 
in 2016 (see the above chart and the table on 
page 61). Compared with the official November 
2016 forecast, figures have thus been revised 
upwards by €6 billion. This is largely due to the 
fact that – contrary to expectations – corpor -
ation tax refunds as a result of previous court 
rulings7 have, for the most part, not yet been 
paid out. All in all, revenue growth from profit- 
related taxes, in particular, remained strong. 
The sharp rise in wage tax receipts primarily 
reflects  the increase in gross wages and salaries . 
The additional revenue generated by bracket 
creep in income taxation was somewhat more 
than offset by revenue shortfalls resulting from 
legislative changes (in particular, higher income 
tax allowances, a rightward shift in other in -
come tax thresholds and the rise in child bene -
fit). Turnover tax revenue likewise climbed 
markedly and was largely in line with its macro -
economic reference variables.According to the official estimate of November 
2016, an increase in tax revenue of around 4% 
(including local government taxes) is expected 
for 2017. In the meantime, however, amend -
ments to tax legislation have been adopted 
that are putting the brakes on growth (chiefly 
the further cut in income taxes and the rise in 
child benefit). Moreover, the rate of change is 
significantly dampened by the fact that, for the 
most part, the envisaged burdens stemming 
from the aforementioned court rulings did not 
come to pass last year and will now largely 
make themselves felt this year.
Central government budget
According to provisional figures, the central 
government budget recorded a surplus of €6 
billion last year.8 However, this represented a 
marked year-  on- year decline (2015: €12 bil -
lion), not least on account of spending in 
connec tion with refugee migration. Revenue 
growth remained subdued at 2%. Despite size -
able tax- share transfers to state government to 
offset part of its refugee- related expenditure, 
tax revenue was up somewhat more sharply at 
3%. However, other revenue fell relative to val -
ues recorded in 2015, which had been elevated Tax revenue up 
considerably in 2016Growth 
dampened  in 
current year
Significant 
surplus  once again for 2016 as a wholeTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201601234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
5 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Ap -
proaches to strengthening the regulatory framework of 
European monetary union, Monthly Report, March 2015, 
pp  15-37; and Deutsche Bundesbank, Approaches to 
resolv ing sovereign debt crises in the euro area, Monthly 
Report, July 2016, pp 41-62.
6 Including transfers to the EU budget –  which are 
deducted  from German tax revenue  – but excluding 
receipts  from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
7 Rulings by the Federal Fiscal Court of 25 June 2014 (I R 
33/ 09) and of 30 July 2014 (I R 74/ 12) on section 40a of 
the Act on Asset Management Companies (Gesetz über 
Kapitalanlagegesellschaften)  and STEKO (section 8b (3) of 
the Corporation Tax Act (Körperschaftsteuergesetz) ) (see 
also Bundestags- Drucksache 18/ 5560). In the national 
accounts , such tax refunds are recorded as government 
spending (capital transfers) at the time of the final ruling 
rather than as reducing revenue at the time of payment.
8 According to the press release of the Federal Ministry of 
Finance of 12  January 2017. In the Federal Ministry of 
Finance ’s January 2017 Monthly Report, transfers not yet 
made to the fund to promote municipal investment and to 
state government in connection with the basic allowance 
for the elderly are not taken into account, resulting in a 
(cash) surplus of just over €10 billion being reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
60

by proceeds from the frequency auction. At 
4%, the rise in spending was higher. Although 
interest expenditure was down by €3½ billion, 
this was significantly outweighed by additional 
burdens in the form of higher transfers (also 
due to the discretionary shortfall of €2½ billion 
in the transfer to the health fund coming to an 
end), investment and other operating expend -
iture.
The result was almost €12½ billion better than 
forecast in the 2016 supplementary budget.9 
As a result, the €6 billion withdrawal from the 
refugee reserve that had been planned so as to 
close the 2016 financial year without posting 
any net borrowing, ie with a balanced budget, 
was no longer needed. Revenue exceeded the 
amount envisaged in the budget by €6½ bil -
lion. Despite the tax- share transfer of €4½ bil -
lion to state government at the end of the year, 
tax revenue was up by €1 billion. This was 
accom panied by other additional revenue of 
€5½ billion.10 Expenditure was €5½ billion lower than the amount envisaged in the 
budget. At almost €3 billion, interest expend -
iture alone accounted for half of these savings. 
Premiums paid (€6 billion) when issuing new 
securities made a crucial contribution here. 
These are recognised in profit or loss in their 
full amount in the same year, which increases 
the volatility of interest expenditure and, in the 
event of a sharp shift on the capital markets, 
could lead to significant additional strain being 
placed on the central government budget in 
the short term. In order to ensure that develop -
ments remain more stable – an essential pre -Result consider-
ably better than forecastTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a whole Estimate 
for 2016 as a 
whole
1,2,3Q4
2015 2016 2015 2016
Year-on-year changeYear-on-year 
change %Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total
2 620.3 648.3 + 28.0 +  4.5 +  3.6 166.9 175.8 + 8.9 +  5.3
of which
Wage tax 178.9 184.8 +  5.9 +  3.3 +  3.0 49.8 52.3 + 2.5 +  4.9
Profi  t-related taxes 4 94.4 106.7 + 12.3 + 13.0 +  7.4 21.5 25.8 + 4.3 + 20.1
Assessed income tax 48.6 53.8 +  5.3 + 10.8 +  8.9 12.5 14.4 + 2.0 + 15.8
Corporation tax 19.6 27.4 +  7.9 + 40.1 + 19.8 3.8 6.1 + 2.3 + 59.6
Investment income 
tax5 26.2 25.4 –  0.8 –  3.1 –  4.5 5.2 5.2 + 0.1 +  1.3
Turnover taxes 6 209.9 217.1 +  7.2 +  3.4 +  3.5 54.1 56.1 + 2.0 +  3.6
Energy tax 39.6 40.1 +  0.5 +  1.3 +  1.0 15.2 15.5 + 0.2 +  1.6
Tobacco tax 14.9 14.2 –  0.7 –  4.9 –  2.5 5.0 4.3 – 0.7 – 14.3
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of November 2016. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Tax revenue including (still estimated) local govern-
ment taxes was €15 billion above the November 2015 estimate, which formed the basis for the 2016 central government plan drawn up at the end of 2015. Amendments made to tax legislation since that time played virtually no role in this revision. 4 Employee refunds, 
homebuyers’ grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 5 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed 
taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9 The only difference between the original budget plan 
drawn up at the end of 2015 and the supplementary 
budget draft of November 2016 – which was adopted un -
changed by the Bundestag in February 2017 – was that the 
estimates for interest expenditure were lowered by €3½ 
billion, which covered the newly envisaged transfer to the 
fund to promote municipal investment.
10 Up by just over €½ billion in each case, this included, in 
particular, additional guarantee repayments, the Bundes -
bank’s profit distribution, a contribution refund by the sup -
plementary pension scheme of central and state govern -
ment for salaried employees, and payments from the EU 
budget.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
61

requisite when it comes to budget planning 
and implementation  – in the future, such 
amounts could be spread over a bond’s life.11 
Significant savings were also made vis- à- vis the 
budget plan in the case of investment expend -
iture. In addition to the lower- than- expected 
calls on guarantees, funds used for broadband 
network extension, in particular, fell far below 
what was budgeted for.
Pursuant to the Budget Act (Haushaltsgesetz), 
the surplus is to be transferred to the refugee 
reserve set up at the end of 2015, which will 
grow to €18½ billion as a result. However, as it 
was possible to cover the costs of support for 
refugees without dipping into this reserve last 
year, and spending in connection with this is 
now easier to gauge, it would not appear pru -
dent to top up the reserve as this might effect -
ively cause the funds to be used for other pur -
poses. Instead, rather than using just the 2016 
surplus – as proposed by the Federal Finance 
Minister when presenting the figures  – the entire  reserve could be used to repay debt in 
the budget, which would provide reliable, sus -
tained budget relief by means of lower interest 
expenditure.
In an initial press release published in mid-  
January, the Federal Ministry of Finance put the 
structural result for 2016 as defined in the debt 
brake rules at -0.1% of GDP (see the table on 
page 63). The surplus in the core budget was 
neutralised by a reserve top- up of the same 
amount (no net borrowing).12 A slight cyclical 
burden in arithmetical terms is cancelled out by 
a surplus from financial transactions. The figure 
includes the (provisional) balances of three off- 
budget entities – the flood relief fund, the fund 
to promote municipal investment (excluding 
the additional transfer already taken into 
account  in the core budget) and the energy 
and climate fund – with a total deficit of €2½ 
billion. The reported structural funding gap in 
relation to GDP was therefore ¼ percentage 
point below the debt brake ceiling, with a 
corres ponding amount normally having to 
be  credited to central government’s control 
account .13
The Bundestag adopted the 2017 central gov -
ernment budget, too, with no authorisation for 
net borrowing. As in the 2016 budget, a with -
drawal from the refugee reserve (€6½ billion) is 
planned in order to offset a deficit stemming 
from spending in connection with refugee 
migra tion. However, at least some of the posi -
tive deviations from the budget plan in 2016 
are likely to extend into this year. In particular, 
continued higher-  than-  envisaged grants from Reserve top- up 
not prudentStructural result broadly 
balanced in 
2016, leading to 
considerable 
credit entry for 
control account
Starting point 
for 2017 budget much better 
than 
planned, …Central government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects. 1 2016 Q4 pursuant to preliminary outturn figures.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q415105051015
–––+++
–15–10–50+5+10+15
2016
20152014Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201420162015€ billion
1
1
11 This manner of accounting would be more in line with 
that of the national accounts, to which the EU fiscal rules 
refer.
12 This recording of transfers to and from reserves  contra -
venes the EU fiscal rules. Following these rules, the struc -
tural result would have been 0.2 percentage point higher.
13 For more information on the control account, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The debt brake in Germany – key 
aspects and implementation, Monthly Report, October 
2011, pp 15-39. In a welcome step, the extensive total bal -
ance for this account, which was accrued during the tran -
sitional period for reaching the regular ceiling, was can -
celled once this period came to an end at the close of 
2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
62

the EU and lower net burdens from guarantees 
and investment grants appear likely.14
By contrast, spending on unemployment bene -
fit II (means- tested benefit) could rise more 
sharply than planned. Taking into account last 
year’s actual figures, central government spend -
ing on this item is set to increase by 3%, with 
the benefit increases at the start of the year 
claiming a large part of this. Significant add -
itional expenditure may arise as growing num -
bers of asylum seekers are granted refugee 
status , thereby becoming eligible for basic 
allow ance benefits. While there were many 
successful applications for asylum last year, it is 
unlikely that the majority of these applicants 
have since secured a living wage. In addition, 
there remain a large number of asylum applica -
tions to be processed. Marked burdens may 
also arise in connection with court rulings on 
the accelerated phasing- out of nuclear energy 
or on whether the nuclear fuel tax is constitu -
tional. Furthermore, the Bundesbank’s profit distribution could be reduced on account of 
increased  provisions for interest rate risk arising 
from the public sector purchase programme.
All things considered, it may be possible to 
leave the refugee reserve untouched this year 
as well – provided the current expectations re -
garding macroeconomic developments prove 
true, the interest rate level remains stable at the 
long end and further strains on the central gov -
ernment budget to the benefit of state and 
local government and in the run- up to the gen -
eral election are avoided. The ceiling as defined 
in the debt brake rules would then be main -
tained with a safety margin.
The benchmark figures for the 2018 central 
government budget and the medium- term 
finan cial plan up to 2021 will be adopted by … but there are 
also risks, not least in connec-tion with court rulingsCentral govern-ment budget set to comfortably 
comply with 
debt brake in 
2017, tooKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
 
2015 2016 2017
Actual BudgetSupplemen-
tary budget1Provisional actual Budget
 1 Fiscal balance 11.8 –  6.4 –  6.4 5.9 –  7.0
 2 Coin seigniorage 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
 3 Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 12.1 6.1 6.1 –  6.2 6.7
 4 Net borrowing (1+2+3) – – – – –
 5 Balance of fi  nancial transactions 1.9 0.1 0.1 0.6 –  0.7
 6 Cyclical component in the budget procedure 
2 –  1.4 0.3 0.3 3 –  0.4 –  1.9
 7 Balance of incorporated off-budget entities 4.5 –  5.4 1.0 –  2.5 –  3.2
Energy and climate fund 1.9 –  0.4 –  0.2 –  0.0 –  1.5
Flood assistance fund –  0.9 –  3.5 –  2.2 –  2.3 –  1.0
Fund to promote municipal investment 3.5 –  1.5 3.4 4 –  0.1 –  0.8
 8 Structural net borrowing (4–5–6+7)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) 4.0 –  5.8 0.6 –  2.7 –  0.6
 9 Structural balance (8–2–3) 15.8 – 12.1 –  5.8 3.2 –  7.6
10 Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate 
of potential output 17.5 – 12.1 –  5.7 2.6 –  8.3
11 Debt brake ceiling (from 2016: –0.35% of GDP 5) – 18.6 – 10.2 – 10.2 – 10.2 – 10.6
* For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi  nances, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp 68-69. 1 Draft of November 2016 
adopted by the Bundestag without adjustments. 2 Pursuant to the 2015 budgetary account; provisional. 3 Simplifi  ed procedure applied: 
adjusted to the national accounts fi  gures published in mid-February 2017. 4 Excluding the €3.5 billion transfer taken into account in the 
central government budget (in item 1), which has a negative impact on the balance. 5 GDP: gross domestic product. Here, this refers to 
GDP in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
14 The positive base effect resulting from better- than-  
expected tax revenue could be counteracted in 2017 by 
delayed tax refunds stemming from earlier court rulings; 
see p 60.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
63

the Federal Cabinet in mid- March. Based on 
the November 2016 tax estimate, annual rev -
enue shortfalls of around €2 billion now need 
to be factored in compared with the previous 
financial plan from the summer of 2016. 
Account  now also needs to be taken of the 
income  tax cuts and rises in child benefit from 
2018 onwards, involving losses of up to €3 bil -
lion, as well as the granting of a flat immigrant 
integration payment in the form of forwarded 
turnover tax of €2 billion to the federal states. 
Further revenue- side burdens initially amount -
ing to €9½ billion per year from 2020 onwards 
can be foreseen on the basis of draft legislation 
on the reform of federal financial rela tions. 
Moreover, there are risks attached to the Bun -
desbank’s profit. Defence expenditure may also 
be additionally increased in the medium  term in 
line with the North Atlantic Council’s agree -
ment.15 Overall, the medium- term plans to 
date have included global revenue  shortfalls as 
a precautionary measure. However, some of 
these funds were set aside for the municipal 
relief package of €5 billion per year from 2018 
onwards, which has now been adopted. While 
the remaining provisions are set to grow signifi -
cantly, from €2 billion in 2018 to almost €9 bil -
lion in 2020, they will not be sufficient to fully 
finance the revenue-  side burdens which have 
already been specified in detail. In view of this 
and given the generally high level of uncer -
tainty, it would appear advisable to avoid pla -
cing any further additional burdens on the cen -
tral government budget.
According to provisional figures from the Fed -
eral Ministry of Finance, central government’s 
off- budget entities (excluding bad banks and 
other entities that use commercial double- entry 
bookkeeping) concluded 2016 with a deficit of 
€3 billion. In 2015, they recorded a surplus of 
€9 billion, largely as a result of frontloaded 
payments to the fund to promote municipal 
invest ment and the energy and climate fund. 
As in the previous years, the off- budget entities 
for civil servant pension obligations posted 
marked surpluses (now €2½ billion), and the 
Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) also achieved a surplus of €1 billion resulting from 
repayments of capital injections. By contrast, 
the transfer of revenue obtained in 2015 by the 
restructuring fund to the new European bank 
resolution authority (-€1½ billion) and the pre -
miums on the redemption of an inflation-  
indexed  Federal bond (-€2 billion) had a nega -
tive impact. In addition, the flood assistance 
fund recorded a discernible deficit (-€2½ bil -
lion), largely because of a transfer to the cen -
tral government budget. The fund to promote 
municipal investment registered a slight deficit, 
with withdrawals remaining subdued.16
Central government’s off- budget entities for 
civil servant pension obligations are expected 
to continue recording significant surpluses this 
year. As no repayments of inflation- indexed 
Federal bonds are due, the off- budget entity 
established for that purpose is also likely to 
post a moderate surplus as a result of the regu -
lar transfers it receives. Given cash reporting of 
the increased inflows to the fund to promote 
municipal investment in 2017, it would record a 
discernible surplus, even though significantly 
larger outflows from this fund are likely, not 
least because the field of application has been 
expanded to include education. Although cen -
tral government is expecting the energy and 
climate fund and the flood assistance fund to 
record  deficits, even then a surplus would be 
likely overall.17Substantial 
additional  burdens  to be 
factored into further  planning; leeway thus appears exhausted
Central govern-
ment’s off- budget entities in deficit for 2016 as a whole …… but surplus likely for 2017
15 Summit statement from 5 September 2014.
16 As the supplementary budget for 2016 had not yet 
entered into force when the figures were published, the 
renewed frontloading of transfers to this fund planned by 
central government had not yet been taken into account.
17 It is possible that the foundation for funding nuclear 
waste disposal, which is likely to record one- off revenue of 
around €23½ billion for 2017, will be included in the re -
porting group. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, 
Monthly Report, November 2016, p  68. The European 
Commission must confirm a priori that the arrangement is 
compatible with the EU state aid rules.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
64

State government budgets18
State government’s core budgets concluded 
2016 with a large surplus of €9 billion, which 
was a much better outcome than in 2015 (sur -
plus of €3 billion).19 This improvement was 
due, not least, to transfers of central govern -
ment tax funds. In December, the federal states 
received turnover tax funds via a frontloaded 
final settlement of flat refugee cost reimburse -
ments (€2½ billion), and via a flat immigrant 
integration payment (€2 billion). Buoyed by the 
(thus additionally strengthened) growth in tax 
receipts (+8½%), revenue rose by a total of just 
over 6% (just over €20½ billion). By compari -
son, growth in expenditure was much weaker 
(+4½%, or just under €15 billion). The largest 
single contribution to this growth was made 
by  ongoing payments to local government 
(+11½%, or €8½ billion), which were partly 
financed  from transfers of central government 
funds. In addition, other operating expenditure 
saw exceptionally strong growth of 12½% in 
connection with support for refugees. The rise 
in personnel expenses was much more sub -
dued (+3½%), while the decline in interest 
expend iture (-10½%) had a marked alleviating 
effect on state government finances.
All of the federal states except Saarland fin -
ished 2016 in surplus. While only the consolida -
tion assistance it received enabled Bremen to 
record a small surplus, Berlin, notably, achieved 
a significant surplus even if consolidation assis -
tance is factored out. On balance, the slight 
surplus recorded by North Rhine-  Westphalia 
was evidently due to the realisation of financial 
assets. At its meeting in December 2016, the 
Stability Council concluded that the budgetary 
recovery procedures that had been launched in 
2012 for Berlin and Schleswig- Holstein would 
be closed in 2016, while Bremen and Saarland 
would both require an extension as their 
budget figures were still unsatisfactory.
This year and in the medium term, state gov -
ernment as a whole can be expected to record 
persistent surpluses. This was also reflected by the Federal Ministry of Finance’s projection for 
the period up to 2020, which it put together 
for the Stability Council’s December meeting. 
This envisaged favourable underlying condi -
tions in the form of significant rises in tax rev -
enue and a continued easing of financial pres -
sures thanks to the low interest rates. Central 
government grants to cover refugee- related 
expenses were particularly high last year, how -
ever, and it seems plausible that not all of these 
funds have yet been spent. Furthermore, tax 
refunds due to court rulings, which were ini -
tially expected for last year, may now largely 
take effect in 2017. The surpluses could there -
fore be more moderate than last year.
In December 2016, the Federal Cabinet adopted 
the draft legislation on the reform of federal 
financial relations from 2020 onwards, which 
was based on the agreements reached by cen -
tral and state government in October 2016. Al -
though the planned reform simplifies the state 
government financial equalisation system, it 
does not greatly improve its transparency or 
the incentives for state governments to take 
respon sibility for their own fiscal and economic 
policy.20 In future, central government will only 
grant its envisaged budgetary recovery assis -
tance for Bremen and Saarland in full if a por -
tion of the funds – albeit a comparatively small 
one – is used to pay off debt. As well as ex -
tending the field of application for its invest -
ment grants to include education in municipal -
ities with weak financial capacity, central gov -
ernment is to gain stronger powers to influence 
the state government investment programmes 
receiving financial assistance in order to better 
ensure their compatibility with its goals.Large surplus in 
2016, not least due to transfer of central government  tax funds
Almost all states 
posted surpluses but recovery procedures still ongoing for Bremen and Saarland
Surpluses 
continuing  this year and in the medium termDraft legislation on reform of 
federal financial 
relations 
attaches repay-ment conditions to recovery 
assistance …
18 The development of local government finances in the 
third quarter of 2016 was analysed in the short articles of 
the Bundesbank’s January 2017 Monthly Report. These are 
the most recent data available.
19 According to the monthly cash data, and adjusted for 
the booking of repayments to off- budget entities in Saxony 
which affected the deficit. According to the quarterly cash 
statistics, the surplus for 2015 came to only €½ billion, par -
ticularly because closing entries in favour of off- budget 
entities  were made.
20 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public 
finances, Monthly Report, November 2016, pp 63-71.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
65

The fact that the Stability Council will, in future, 
monitor central and state government’s com -
pliance with the constitutionally- enshrined 
debt brake while taking recourse to the Euro -
pean fiscal rules is a welcome development. 
Although  the details have yet to be confirmed, 
this would mark out important guiding prin -
ciples, such as the inclusion of the off- budget 
entities categorised as belonging to the gov -
ernment sector21 and a focus on the fiscal bal -
ance rather than net borrowing.22 To ensure 
successful monitoring of budgets within the 
German federal system, comprehensive, com -
parable data on the budgetary developments 
and planning of the individual state govern -
ments must also be made available.23 As a gen -
eral point, it would be desirable to ensure that 
sanctions can be imposed if a state is found to 
have responded inadequately to undesirable 
budgetary developments. Obliging states to 
repay debt promptly could also play a major 
role in securing desirable outcomes, however.Social security funds24
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
According to provisional figures, the statutory 
pension insurance scheme recorded a deficit of 
€2½ billion in 2016. This was around €2 billion 
lower than estimated, and the reserve remained 
above its statutory upper limit at just over 1.6 
times the scheme’s monthly expenditure. How -
ever, the deficit was larger than it had been a 
year earlier (2015: €1½ billion). This was due to 
the exceptionally large mid- year pension in -
crease (western Germany: 4.25%; eastern Ger -
many 5.95%), which was driven up by a special 
factor that had dampened the previous 
increase .25 However, growth in contribution 
receipts  also remained strong (+4%), buoyed 
by the favourable employment and wage 
develop ments. A marked rise in revenue is ex -
pected again this year, partly because a reduc -
tion factor of just over €1 billion in the central 
government grant will no longer apply. Finan -
cial pressures on the scheme are set to increase 
in view of demographic change alone, leading 
to a greater deple tion of reserves. Central gov -
ernment’s pension insurance report published 
in autumn 2016 states that contribution rate 
increases can be expected from 2022 onwards, 
as the lower reserve limit of 0.2 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure would other -
wise be undershot.
The deterioration in the scheme’s finances will 
be exacerbated by central government’s new … and envis-
ages monitoring of debt brake in line with Euro-pean rules2016 deficit smaller than 
planned but 
depletion of 
reserves foresee-
able in view of 
demographic 
changeFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). 
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 201664666870727476
–4–20+2+4+6€ billion, quarterly data
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)ExpenditureLog scale
Revenue
21 For example, Berlin intends to transfer most of last 
year’s surplus to a special fund for investment in infra -
structure. Its subsequent deficits would then be counted 
towards  the debt brake limit.
22 This means that transfers to and from the reserves 
would have no impact on compliance with the upper 
limits.
23 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The role of the Stability 
Council, Monthly Report, October 2011, p 23.
24 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the third quarter 
of 2016 was discussed in the December 2016 Monthly 
Report . These are the most recent data available.
25 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
Report , May 2016, p 72.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
66

pension policy initiatives, which will entail sig -
nificant additional expenditure in the future. 
These notably include the harmonisation of 
pensions in eastern Germany with those in 
western Germany and pension increases for 
persons with reduced earning capacity. The 
benchmark pension in eastern Germany is to 
be increased in seven stages from its current 
level of just over 94% of the western German 
level so that the two are harmonised by 2025 
at the latest. In return, the higher valuation of 
the wages of persons in eastern Germany in -
sured for pension purposes is to be gradually 
phased out. Under the planned design, how -
ever, there will be a long transitional period 
during which pensions will increase further in 
net terms in eastern Germany.26 This will profit 
those already drawing a pension and those 
approaching  retirement, while younger cohorts 
will not experience a net benefit from the 
higher valuation of wages. To finance part of 
this additional expenditure, transfers from the 
central government budget are to be increased 
in stages from 2022 to 2025 by €2 billion in the 
long term, which corresponds to around half of 
the additional expenditure. For the pensions of 
persons with reduced earning capacity, a fur -
ther extension of the reckonable period by 
three years is planned in stages between 2018 
and 2024.27 In future, it will thus be assumed 
that those with reduced earning capacity have 
made contributions up to the age of 65. The 
intention is, not least, to reduce the relatively 
high proportion of persons with reduced earn -
ing capacity who additionally depend on the 
basic allowance. If the expansion of benefits 
increases  the number of people claiming pen -
sions for reduced earning capacity, this will put 
more pressure on the finances of the statutory 
pension insurance scheme.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency’s core budget 
was €5½ billion in surplus in 2016, thus ex -
ceeding the figure for 2015 (€3½ billion) and, 
to a greater extent, the budget estimate (€2 billion). The scheme’s reserves thus swelled to 
€13½ billion.28 While revenue grew signifi -
cantly (by 3½%), expenditure fell (by just over 
1½%). There was a fall in spending on un -
employment insurance benefit I (insurance-  Intended benefit 
increases put more pressure on statutory pension insurance  scheme’s finances
Surplus 
increased significantly  in 2016Finances of theFederal Employment Agency
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 20167.07.58.08.59.09.510.0
1.42.03.04.05.06.0–10+1+2€ billion, quarterly data
Log scale
Revenue
Log scale, reduced
Expenditure on ...
... vocational training... unemployment benefit I
    and short-time  working benefitsLin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (–)Total expenditure 1
26 The combination of a lower benchmark pension and a 
higher valuation of wages currently means that in eastern 
Germany the same wage results in higher pension entitle -
ments than in western Germany.
27 The reckonable time was already extended by 2 years 
through the 2014 pension benefits package.
28 The free reserves (excluding the components assigned 
for insolvency benefit and winter construction workers 
benefit) stood at €11½ billion. In addition, the pension 
fund once again posted a surplus of almost €½ billion, 
which brought its reserves for the complete funding of civil 
servants’ pensions up to €5½ billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
67

related benefit) and on subsidies for partial 
retire ment, which are being phased out. By 
contrast, more funds were spent on active 
labour  market policy measures. This reflects 
greater uptake of education and training pro -
grammes, not least in view of refugee migra -
tion.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan 
for 2017, which was approved in December last 
year, envisages a marked reduction of the sur -
plus to €1½ billion. A sharp rise in expenditure 
on active labour market policy measures (of 
one- quarter to €9 billion) is planned. This is 
partly due to additional costs relating to the 
labour  market integration of refugees, but the 
majority is accounted for by other measures. 
Unemployment insurance benefit I is also set to 
see a strong rise. However, the underlying 
assump tion of a significant increase in the 
number of beneficiaries appears pessimistic in 
view of favourable labour market develop -
ments, which are also predicted in central gov -
ernment’s forecasts. Part of the deterioration 
(of just over €½ billion) in the budget position 
is due to an additional transfer to the Federal 
Employment Agency’s pension fund, which is related to the current low interest rates. All in 
all, in light of the cautious expenditure appro -
priations in the core budget, the surplus could 
turn out to be much larger than projected.
According to current forecasts, the labour mar -
ket situation is expected to remain favourable 
in the next few years. If the current expenditure 
policy continues, the agency seems likely to see 
further rises in its surplus and a sharp increase 
in its reserve. In general, however, a change of 
tack should be viewed critically. In the past, 
work promotion schemes have often proved to 
be counterproductive,29 and tasks for society as 
a whole should not generally be funded from 
contributions but from tax revenue. Although 
the cyclical volatility of the agency’s finances 
means that it generally makes sense to build up 
a large reserve in good times, given the current 
outlook, the option of cutting the current con -
tribution rate of 3.0% would be worth consid -
eration.Surplus planned 
for 2017 despite strong expend-iture growthContribution 
rate cut worth 
consideration
29 See, inter alia, T Büttner, T Schewe and G Stephan, The 
effectiveness of labour market policy instruments, IAB Brief 
Report 8/ 2015.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2017  
68

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of the  
European monetary union  ...........................................................................................  79•
 9 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 0 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 1 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 2 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2017
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2015          Apr 10.4 4.8 5.2 4.8 0.9 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.07 0.00 0.8
         May 11.0 4.8 4.8 4.9 1.3 0.5 − 3.0 − 0.11 − 0.01 1.3         June 11.2 4.9 4.6 4.8 1.3 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.01 1.6
         July 11.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 1.8 0.7 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.3 5.0 4.8 4.8 2.2 1.0 − 3.2 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.3 5.0 4.7 4.9 2.2 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct 11.5 5.4 5.2 5.0 2.3 0.9 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 10.8 5.1 4.9 4.9 2.6 1.1 − 3.3 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.5 5.2 4.7 4.9 2.2 0.6 − 3.1 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016          Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 5.0 2.8 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.4 5.5 5.1 5.2 3.2 1.2 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.3 5.6 5.2 5.0 3.1 1.1 − 3.3 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.2 4.8 5.0 3.4 1.3 − 2.8 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 3.6 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.8 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.8 1.5 − 2.3 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July 8.6 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.8 1.3 − 2.6 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.8 1.6 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.4 5.0 5.1 4.9 3.8 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct 8.1 4.7 4.5 4.8 4.1 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.2 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 ... 4.6 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2015          Apr 
+ 24,556 + 29,837 − 15,944 + 15,420 + 24,203 + 4,510 − 56,282 − 3,795 1.0779 89.7 86.1
         May + 5,617 + 26,483 + 54,744 + 5,252 + 40,435 + 4,794 + 5,937 − 1,674 1.1150 91.6 87.8
         June + 35,316 + 34,541 + 43,464 − 5,518 + 32,875 − 5,602 + 18,615 + 3,093 1.1213 92.3 88.5
         July + 39,320 + 39,428 + 31,405 + 6,278 + 75,561 + 10,958 − 54,393 − 7,000 1.0996 91.3 87.5
         Aug + 20,424 + 19,392 + 13,732 + 9,996 + 22,184 − 6,862 − 12,975 + 1,390 1.1139 93.0 88.9         Sep + 34,955 + 30,024 + 49,124 − 455 + 22,322 − 4,851 + 23,825 + 8,282 1.1221 93.8 89.6
         Oct + 30,300 + 33,219 + 112,822 + 38,618 + 37,886 + 12,468 + 29,858 − 6,009 1.1235 93.6 89.6
         Nov + 30,977 + 32,225 − 34,645 − 73,413 + 17,916 + 21,426 − 3,037 + 2,462 1.0736 91.1 87.1         Dec + 41,382 + 31,353 + 78,235 + 55,333 + 67,028 + 21,758 − 74,010 + 8,126 1.0877 92.5 88.3
2016          Jan + 8,607 + 13,713 − 15,112 − 19,623 + 71,724 + 15,117 − 81,176 − 1,155 1.0860 93.6 89.1
         Feb + 14,431 + 27,486 − 17,151 + 42,519 + 22,529 + 13,156 − 96,416 + 1,061 1.1093 94.7 90.0         Mar + 36,478 + 39,231 + 36,866 + 16,100 − 707 − 942 + 21,351 + 1,064 1.1100 94.1 89.5
         Apr + 35,309 + 35,279 + 21,012 − 8,526 + 123,736 − 21,344 − 71,237 − 1,618 1.1339 94.8 90.1
         May + 15,523 + 32,604 + 11,444 + 21,888 + 5,245 − 12,989 − 5,810 + 3,109 1.1311 95.1 90.5         June + 37,242 + 39,174 + 29,799 − 51,467 + 27,570 − 10,273 + 63,274 + 695 1.1229 94.7 90.2
         July + 36,053 + 33,577 + 24,385 + 31,871 + 58,822 + 14,718 − 80,148 − 877 1.1069 94.9 90.4
         Aug + 23,718 + 25,629 + 51,851 + 42,180 + 70,365 + 6,742 − 69,248 + 1,812 1.1212 95.2 90.6         Sep + 33,951 + 33,918 + 89,485 + 51,183 + 38,633 + 4,563 − 11,697 + 6,802 1.1212 95.4 90.6
         Oct + 32,589 + 26,972 − 9,110 + 71,290 − 3,309 + 8,756 − 81,771 − 4,076 1.1026 95.5 p 90.8
         Nov + 40,522 + 33,648 + 32,474 + 32,092 − 38,373 + 2,366 + 34,150 + 2,239 1.0799 95.0 p 90.2         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0543 94.2 p 89.6
2017          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0614 94.4 p 89.8
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2014 1.2 1.6 1.6 2.8 − 0.6 0.6 0.4 8.5 0.1 2.1
2015 2.0 1.5 1.7 1.4 0.3 1.3 − 0.2 26.3 0.7 2.7
2016 ... ... 1.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2015          Q3 1.9 1.3 1.8 1.9 − 0.1 1.1 − 2.3 24.4 0.6 3.5
         Q4 2.0 1.6 2.1 0.8 0.8 1.3 0.9 28.4 1.0 2.7
2016          Q1 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.3 − 0.8 3.9 0.9 2.1
         Q2 1.6 1.3 3.2 0.7 1.6 1.7 − 0.4 3.1 1.1 2.0
         Q3 1.8 1.3 1.5 1.3 1.6 0.7 2.2 6.9 0.6 0.3
         Q4 1.7 ... 1.2 ... ... 0.9 0.2 ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2014 0.9 0.9 1.3 4.3 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.9
2015 2.0 − 0.1 0.8 − 2.4 − 1.2 1.6 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.6
2016 e 1.4 ... p 1.0 1.7 2.2 0.4 2.4 p 0.5 1.7 4.9
2015          Q3 2.5 0.1 1.6 − 4.0 − 0.2 1.2 1.5 38.5 2.1 3.8
         Q4 1.8 1.3 − 0.3 − 5.5 − 0.1 2.0 2.6 36.6 1.3 3.0
2016          Q1 1.3 4.7 1.3 − 2.3 − 0.4 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.2 1.7 3.8
         Q2 1.1 3.6 0.6 − 1.8 2.9 0.6 5.0 0.7 0.0 4.4
         Q3 1.0 4.8 0.7 3.1 2.8 − 0.5 1.7 − 0.8 1.6 1.4
         Q4 e 2.0 ... p 1.2 8.0 3.2 0.5 3.8 p 2.3 3.5 9.8
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.2
2015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2015          Q4 81.6 79.2 84.6 71.0 80.1 83.4 64.2 − 75.9 71.0
2016          Q1 81.9 80.0 85.0 72.5 79.5 82.6 65.5 − 77.1 72.3
         Q2 81.5 79.3 84.6 73.8 78.0 82.8 67.8 − 76.5 73.0
         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.8 67.8 − 76.0 71.8
         Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.6 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
2017          Q1 82.5 80.7 85.9 74.4 81.0 84.4 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.8
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.9
2016 10.0 8.0 4.1 ... 8.8 9.9 ... 8.0 ... 9.7
2016          Aug 10.0 7.9 4.2 7.8 8.7 10.2 23.3 7.9 11.5 9.8
         Sep 9.8 7.6 4.0 7.2 8.7 9.9 23.1 7.6 11.8 9.7
         Oct 9.7 7.6 4.0 7.2 8.7 9.7 23.0 7.5 11.8 9.6
         Nov 9.7 7.6 3.9 6.7 8.7 9.5 23.0 7.3 12.0 9.6
         Dec 9.6 7.6 3.7 ... 8.7 9.6 ... 7.2 12.0 9.8
2017          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7.1 ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2016          Aug 0.2 2.0 0.3 1.1 0.5 0.4 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Sep 0.4 1.8 0.5 1.7 0.5 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 0.1 0.5
         Oct 0.5 1.9 0.7 1.0 0.6 0.5 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 1.1
         Nov 0.6 1.7 0.7 1.4 0.6 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 0.1 1.2
         Dec 1.1 2.2 1.7 2.4 1.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 2.1
2017          Jan e 1.8 ... 1.9 ... ... ... ... ... e 0.7 ...
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2013 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 13.2 − 5.7 − 2.7 − 0.9
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.2 − 4.0 − 3.6 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 1.6
2015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.7 0.1 − 2.8 − 3.5 − 7.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.3
 
General government debt 8
 
2013 91.3 105.4 77.5 10.2 56.5 92.3 177.4 119.5 129.0 39.0
2014 92.0 106.5 74.9 10.7 60.2 95.3 179.7 105.2 131.9 40.7
2015 90.4 105.8 71.2 10.1 63.6 96.2 177.4 78.6 132.3 36.3
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. tions. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January,
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual April, July and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro-area aggregate calculated from seasonally ad- seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
justed data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day varia- calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.5 4.7 8.4 1.4 0.6 0.9 2.6 3.1 1.4 − 1.5 2014
1.8 3.5 7.4 2.0 1.0 1.6 3.8 2.3 3.2 1.7 2015
... ... ... 2.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2016
1.8 1.6 7.3 2.0 1.4 1.6 3.9 2.0 3.5 2.1 2015          Q32.1 3.2 7.1 1.4 1.1 1.5 4.6 2.8 3.3 2.6          Q4
2.4 3.5 5.5 1.5 1.6 0.9 3.4 2.3 3.6 2.6 2016          Q1
1.9 5.0 3.4 2.3 1.3 1.0 3.8 2.9 3.5 2.8          Q2
1.7 4.6 3.0 2.4 1.3 1.4 3.0 2.7 3.3 2.9          Q3
3.0 ... ... 2.3 1.8 ... 3.0 ... ... ...          Q4
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
0.1 4.4 − 5.7 − 2.9 1.0 1.8 8.6 1.7 1.3 − 0.7 20144.6 0.9 6.3 − 3.4 2.2 1.7 7.0 5.1 3.4 3.4 20152.3 ... ...
p 1.9 ... 1.1 3.4 p 6.6 1.8 ... 2016
3.9 0.1 7.3 − 5.4 3.0 2.4 6.1 5.3 4.2 4.5 2015          Q35.4 1.0 5.1 − 4.5 2.4 2.2 5.0 3.6 4.8 6.2          Q4
5.4 1.5 − 5.2 − 2.7 1.8 0.9 2.3 5.8 3.0 9.9 2016          Q1
− 0.9 − 0.5 − 4.6 2.7 1.7 0.8 6.2 5.7 1.4 8.4          Q2
2.3 − 1.7 − 3.4 3.3 1.0 0.4 1.9 7.0 0.9 5.9          Q3
2.4 ... ...
p 5.0 ... 2.2 2.9 p 8.0 1.7 ...          Q4
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
74.3 72.2 77.9 82.2 83.4 80.4 83.4 82.3 78.1 61.1 2015          Q4
75.9 72.4 77.8 81.4 85.0 80.0 85.4 83.2 79.0 56.9 2016          Q1
76.1 76.1 78.9 81.7 84.0 80.8 83.0 83.1 77.8 63.9          Q2
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7          Q3
76.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6          Q4
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2017          Q1
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
10.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 2015
8.0 6.3 4.8 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 7.9 19.6 13.3 2016
7.6 6.3 4.8 5.8 6.2 10.9 9.5 7.8 19.3 13.1 2016          Aug 
7.6 6.3 4.7 5.7 6.0 10.9 9.4 7.7 19.1 13.4          Sep 
7.6 6.3 4.8 5.6 5.8 10.6 9.2 7.6 18.9 13.8          Oct 
7.9 6.2 4.6 5.6 5.7 10.5 9.0 7.6 18.7 14.2          Nov 
8.1 6.3 4.5 5.4 5.7 10.2 8.8 7.5 18.4 14.3          Dec 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2017          Jan 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
0.5 − 0.2 1.0 0.1 0.6 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.6 2016          Aug 
0.6 0.3 0.9 − 0.1 1.1 0.7 − 0.5 0.2 0.0 − 0.4          Sep 
0.7 0.7 0.5 0.3 1.4 1.1 − 0.3 0.7 0.5 − 1.0          Oct 
1.1 0.6 0.8 0.4 1.5 0.5 − 0.2 0.7 0.5 − 0.8          Nov 
2.0 1.6 1.0 0.7 1.6 0.9 0.2 0.6 1.4 0.1          Dec 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2017          Jan 
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 2.6 1.0 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 15.0 − 7.0 − 4.9 2013− 0.7 1.5 − 2.1 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.0 − 6.0 − 8.8 2014− 0.2 1.6 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.7 − 5.1 − 1.1 2015
 
General government debt 8
 
38.7 23.5 68.4 67.7 81.3 129.0 54.7 71.0 95.4 102.2 201340.5 22.7 67.0 67.9 84.4 130.6 53.6 80.9 100.4 107.1 201442.7 22.1 64.0 65.1 85.5 129.0 52.5 83.1 99.8 107.5 2015
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. latest data publication under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat).
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro-area aggregate: Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank
European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          May 33.3 16.9 − 0.8 16.4 31.2 25.1 − 55.1 − 80.2 − 21.6 − 8.3 − 1.7 − 23.9 12.3
         June 11.1 − 12.1 − 28.2 23.3 24.5 57.4 − 88.0 − 145.3 − 21.3 − 13.9 − 1.2 − 13.4 7.1
         July 54.7 50.9 51.5 3.8 4.1 − 66.4 − 0.0 66.4 − 5.0 11.2 − 0.9 − 21.8 6.5
         Aug 18.6 − 20.1 6.2 38.7 47.6 − 23.1 10.5 33.5 − 11.5 − 3.3 − 1.4 − 9.1 2.3
         Sep 33.0 − 6.5 − 8.8 39.4 45.8 − 7.9 − 94.9 − 87.0 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 26.1 9.3
         Oct 22.9 0.8 − 15.3 22.1 18.6 9.7 22.7 13.0 − 39.8 − 25.7 − 1.1 − 17.3 4.3
         Nov 88.2 49.1 2.0 39.1 47.1 4.4 − 15.3 − 19.6 − 5.5 − 13.6 − 1.7 − 4.4 14.1
         Dec − 109.6 − 70.8 − 2.0 − 38.9 − 33.7 − 10.4 − 197.4 − 186.9 − 8.5 4.1 − 0.6 − 27.0 15.0
2016          Jan 156.2 45.9 6.0 110.3 95.2 − 45.0 129.0 174.0 − 26.8 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 18.1 − 0.3
         Feb 86.4 45.1 − 0.5 41.3 50.1 − 81.7 32.3 114.0 − 15.3 11.2 − 1.2 − 23.8 − 1.5
         Mar 62.8 22.2 − 5.6 40.6 41.3 21.6 − 86.1 − 107.7 − 17.5 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 8.7
         Apr 93.9 47.7 27.7 46.2 41.1 − 62.0 119.0 181.0 − 3.1 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 2.5
         May 67.9 20.5 12.9 47.3 53.6 − 0.3 62.3 62.6 1.0 − 5.0 − 0.5 0.3 6.2
         June 52.0 4.7 − 7.2 47.3 58.9 23.5 − 31.5 − 55.0 − 10.8 − 20.8 − 0.8 − 10.2 21.0
         July 51.3 29.7 15.4 21.6 20.7 − 84.9 62.0 146.9 − 26.9 − 7.1 − 0.5 − 23.7 4.4
         Aug 15.0 16.6 27.0 − 1.7 6.9 − 39.7 7.5 47.2 − 0.3 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 5.5
         Sep 38.0 26.3 − 7.6 11.7 15.9 − 26.7 − 78.4 − 51.7 − 26.1 − 12.2 − 0.6 − 19.5 6.2
         Oct 82.6 38.0 6.5 44.6 42.1 − 47.3 151.4 198.6 − 7.7 − 5.8 − 0.6 − 8.0 6.8
         Nov 104.1 55.7 15.3 48.4 60.3 8.3 − 18.8 − 27.1 − 3.6 − 8.8 − 0.7 − 0.6 6.5
         Dec − 56.7 − 47.5 − 4.1 − 9.2 − 2.4 36.0 − 156.3 − 192.3 − 14.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 15.3 3.4
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          May − 3.5 4.5 − 4.8 − 8.0 4.4 1.1 − 11.7 − 12.8 − 14.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 11.7 0.4
         June − 0.9 − 2.7 − 5.7 1.7 5.1 16.2 − 25.0 − 41.1 0.4 − 3.8 − 1.4 1.8 3.7
         July 31.5 22.9 21.3 8.6 6.4 − 27.6 − 8.7 19.0 12.5 16.5 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 1.9
         Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 20.7 − 0.9 19.9 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0
         Sep 11.5 4.1 − 2.6 7.3 8.7 15.9 − 2.0 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.4 − 0.4
         Oct 3.4 − 3.8 − 9.4 7.1 3.5 − 8.5 − 13.1 − 4.6 − 10.7 − 9.0 − 1.3 0.7 − 1.1
         Nov 27.3 21.3 7.8 6.0 10.6 − 13.0 − 35.7 − 22.7 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 4.1
         Dec − 19.9 − 11.6 − 5.8 − 8.2 − 2.8 5.2 − 52.1 − 57.3 − 24.0 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.1 2.92016          Jan 19.7 5.7 − 3.0 14.0 10.4 − 21.1 24.7 45.8 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.8 − 1.2
         Feb 15.6 10.9 − 4.2 4.7 4.8 − 29.2 7.3 36.5 − 11.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 7.7 − 1.0
         Mar 12.3 4.4 0.6 7.8 8.2 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 0.4
         Apr 22.8 12.3 0.7 10.6 5.9 − 40.1 13.5 53.7 − 2.3 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.7 0.4
         May 22.0 16.2 4.9 5.8 9.1 1.7 1.2 − 0.5 4.8 0.8 − 1.0 5.0 − 0.0
         June 2.5 1.7 0.5 0.8 6.5 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 5.7 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.3 3.8
         July 25.7 13.2 1.4 12.5 9.5 − 18.5 7.0 25.5 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.1 − 3.7
         Aug 9.0 8.8 1.4 0.2 2.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.8 4.0 − 1.6
         Sep 20.9 13.0 3.3 7.9 9.1 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 − 2.8
         Oct 18.3 11.7 2.5 6.6 3.4 − 3.5 42.2 45.7 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 6.0 − 3.8
         Nov 25.8 18.3 4.3 7.5 12.2 − 22.0 − 25.7 − 3.7 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.7 − 1.7
         Dec − 12.6 − 8.0 0.4 − 4.6 5.9 19.7 − 9.0 − 28.6 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 2.8 0.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
44.1 5.2 − 30.7 64.7 94.7 6.7 88.0 − 34.8 4.8 − 5.9 − 9.0 − 6.9 2015          May
14.0 66.4 − 9.4 39.3 63.5 10.7 52.8 − 24.2 0.0 − 18.7 − 15.4 8.2          June
− 43.2 − 28.6 − 65.1 45.0 43.1 14.2 28.9 2.5 − 0.6 − 11.1 22.7 − 12.2          July
− 14.8 2.2 − 19.7 11.8 13.2 − 1.9 15.1 − 4.9 3.6 4.5 11.1 − 4.6          Aug 
28.6 30.5 − − 13.3 7.0 23.2 − 2.8 26.0 − 7.7 − 8.5 − 0.9 − 15.6 − 0.8          Sep 
32.9 − 64.0 − 103.4 67.9 82.9 2.2 80.7 − 10.2 − 4.8 − 7.1 21.9 1.4          Oct 
− 17.0 60.8 − 54.3 55.7 58.5 5.7 52.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 3.3 15.9 0.6          Nov 
− 71.4 − 44.2 − 4.1 54.1 44.2 14.4 29.7 9.0 0.9 − 28.3 − 22.6 − 10.8          Dec 
87.7 − 19.7 − 70.0 38.2 36.3 − 11.1 47.4 − 8.4 10.4 21.8 11.0 8.1 2016          Jan 
− 14.1 0.3 − 33.7 15.2 21.7 1.2 20.5 − 11.7 5.2 44.5 − 1.3 6.9          Feb 
31.8 31.6 − 38.5 55.9 42.6 3.7 39.0 11.0 2.3 − 6.2 − 11.9 1.4          Mar 
− 35.9 − 29.5 − 100.4 75.3 92.7 4.6 88.2 − 17.2 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 2.4          Apr 
20.1 12.8 − 33.7 35.1 47.5 2.3 45.3 − 20.2 7.8 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 2.0          May60.5 6.4 − 19.5 31.3 34.6 8.4 26.2 − 1.9 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.4 6.3          June
− 29.0 − 75.3 − 97.6 73.6 67.1 10.1 57.0 6.1 0.5 − 22.7 16.0 5.5          July
− 54.7 41.1 − − 10.9 − 9.0 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.7 − 2.6          Aug 
2.7 32.3 − 2.4 18.6 23.9 2.2 21.7 1.5 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.7 − 6.5          Sep 
− 3.0 14.0 − 32.0 18.3 54.5 2.8 51.7 − 30.0 − 6.2 − 17.0 17.0 0.8          Oct 
5.1 20.7 − 90.1 84.8 92.2 1.7 90.4 − 5.5 − 1.8 − 1.9 8.7 0.2          Nov 
− 47.8 − 12.0 − 54.0 73.2 90.0 16.2 73.8 − 24.1 7.3 4.0 − 7.5 − 4.4          Dec 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
1.4 − 4.8 2.4 1.1 15.5 28.1 − 3.3 0.2 − 6.4 0.1 − 3.1 2015          May
2.2 12.7 0.9 3.5 − 0.1 5.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.3          June
− 3.2 − 18.6 4.7 3.3 13.1 12.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 1.2 0.0 − 0.6          July− 0.3 − 13.1 2.4 − 0.5 12.1 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2          Aug 
1.8 16.8 2.8 − 0.8 20.5 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.8          Sep 
− 0.6 − 25.3 3.0 − 0.3 31.4 30.7 − 3.8 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 3.7          Oct − 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1          Nov 
10.3 15.2 2.6 2.3 − 16.2 − 21.3 6.3 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.8 − 24.2 − 0.7 − 1.9 24.7 27.8 − 5.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.9 2016          Jan 
7.1 − 24.1 0.6 0.4 15.3 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.6 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.6 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4          June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6          July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4          Aug 8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5          Sep 
− 8.8 18.7 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8          Oct 
6.9 − 47.7 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7          Nov 
− 13.6 30.5 3.3 2.4 − 5.6 − 4.9 − 1.8 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6          Dec 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          Nov 26,010.6 16,221.2 12,675.7 10,573.1 1,296.8 805.9 3,545.5 1,109.7 2,435.8 5,040.3 4,749.1
         Dec 25,873.2 16,227.8 12,671.7 10,633.1 1,271.8 766.8 3,556.1 1,132.4 2,423.6 4,972.7 4,672.7
2015          Jan 26,852.0 16,310.7 12,666.6 10,616.3 1,274.4 775.9 3,644.0 1,158.9 2,485.1 5,407.4 5,133.9
         Feb 26,795.6 16,338.0 12,698.5 10,638.0 1,276.5 784.0 3,639.5 1,144.2 2,495.3 5,402.4 5,055.2
         Mar 27,171.9 16,428.1 12,748.2 10,680.8 1,275.9 791.5 3,679.9 1,148.8 2,531.1 5,476.4 5,267.4
         Apr 26,839.9 16,452.1 12,746.4 10,664.2 1,274.8 807.4 3,705.7 1,152.9 2,552.8 5,415.3 4,972.5
         May 26,685.3 16,472.1 12,762.9 10,681.9 1,276.3 804.8 3,709.2 1,138.4 2,570.8 5,410.4 4,802.8
         June 26,127.5 16,435.2 12,728.4 10,683.9 1,254.0 790.5 3,706.8 1,136.8 2,570.1 5,269.8 4,422.5
         July 26,346.9 16,514.6 12,785.5 10,682.8 1,301.0 801.7 3,729.1 1,135.4 2,593.7 5,290.7 4,541.7
         Aug 26,196.6 16,494.0 12,735.6 10,646.0 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,242.1 4,460.5
         Sep 26,145.1 16,526.0 12,714.3 10,639.8 1,303.0 771.4 3,811.8 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,158.7 4,460.3
         Oct 26,337.3 16,576.0 12,732.6 10,661.8 1,288.0 782.8 3,843.4 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,245.2 4,516.0
         Nov 26,653.4 16,691.7 12,803.5 10,716.5 1,295.5 791.5 3,888.3 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,308.1 4,653.6
         Dec 25,850.7 16,541.4 12,703.0 10,627.4 1,296.3 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.2 2,728.2 5,022.3 4,287.0
2016          Jan 26,414.5 16,689.5 12,731.2 10,656.8 1,306.9 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,137.4 4,587.7
         Feb 26,749.2 16,774.6 12,771.5 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.1 1,118.6 2,884.5 5,215.9 4,758.6
         Mar 26,406.8 16,825.5 12,776.3 10,709.9 1,312.0 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,018.9 4,562.5
         Apr 26,557.6 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,162.1 4,486.5
         May 26,806.9 16,993.8 12,842.4 10,733.3 1,341.3 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,258.2 4,554.9
         June 27,072.6 17,041.0 12,828.9 10,732.0 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,261.1 4,770.5
         July 27,140.1 17,093.5 12,852.5 10,736.8 1,360.4 755.3 4,241.0 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,314.7 4,731.8
         Aug 27,042.4 17,105.3 12,866.3 10,722.2 1,365.8 778.2 4,239.0 1,102.9 3,136.1 5,309.2 4,627.9
         Sep 26,976.1 17,147.0 12,892.1 10,755.7 1,359.9 776.5 4,254.9 1,098.8 3,156.1 5,244.7 4,584.4
         Oct 27,039.1 17,206.9 12,927.3 10,786.6 1,363.7 777.0 4,279.6 1,101.2 3,178.4 5,397.8 4,434.4
         Nov 27,152.9 17,299.8 12,987.5 10,832.2 1,383.3 772.1 4,312.3 1,089.2 3,223.1 5,428.3 4,424.8
         Dec 26,664.3 17,245.2 12,935.9 10,775.3 1,375.4 785.2 4,309.4 1,079.7 3,229.7 5,182.2 4,236.9
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          Nov 5,960.0 3,711.2 2,938.5 2,537.3 145.5 255.7 772.6 363.9 408.7 1,225.3 1,023.5
         Dec 5,973.4 3,696.4 2,931.4 2,527.7 143.6 260.1 764.9 364.1 400.8 1,209.1 1,068.0
2015          Jan 6,233.3 3,728.3 2,948.0 2,536.5 142.2 269.2 780.4 372.4 408.0 1,313.5 1,191.4
         Feb 6,174.3 3,739.4 2,953.8 2,542.4 142.3 269.1 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.2 3,758.2 2,967.1 2,546.4 144.1 276.5 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,202.9 3,772.6 2,966.9 2,546.0 135.6 285.3 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.5 3,770.8 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.7 3,767.1 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.3 3,803.0 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.6 3,813.0 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 816.9 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,041.7 3,824.0 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 827.9 364.5 463.4 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.6 3,832.0 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.4 368.4 469.0 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.5 3,864.8 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.3 363.9 481.3 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,924.8 3,839.8 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.3 358.3 477.9 1,166.4 918.6
2016          Jan 6,057.5 3,858.0 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.1 362.0 491.2 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.1 3,874.6 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.6 362.0 498.6 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.3 3,885.2 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.6 361.6 508.0 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,049.9 3,908.1 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 881.8 366.1 515.7 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,090.9 3,934.4 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.4 362.8 528.6 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,220.9 3,939.5 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.0 357.3 539.7 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.3 3,968.2 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 913.9 360.3 553.6 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.7 3,977.6 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 914.8 358.5 556.4 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep 6,201.9 4,001.6 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.5 357.2 569.3 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,207.5 4,018.7 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.4 360.3 571.1 1,259.9 928.9
         Nov 6,185.7 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,242.8 896.8
         Dec 6,131.0 4,036.8 3,099.3 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.6 345.2 592.4 1,234.8 859.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
956.8 11,109.7 10,480.5 10,532.6 4,637.2 1,099.7 407.6 2,213.2 2,088.7 86.1 2014          Nov 
980.6 11,155.3 10,549.3 10,627.7 4,728.8 1,089.3 399.5 2,217.4 2,105.6 87.0          Dec 
979.1 11,230.5 10,515.7 10,620.1 4,827.3 1,069.8 379.6 2,145.1 2,109.9 88.4 2015          Jan 
983.2 11,214.1 10,523.6 10,622.9 4,847.7 1,035.5 379.6 2,162.7 2,110.3 87.2          Feb 
990.9 11,281.3 10,557.8 10,669.6 4,899.7 1,037.0 375.2 2,153.5 2,118.2 85.9          Mar 
999.8 11,276.2 10,603.7 10,704.4 4,972.1 1,028.0 369.2 2,131.8 2,119.4 83.9          Apr 
1,006.4 11,372.9 10,646.8 10,744.7 5,049.9 999.5 364.6 2,124.5 2,123.9 82.3          May
1,017.1 11,392.8 10,648.0 10,749.1 5,096.4 976.4 361.0 2,110.1 2,124.1 81.2          June
1,031.3 11,393.9 10,683.7 10,798.9 5,135.0 983.0 358.9 2,119.8 2,121.8 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,377.8 10,680.3 10,790.2 5,137.0 981.5 353.8 2,114.8 2,124.1 79.1          Aug 
1,026.5 11,412.6 10,696.5 10,798.3 5,162.5 977.4 350.6 2,110.9 2,118.6 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,500.5 10,741.4 10,850.4 5,244.5 972.9 349.1 2,092.0 2,114.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,526.0 10,776.1 10,871.8 5,288.4 970.8 343.9 2,081.4 2,111.6 75.7          Nov 
1,048.9 11,488.5 10,815.7 10,924.5 5,325.7 981.5 343.8 2,083.3 2,114.9 75.2          Dec 
1,037.7 11,613.5 10,854.2 10,955.0 5,365.0 973.3 344.1 2,074.6 2,123.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.9 11,622.8 10,873.7 10,977.8 5,385.0 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,126.0 73.1          Feb 
1,042.5 11,688.2 10,918.6 11,009.0 5,418.7 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,128.7 72.3          Mar 
1,047.1 11,717.4 10,980.0 11,074.7 5,504.2 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,128.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.3 11,768.7 11,007.8 11,094.3 5,545.0 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,135.9 70.0          May
1,057.7 11,830.9 11,003.1 11,091.0 5,565.0 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,135.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,851.3 11,055.5 11,135.4 5,614.9 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,134.8 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,785.2 11,039.5 11,122.6 5,611.2 952.5 320.7 2,034.0 2,136.0 68.1          Aug 
1,066.5 11,790.8 11,034.3 11,132.4 5,636.9 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,131.1 67.4          Sep 
1,069.3 11,799.2 11,049.7 11,136.5 5,684.0 932.6 307.2 2,019.7 2,125.7 67.2          Oct 
1,071.1 11,882.7 11,108.2 11,212.7 5,780.3 926.2 303.6 2,014.2 2,121.9 66.6          Nov 
1,087.3 11,891.3 11,173.6 11,283.5 5,869.8 911.1 294.0 2,013.6 2,129.5 65.5          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
224.8 3,222.7 3,157.5 3,038.6 1,531.2 186.7 33.4 682.2 527.4 77.7 2014          Nov 
229.7 3,207.5 3,142.6 3,019.1 1,507.1 191.8 32.3 680.6 531.0 76.4          Dec 
228.9 3,233.6 3,156.6 3,045.0 1,541.7 188.3 31.3 677.5 528.8 77.4 2015          Jan 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 
244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 
245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 
248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,850.9 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2014          Nov 262.2 315.0 142.1 97.0 10.1 44.9 15.8 5.1 310.5 301.4 434.4 2,474.9 1,824.9
         Dec 216.7 310.9 138.0 100.5 11.5 39.5 16.4 5.1 297.0 290.7 414.2 2,479.0 1,820.8
2015          Jan 300.7 309.7 134.9 99.3 11.3 39.9 18.8 5.4 314.8 304.7 438.3 2,509.3 1,800.5
         Feb 272.1 319.1 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.2 5.3 352.4 342.3 447.3 2,506.4 1,786.1
         Mar 294.7 316.9 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 19.9 5.3 354.1 347.9 437.3 2,496.3 1,764.6
         Apr 251.4 320.4 144.8 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.3 5.1 336.7 329.0 458.8 2,464.9 1,745.0
         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 331.0 324.4 449.8 2,446.1 1,720.6
         June 309.5 334.2 157.2 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 312.2 308.7 434.4 2,433.8 1,706.0
         July 266.4 328.6 149.2 100.3 13.3 38.8 22.3 4.9 301.3 298.1 457.1 2,405.5 1,682.1
         Aug 251.6 335.9 155.2 100.4 13.3 38.8 23.4 4.8 305.4 300.3 455.7 2,374.3 1,672.4
         Sep 280.6 333.7 153.5 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 304.5 296.9 449.9 2,344.0 1,660.4
         Oct 315.5 334.6 157.4 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 297.6 288.1 471.8 2,337.6 1,640.5
         Nov 298.5 355.7 168.0 108.4 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 301.4 296.2 487.7 2,367.2 1,646.3
         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 272.8 270.9 465.2 2,318.6 1,633.5
2016          Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 294.5 292.9 475.6 2,301.1 1,614.7
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 474.3 2,287.6 1,597.2
         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 462.9 2,265.2 1,589.5
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 480.3 2,269.1 1,585.2
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 480.4 2,277.3 1,574.2
         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 471.1 2,275.0 1,568.0
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 486.6 2,251.7 1,543.0
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 487.5 2,246.6 1,533.7
         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 485.7 2,220.0 1,515.8
         Oct 295.3 367.5 182.2 94.1 19.8 44.7 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 502.7 2,221.2 1,504.3
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.6 98.9 21.2 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.8 264.1 511.4 2,238.1 1,507.1
         Dec 252.6 355.1 169.9 93.9 21.5 43.3 21.4 5.1 268.8 268.1 503.9 2,225.5 1,503.0
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2014          Nov 12.4 171.7 44.0 79.2 6.4 38.7 2.8 0.6 9.6 9.0 3.4 550.5 285.7
         Dec 11.3 177.1 50.7 82.3 7.6 32.8 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.1 3.3 547.3 280.7
2015          Jan 18.7 170.0 44.7 81.2 7.5 32.9 3.1 0.7 6.8 4.7 3.3 566.9 283.7
         Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016          Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 540.7 250.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
29.7 38.8 2,406.4 3,573.4 2,504.1 − 68.5 4,715.3 − 5,827.3 9,568.3 10,197.2 7,259.8 113.3 2014          Nov 
61.6 42.8 2,374.7 3,561.6 2,459.6 − 45.1 4,570.9 − 5,938.9 9,682.5 10,313.4 7,183.3 112.3          Dec 
58.8 42.4 2,408.1 3,915.5 2,552.2 − 101.8 5,014.0 − 6,030.9 9,740.6 10,389.6 7,239.1 110.6 2015          Jan 
59.3 43.4 2,403.7 3,942.9 2,545.0 − 115.4 4,919.7 − 6,061.3 9,739.1 10,411.4 7,243.9 109.1          Feb 
53.6 44.3 2,398.3 3,974.6 2,574.1 − 68.7 5,132.1 − 6,119.4 9,803.1 10,453.6 7,256.3 109.5          Mar 
57.1 45.9 2,361.9 4,002.6 2,541.3 − 78.5 4,838.3 − 6,203.6 9,871.8 10,555.9 7,163.6 107.6          Apr 
54.1 42.3 2,349.7 3,960.1 2,549.8 − 67.3 4,636.6 − 6,302.5 9,942.1 10,592.7 7,151.2 110.0          May
58.7 44.8 2,330.3 3,789.6 2,532.1 − 59.5 4,275.0 − 6,361.2 9,975.6 10,595.1 7,099.6 112.4          June
46.0 45.1 2,314.4 3,888.7 2,531.0 − 67.1 4,405.2 − 6,408.3 10,029.7 10,669.2 7,089.3 114.8          July
35.7 47.4 2,291.3 3,883.5 2,529.6 − 66.0 4,306.9 − 6,416.1 10,034.4 10,665.5 7,058.3 116.3          Aug 
32.7 46.5 2,264.8 3,808.9 2,533.5 − 52.8 4,317.9 − 6,438.2 10,042.3 10,659.8 7,031.8 117.3          Sep 
32.6 47.2 2,257.9 3,861.9 2,559.7 − 76.0 4,355.4 − 6,525.3 10,115.8 10,768.3 7,031.2 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,286.9 3,915.5 2,564.9 − 77.2 4,533.4 − 6,592.2 10,182.4 10,833.8 7,053.3 121.9          Nov 
22.9 47.8 2,247.9 3,662.8 2,548.7 − 49.3 4,094.4 − 6,631.5 10,230.1 10,832.5 6,999.5 123.0          Dec 
29.2 50.9 2,221.0 3,809.9 2,572.5 − 76.6 4,386.2 − 6,665.8 10,265.9 10,900.7 6,987.3 123.6 2016          Jan 
33.6 54.3 2,199.6 3,922.0 2,609.5 − 98.0 4,553.1 − 6,688.2 10,280.1 10,934.5 7,012.5 122.8          Feb 
37.2 51.9 2,176.1 3,739.2 2,592.0 − 93.9 4,378.3 − 6,721.4 10,324.4 10,961.5 6,962.4 121.3          Mar 
41.4 49.8 2,177.8 3,927.3 2,603.9 − 98.9 4,283.4 − 6,815.2 10,400.9 11,063.2 6,970.4 122.7          Apr 
39.7 49.1 2,188.6 4,033.3 2,600.4 − 83.0 4,361.7 − 6,867.4 10,442.6 11,103.3 6,973.3 126.6          May
49.8 47.2 2,178.0 3,955.3 2,664.4 − 62.0 4,558.8 − 6,901.2 10,473.7 11,124.7 7,006.7 127.7          June
54.9 48.1 2,148.8 4,091.2 2,678.2 − 105.1 4,519.6 − 6,967.5 10,544.7 11,219.6 6,983.7 131.5          July
54.3 46.3 2,146.0 4,132.9 2,675.7 − 84.9 4,434.1 − 6,961.8 10,535.1 11,208.5 6,972.9 131.4          Aug 
48.7 46.0 2,125.3 4,088.3 2,697.8 − 46.5 4,387.0 − 6,984.5 10,552.7 11,210.4 6,961.7 131.3          Sep 
53.4 43.5 2,124.3 4,292.4 2,683.4 − 31.1 4,235.6 − 7,046.6 10,568.2 11,241.1 6,944.6 131.8          Oct 
53.6 42.7 2,141.8 4,334.3 2,663.1 − 55.4 4,242.9 − 7,145.7 10,659.6 11,337.2 6,935.0 136.4          Nov 
50.1 41.6 2,133.8 4,053.2 2,661.2 − 44.6 4,017.7 − 7,237.3 10,732.7 11,391.0 6,922.5 134.4          Dec 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
10.4 7.9 532.2 654.2 532.9 − 621.3 1,608.0 264.4 1,575.2 2,411.1 2,442.4 1,864.4 − 2014          Nov 
10.3 7.7 529.4 633.4 535.7 − 605.7 1,648.7 267.9 1,557.8 2,405.7 2,430.3 1,855.6 −          Dec 
11.8 8.2 546.9 763.4 553.3 − 674.0 1,780.3 270.3 1,586.4 2,426.5 2,456.5 1,888.6 − 2015          Jan 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 −          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May
23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 
26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.3 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,799.8 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.0 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,808.9 −          Nov 
22.7 14.1 503.9 879.3 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.5 2,759.1 2,800.4 1,808.3 −          Dec 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2014          July 540.0 111.7 460.1 0.1 209.0 23.9 27.2 958.1 110.0 − 12.5 214.3 1 196.3
         Aug 547.6 106.6 414.7 0.3 202.2 24.6 0.0 967.6 92.4 − 23.6 210.2 1 202.5
         Sep 547.8 114.7 387.4 0.2 196.3 25.2 0.0 971.8 66.2 − 27.0 210.1 1 207.1
         Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.1 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016          Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2017          Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          July 136.9 10.0 16.1 0.1 48.9 8.4 9.0 228.1 1.6 − 99.6 64.6 301.0
         Aug 138.8 6.2 11.3 0.0 47.4 6.8 0.0 230.5 0.9 − 96.7 62.3 299.5
         Sep 138.7 4.1 10.0 0.1 45.9 8.7 0.0 231.1 1.0 − 103.5 61.5 301.2
         Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016          Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017          Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations.the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue ofsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 3.2 − 36.4 − 47.7 + 0.0 − 6.9 − 4.4 − 98.8 + 7.1 − 1.6 − 12.0 + 22.0 + 24.7 2014          July
+ 7.6 − 5.1 − 45.4 + 0.2 − 6.8 + 0.7 − 27.2 + 9.5 − 17.6 − 11.1 − 4.1 + 6.2          Aug + 0.2 + 8.1 − 27.3 − 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.6 +
 0.0 + 4.2 − 26.2 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 4.6          Sep 
+
4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
−
0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+
19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+
25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+
2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
−
12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.7 − 18.4 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.7 − 32.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 9.1 + 11.9 2014          July+ 1.9 − 3.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 9.0 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.3 − 1.5          Aug − 0.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 1.9 +
 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 6.8 − 0.7 + 1.7          Sep 
+
0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
−
1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+
8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+
6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+
0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
−
4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
allocated
on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2016 June                  3 3,078.6 377.3 300.6 76.8 223.7 30.1 18.6 18.6 −
                              10 3,093.9 377.3 300.0 76.6 223.4 30.3 18.8 18.8 −
                              17 3,109.6 377.3 298.0 76.6 221.4 31.1 17.8 17.8 −
                              24 3,131.1 377.3 299.6 76.6 223.1 30.1 18.3 18.3 −
         July                  1 3,232.6 413.1 309.0 77.6 231.3 33.2 18.3 18.3 −
                                8 3,237.9 413.1 307.8 77.6 230.1 34.7 18.4 18.4 −
                              15 3,249.2 413.1 305.9 77.6 228.3 33.9 17.9 17.9 −
                              22 3,265.8 413.1 308.6 77.6 231.0 30.6 17.3 17.3 −
                              29 3,284.3 413.1 307.6 77.4 230.1 33.2 17.5 17.5 −
         Aug                  5 3,286.1 413.1 308.4 77.2 231.2 32.9 16.6 16.6 −
                              12 3,296.6 413.1 307.3 77.2 230.1 33.6 17.1 17.1 −
                              19 3,313.3 413.1 308.9 77.2 231.6 32.2 17.2 17.2 −
                              26 3,330.5 413.1 310.1 77.2 232.8 32.6 17.2 17.2 −
         Sep                  2 3,341.8 413.1 311.3 77.3 234.0 30.5 17.3 17.3 −
                                9 3,358.7 413.1 311.6 77.3 234.3 30.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 3,372.4 413.1 312.3 77.3 235.0 29.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              23 3,391.4 413.1 314.5 77.3 237.3 29.6 17.8 17.8 −
                              30 3,438.1 412.6 315.2 77.8 237.4 33.9 19.6 19.6 −
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 412.6 313.7 77.8 235.8 32.5 19.0 19.0 −
                              14 3,469.3 412.6 313.0 77.8 235.2 33.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              21 3,494.9 412.6 313.1 77.8 235.3 35.3 18.5 18.5 −
                              28 3,507.4 412.6 311.5 78.3 233.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
2016 Nov                  4 3,518.5 412.6 312.9 78.2 234.7 36.1 17.6 17.6 −
                              11 3,534.3 412.6 314.3 78.2 236.1 32.4 17.1 17.1 −
                              18 3,553.4 412.6 314.6 78.2 236.4 32.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              25 3,566.2 412.6 314.1 77.4 236.6 32.3 18.2 18.2 −
         Dec                  2 3,587.4 412.6 314.4 77.4 237.0 34.0 17.4 17.4 −
                                9 3,609.8 412.6 316.5 77.5 239.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              16 3,630.7 412.6 319.5 77.5 242.0 36.9 18.1 18.1 −
                              23 3,685.7 412.6 317.8 77.1 240.6 35.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              30 3,662.9 382.1 327.9 78.8 249.1 30.7 19.1 19.1 −
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 382.1 326.6 78.7 247.8 31.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              13 3,697.3 382.1 326.9 78.7 248.2 34.7 17.5 17.5 −
                              20 3,719.6 382.1 325.7 78.7 247.0 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              27 3,740.8 382.1 323.6 78.7 245.0 35.8 18.8 18.8 −
         Feb                  3 3,749.5 382.1 323.4 78.7 244.8 34.7 19.8 19.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015          Mar 847.9 120.0 56.9 21.3 35.7 −−−−
         Apr 856.5 120.0 56.9 21.2 35.6 0.0−−−
         May 860.3 120.0 56.8 21.1 35.7 0.0−−−
         June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0.0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016          Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0.0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0.0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0.0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0.0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0.7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0.2−−−
         Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0.3−−−
         Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
         Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 1 376.5 128.8 55.0 21.1 33.9 0.1 0.4 0.4 −
         Dec 1 392.7 119.3 56.5 21.5 35.0 1.8 0.4 0.4 −
2017          Jan 1 449.7 119.3 56.4 21.5 34.9 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
503.2 51.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 108.3 1 499.4 1 152.4 347.0 27.0 214.2 2016 June                  3
502.1 50.8 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.4 1 517.3 1 171.3 346.1 27.0 213.7                               10
500.4 49.1 451.2 − − 0.1 − 107.7 1 537.0 1 191.4 345.6 27.0 213.4                               17
501.2 49.9 451.2 − − 0.1 − 103.5 1 559.0 1 212.9 346.1 27.0 215.1                               24
540.0 53.1 486.8 − − 0.2 − 96.5 1 573.4 1 225.6 347.8 26.5 222.5          July                  1
531.2 44.1 486.8 − − 0.3 − 95.3 1 589.0 1 243.7 345.3 26.5 221.9                                 8
529.3 42.5 486.8 − − 0.0 − 95.8 1 605.9 1 263.6 342.3 26.5 220.8                               15
530.6 43.6 486.8 − − 0.2 − 94.4 1 623.7 1 281.4 342.3 26.5 221.1                               22
533.6 49.6 484.0 − − 0.0 − 94.0 1 639.4 1 298.8 340.6 26.5 219.5                               29
527.1 43.0 484.0 − − 0.1 − 93.1 1 650.0 1 312.3 337.6 26.5 218.4          Aug                  5
525.6 41.6 484.0 − − − − 92.2 1 663.2 1 325.6 337.6 26.5 217.9                               12
525.7 41.7 484.0 − − 0.0 − 93.8 1 676.5 1 339.3 337.2 26.5 219.5                               19
526.8 42.8 484.0 − − 0.0 − 95.7 1 689.0 1 351.8 337.2 26.5 219.5                               26
526.5 43.8 482.7 − − 0.0 − 96.3 1 702.2 1 365.6 336.6 26.5 218.0          Sep                  2
524.5 41.8 482.7 − − − − 94.8 1 721.4 1 385.2 336.2 26.5 219.2                                 9
524.4 41.6 482.7 − − 0.0 − 93.9 1 734.8 1 402.2 332.7 26.5 220.5                               16
526.0 43.2 482.7 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 751.6 1 420.3 331.3 26.5 222.4                               23
552.6 38.7 513.8 − − 0.0 − 83.4 1 764.1 1 434.8 329.3 26.4 230.4                               30
548.2 34.4 513.8 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 784.5 1 454.9 329.6 26.4 224.6          Oct                  7
546.8 32.9 513.8 − − 0.1 − 88.9 1 805.1 1 475.7 329.4 26.4 225.0                               14
547.3 33.4 513.8 − − 0.0 − 91.7 1 822.0 1 492.7 329.3 26.4 228.0                               21
548.3 36.0 512.2 − − 0.1 − 93.9 1 840.4 1 513.0 327.5 26.4 220.1                               28
545.1 32.7 512.2 − − 0.2 − 91.8 1 856.6 1 531.4 325.1 26.4 219.3 2016 Nov                  4
543.7 31.4 512.2 − − 0.1 − 91.4 1 875.6 1 551.1 324.5 26.4 220.6                               11
544.9 32.6 512.2 − − 0.0 − 87.5 1 895.5 1 572.3 323.3 26.4 221.0                               18
546.1 33.7 512.2 − − 0.2 − 83.8 1 913.9 1 590.1 323.8 26.4 218.7                               25
546.6 36.0 510.5 − − 0.2 − 83.1 1 932.3 1 608.1 324.2 26.4 220.6          Dec                  2
546.5 35.8 510.5 − − 0.2 − 81.7 1 950.6 1 626.5 324.1 26.4 221.4                                 9
547.4 36.8 510.5 − − 0.1 − 79.8 1 967.1 1 644.0 323.1 26.4 222.9                               16
589.8 32.9 556.6 − − 0.4 − 71.7 1 982.3 1 659.5 322.9 26.4 231.3                               23
595.9 39.1 556.6 − − 0.2 − 69.1 1 974.9 1 654.0 320.9 26.5 236.8                               30
590.8 34.0 556.6 − − 0.2 − 70.9 1 987.0 1 666.1 320.9 26.5 238.5 2017 Jan                  6
589.1 32.3 556.6 − − 0.2 − 74.8 2 010.4 1 690.2 320.1 26.5 235.4                               13
589.0 32.3 556.6 − − 0.1 − 78.1 2 030.4 1 710.9 319.5 26.5 237.5                               20
588.7 34.0 554.5 − − 0.2 − 80.4 2 049.8 1 730.3 319.4 26.5 235.2                               27
586.3 31.6 554.5 − − 0.2 − 79.7 2 064.0 1 748.6 315.4 26.4 233.1          Feb                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
37.2 7.3 29.7 − − 0.1 − 3.6 65.7 65.7 − 4.4 560.0 2015          Mar 
33.7 4.7 29.1 − − − − 4.2 77.1 77.1 − 4.4 560.2          Apr 
31.0 3.4 27.6 − − 0.0 − 3.7 90.3 90.3 − 4.4 554.2          May
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 
49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May
47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0          Aug 
55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1          Sep 
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2          Oct 
55.2 1.0 53.9 − − 0.3 − 4.8 345.4 345.4 − 4.4 782.3          Nov 
65.5 1.8 63.5 − − 0.1 − 3.0 357.7 357.7 − 4.4 784.1          Dec 
64.0 0.6 63.4 − − 0.0 − 4.1 375.7 375.7 − 4.4 823.9 2017          Jan 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2016 June                  3 3,078.6 1,081.3 968.5 620.8 347.5 − − 0.3 3.9 − 223.3 122.6 100.7
                              10 3,093.9 1,081.8 984.3 643.8 340.3 − − 0.2 3.9 − 220.9 117.9 103.1
                              17 3,109.6 1,081.7 932.6 611.2 321.2 − − 0.2 4.0 − 287.4 183.7 103.7
                              24 3,131.1 1,082.2 911.0 613.1 297.6 − − 0.3 3.8 − 332.3 233.0 99.3
         July                  1 3,232.6 1,088.5 1,023.4 693.0 330.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 251.2 154.2 97.0
                                8 3,237.9 1,092.1 1,030.7 688.5 342.1 − − 0.1 3.6 − 237.1 140.9 96.3
                              15 3,249.2 1,093.8 1,008.0 674.6 333.3 − − 0.0 3.6 − 275.2 177.8 97.4
                              22 3,265.8 1,093.5 985.5 664.9 320.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 309.5 213.3 96.2
                              29 3,284.3 1,097.0 1,029.7 698.4 331.2 − − 0.0 3.6 − 277.0 179.4 97.7
         Aug                  5 3,286.1 1,099.2 1,094.4 753.7 340.8 − − 0.0 3.6 − 208.9 111.2 97.7
                              12 3,296.6 1,100.4 1,097.3 742.5 354.8 − − 0.0 3.9 − 225.0 126.4 98.6
                              19 3,313.3 1,096.8 1,099.6 740.9 358.7 − − 0.0 3.9 − 240.9 142.7 98.2
                              26 3,330.5 1,093.1 1,086.5 740.0 346.4 − − 0.0 4.2 − 270.2 171.6 98.6
         Sep                  2 3,341.8 1,095.5 1,143.0 764.0 378.9 − − 0.1 4.1 − 217.0 118.2 98.8
                                9 3,358.7 1,095.6 1,163.4 777.5 385.9 − − 0.0 3.9 − 227.8 128.6 99.2
                              16 3,372.4 1,094.3 1,133.6 767.9 365.7 − − 0.0 3.9 − 258.9 157.3 101.6
                              23 3,391.4 1,092.2 1,127.2 764.4 362.8 − − 0.0 3.9 − 273.6 171.0 102.5
                              30 3,438.1 1,096.3 1,157.9 759.8 398.0 − − 0.1 3.8 − 261.0 155.4 105.6
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 1,097.2 1,186.9 777.4 409.4 − − 0.1 3.8 − 264.2 158.0 106.2
                              14 3,469.3 1,096.2 1,195.0 793.5 401.5 − − 0.0 3.5 − 276.9 171.4 105.5
                              21 3,494.9 1,095.1 1,178.3 781.2 397.0 − − 0.0 3.6 − 304.0 192.8 111.3
                              28 3,507.4 1,100.3 1,197.2 812.8 384.4 − − 0.0 3.4 − 290.5 186.2 104.3
2016 Nov                  4 3,518.5 1,102.5 1,256.7 801.1 455.6 − − 0.0 3.5 − 241.6 136.3 105.3
                              11 3,534.3 1,100.7 1,260.2 800.3 459.7 − − 0.1 3.8 − 258.8 150.7 108.1
                              18 3,553.4 1,099.3 1,261.5 802.5 459.0 − − 0.0 3.8 − 270.6 164.1 106.6
                              25 3,566.2 1,099.8 1,249.2 820.4 428.8 − − 0.0 3.5 − 290.2 184.7 105.5
         Dec                  2 3,587.4 1,108.4 1,301.3 849.7 451.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 253.8 147.0 106.8
                                9 3,609.8 1,114.3 1,321.0 869.0 451.9 − − 0.1 3.4 − 249.0 144.9 104.1
                              16 3,630.7 1,117.4 1,298.1 879.7 418.4 − − 0.0 4.9 − 271.8 168.9 102.9
                              23 3,685.7 1,126.7 1,353.8 930.9 422.9 − − 0.0 8.8 − 238.0 133.1 104.9
                              30 3,662.9 1,126.2 1,313.3 889.0 424.2 − − 0.1 9.4 − 220.8 114.9 105.9
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 1,122.2 1,369.2 928.6 440.5 − − 0.0 8.9 − 213.8 110.2 103.6
                              13 3,697.3 1,115.5 1,396.8 935.3 461.4 − − 0.1 9.6 − 240.2 137.9 102.4
                              20 3,719.6 1,110.7 1,386.8 952.4 434.3 − − 0.2 9.7 − 281.8 177.7 104.0
                              27 3,740.8 1,109.0 1,385.7 978.9 406.7 − − 0.0 7.7 − 305.2 201.3 103.9
         Feb                  3 3,749.5 1,111.4 1,438.1 963.9 474.2 − − 0.0 10.0 − 237.5 130.5 107.0
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015          Mar 847.9 239.0 115.5 99.5 16.0 − − − − − 35.1 1.7 33.4
         Apr 856.5 241.4 120.1 93.5 26.6 − − − − − 38.6 1.3 37.3
         May 860.3 242.7 122.3 97.6 24.7 − − − − − 42.0 0.7 41.2
         June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016          Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5
         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
         Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9
         Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
         Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
         Nov 1 376.5 259.5 428.0 293.1 134.9 − − − 0.3 − 116.6 40.0 76.6
         Dec 1 392.7 264.9 411.4 284.9 126.4 − − − 0.5 − 105.8 32.5 73.4
2017          Jan 1 449.7 260.9 499.0 348.3 150.7 − − − 2.2 − 92.9 17.1 75.8
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
56.1 3.2 6.3 6.3 − 57.5 203.5 − 376.0 99.0 2016 June                  3
58.2 3.3 6.0 6.0 − 57.5 202.9 − 376.0 99.0                               10
59.7 2.9 5.0 5.0 − 57.5 203.8 − 376.0 99.0                               17
56.6 3.1 4.5 4.5 − 57.5 203.3 − 376.0 100.8                               24
70.9 3.0 5.2 5.2 − 58.5 206.3 − 420.9 100.8          July                  1
79.2 3.4 5.5 5.5 − 58.5 206.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 8
72.8 3.5 6.2 6.2 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               15
79.0 3.0 6.4 6.4 − 58.5 205.0 − 420.9 100.8                               22
83.0 3.1 7.4 7.4 − 58.5 203.3 − 420.9 100.8                               29
83.8 3.2 7.9 7.9 − 58.5 204.8 − 420.9 100.8          Aug                  5
76.1 3.1 7.8 7.8 − 58.5 202.7 − 420.9 100.8                               12
77.4 3.1 8.1 8.1 − 58.5 203.4 − 420.9 100.8                               19
81.2 3.1 8.6 8.6 − 58.5 203.4 − 420.9 100.8                               26
85.6 3.2 8.6 8.6 − 58.5 204.5 − 420.9 100.8          Sep                  2
72.6 3.1 8.2 8.2 − 58.5 204.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 9
84.0 3.0 8.7 8.7 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               16
93.4 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 58.5 209.2 − 420.9 100.8                               23
122.8 2.8 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.3 − 418.5 100.8                               30
101.7 4.2 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.1 − 418.5 100.8          Oct                  7
97.7 5.6 9.3 9.3 − 58.1 207.6 − 418.5 100.8                               14
106.1 4.6 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 216.2 − 418.5 100.8                               21
108.2 5.5 9.7 9.7 − 58.1 215.1 − 418.5 100.8                               28
103.8 4.0 12.5 12.5 − 58.1 216.3 − 418.5 100.8 2016 Nov                  4
101.5 3.8 10.6 10.6 − 58.1 217.4 − 418.5 100.8                               11
109.9 4.4 10.0 10.0 − 58.1 216.4 − 418.5 100.8                               18
117.4 2.8 10.5 10.5 − 58.1 215.2 − 418.5 100.8                               25
113.2 3.8 10.9 10.9 − 58.1 214.7 − 418.5 100.8          Dec                  2
112.0 6.2 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.4 − 418.5 99.5                                 9
127.3 7.1 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.6 − 418.5 99.5                               16
145.7 7.0 10.4 10.4 − 58.1 219.0 − 418.5 99.5                               23
205.7 3.6 9.3 9.3 − 59.3 221.4 − 394.4 99.5                               30
167.4 5.7 10.7 10.7 − 59.3 221.3 − 394.4 99.8 2017 Jan                  6
138.8 7.7 13.4 13.4 − 59.3 221.7 − 394.4 99.8                               13
133.8 7.3 9.7 9.7 − 59.3 226.4 − 394.4 99.8                               20
133.0 9.2 10.5 10.5 − 59.3 227.0 − 394.4 99.8                               27
151.5 9.2 9.4 9.4 − 59.3 228.7 − 394.4 100.1          Feb                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
17.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.0 274.7 121.0 5.0 2015          Mar 
12.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 15.5 23.1 276.9 121.0 5.0          Apr 
7.2 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 15.5 23.2 279.3 121.0 5.0          May
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 
30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May
47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0          Aug 
70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0          Sep 
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0          Oct 
74.7 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.4 323.9 128.0 5.0          Nov 
117.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 15.4 24.7 327.3 119.7 5.0          Dec 
100.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.4 25.2 328.3 119.7 5.0 2017          Jan 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.7 26.0 2,101.6 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.7 295.0 135.7 3,762.7 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2015          Mar 8,173.0 15.5 2,123.5 1,608.3 1,224.8 383.5 515.2 360.7 154.5 3,708.5 3,283.5 2,690.5 2,400.0
         Apr 8,084.0 16.1 2,105.0 1,587.5 1,209.5 378.0 517.5 364.5 153.1 3,715.9 3,292.4 2,691.1 2,397.8
         May 8,004.0 16.4 2,097.4 1,584.0 1,209.8 374.2 513.4 361.4 151.9 3,706.2 3,279.2 2,693.9 2,407.4         June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,691.9 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.2 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,716.9 2,421.1
         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016          Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3
         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4         Dec 7,792.7 26.0 2,101.6 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.7 295.0 135.7 3,762.7 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
 Changes 3
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 179.5 0.3 − 16.0 − 11.0 66.8 − 77.8 − 5.0 7.7 − 12.7 66.4 64.9 68.8 57.3
2016 188.8 6.5 121.0 178.8 195.6 − 16.8 − 57.7 − 48.9 − 8.8 57.9 53.7 89.1 81.3
2015          Apr − 63.9 0.6 − 14.1 − 18.8 − 13.9 − 4.9 4.7 5.7 − 1.0 11.3 11.9 3.2 − 0.2
         May − 92.5 0.3 − 9.5 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 4.0 − 5.0 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 13.4 2.7 9.0         June − 191.7 − 1.1 − 55.0 − 20.9 − 11.2 − 9.8 − 34.0 − 31.0 − 3.0 − 7.8 − 5.9 − 0.8 6.7
         July 57.5 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 24.8 26.9 22.3 0.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 13.0 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 7.3 0.3 − 17.3 − 26.7 − 20.8 − 5.9 9.3 8.8 0.6 4.0 1.1 2.3 6.7
         Oct 25.1 0.7 39.8 36.4 40.4 − 4.0 3.4 3.3 0.1 − 2.1 0.4 − 0.9 6.1
         Nov 59.7 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 252.6 3.6 − 88.8 − 87.4 − 56.1 − 31.3 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 26.5 − 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.52016          Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.6 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4
         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.1 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7
         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.3 1.5 8.5 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.5 9.9
         June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.4 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8
         Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
         Oct − 0.4 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 26.1 0.1 72.3 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.7 11.3 15.8 15.2
         Dec − 117.5 3.1 − 52.9 − 41.0 − 37.5 − 3.4 − 12.0 − 11.4 − 0.6 − 22.6 − 16.8 − 4.1 − 5.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.1 281.6 159.5 136.5 28.5 108.0 1,058.3 802.4 844.1 2016
290.5 593.0 339.0 253.9 425.0 276.3 146.2 148.7 30.5 118.2 1,129.2 872.6 1,196.3 2015          Mar 
293.3 601.3 347.6 253.7 423.5 275.6 148.0 147.8 30.9 117.0 1,145.0 890.4 1,101.9          Apr 
286.6 585.3 336.3 249.0 427.0 278.1 148.3 148.9 29.9 119.0 1,143.6 887.2 1,040.4          May278.9 579.9 332.5 247.4 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6          June
300.7 583.5 333.2 250.3 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
295.8 584.7 330.3 254.4 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.1 281.6 159.5 136.5 28.5 108.0 1,058.3 802.4 844.1          Dec 
Changes 3
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 1.4 5.1 2.4 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 2.7 − 80.1 − 93.5 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.5 − 12.1 − 23.4 4.2 8.4 14.8 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 54.8 58.1 − 51.4 2016
3.4 8.7 8.7 0.0 − 0.6 0.0 2.8 − 0.6 0.5 − 1.1 32.6 34.1 − 94.4 2015          Apr 
− 6.3 − 16.1 − 11.4 − 4.6 2.7 1.8 0.3 1.0 − 1.0 1.9 − 11.1 − 12.2 − 61.5          May
− 7.5 − 5.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 3.7 0.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 25.1 − 28.1 − 102.8          June
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 2.1 0.6 0.8 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 3.9 32.0          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.6 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug − 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 2.9 1.8 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 7.2          Sep 
− 7.1 1.4 2.9 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 7.9 − 8.4          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.5 − 35.3 50.6          Nov 
0.9 − 10.1 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 12.8 − 8.0 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 4.2 − 55.6 − 55.3 − 85.4          Dec 
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.8 90.5 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.0 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 1.0 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5          June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.6 11.8 − 11.1          July1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.4 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3          Sep 
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.8 44.1 − 56.4          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.6 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.7 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 5.8 − 4.2 − 2.1 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 6.3 − 8.4 − 38.8          Dec 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.7 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.2 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.1 37.2
2015          Mar 8,173.0 1,382.3 1,134.8 247.5 3,218.1 3,120.2 1,542.4 973.8 295.3 603.9 529.1 84.8 40.8
         Apr 8,084.0 1,367.5 1,118.0 249.5 3,226.8 3,129.0 1,565.9 961.6 292.7 601.5 528.8 86.9 42.4
         May 8,004.0 1,343.4 1,103.5 239.9 3,247.4 3,148.5 1,592.3 956.2 289.1 600.0 529.0 86.1 40.9         June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0
         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016          Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4         Dec 7,792.7 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.2 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.1 37.2
 Changes 4
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 179.5 − 61.1 − 49.6 − 11.5 104.9 105.5 153.7 − 36.9 − 10.0 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
2016 188.8 − 31.1 − 1.9 − 29.2 106.0 105.5 124.5 − 11.1 1.2 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2015          Apr − 63.9 − 11.7 − 15.3 3.7 9.7 10.2 24.5 − 11.9 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 1.7 1.0         May − 92.5 − 25.5 − 15.3 − 10.2 19.8 18.8 25.9 − 5.6 − 3.8 − 1.5 0.2 − 0.9 − 1.7         June − 191.7 − 39.1 − 12.4 − 26.7 − 5.2 − 7.8 2.9 − 9.0 − 5.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 2.9 1.2
         July 57.5 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3
         Sep − 7.3 0.8 3.6 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.7 − 0.4 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
         Oct 25.1 13.7 20.6 − 7.0 9.5 13.5 25.6 − 12.2 − 4.3 0.1 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.5
         Nov 59.7 14.4 10.3 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 252.6 − 42.5 − 41.5 − 1.0 1.0 0.9 − 1.4 0.1 4.5 2.2 3.0 − 1.8 − 4.12016          Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.8 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.5 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0
         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
         June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.4 − 15.0 − 7.0 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3
         Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
         Oct − 0.4 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 26.1 17.3 16.0 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1
         Dec − 117.5 − 0.4 − 9.0 8.6 − 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 4.0 − 1.5 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 200843.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,029.9 46.8 643.5 591.9 906.3 2016
40.5 14.7 3.4 2.7 13.1 9.2 7.6 3.5 1,108.0 46.2 624.5 565.4 1,263.6 2015          Mar 41.1 15.7 3.4 2.7 10.9 9.4 11.4 3.3 1,098.8 47.6 647.9 563.4 1,164.9          Apr 
41.9 16.2 3.4 2.7 12.8 9.5 5.0 3.4 1,087.3 42.9 645.6 567.6 1,104.3          May43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3          June
42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,029.9 46.8 643.5 591.9 906.3          Dec 
Changes 4
− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 80.5 9.3 − 26.6 28.0 − 143.3 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 10.9 − 1.2 117.0 26.9 − 39.4 20160.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 − 2.2 0.2 3.8 − 0.2 0.4 1.7 31.8 0.6 − 98.3 2015          Apr 
0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.1 − 6.4 0.1 − 16.7 − 4.9 − 7.1 2.8 − 59.4          May1.6 1.8 0.0 0.0 − 0.3 1.5 − 1.6 0.1 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 36.0 − 1.8 − 100.8          June
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 17.4 − 0.7 26.6          July− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.0 9.7 − 23.6          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.2 7.3 − 27.9 4.0 19.9          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 0.0 10.8 5.9 2.3 0.0 − 10.7          Oct − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 2.3 − 16.8 − 6.7 51.2          Nov 
2.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 50.1 − 2.1 − 67.8 − 2.8 − 86.4          Dec 
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.1 1.6 11.6 13.2 65.7          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.2 7.2 − 48.8          Apr − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.7 0.9 4.3 12.4          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7          June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5          Sep 
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.4          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.5 − 6.1 − 26.5          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 1.1 − 68.2 0.2 − 34.8          Dec 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2016          July 1,754 7,985.3 264.9 2,438.2 1,928.9 505.3 4,030.4 366.6 2,887.9 0.5 769.5 119.7 1,132.0
         Aug 1,749 7,951.8 273.2 2,429.6 1,923.8 502.0 4,031.3 360.2 2,900.7 0.5 763.4 120.0 1,097.7
         Sep 1,734 7,907.1 279.9 2,414.9 1,903.3 507.9 4,025.2 360.3 2,903.4 0.5 754.7 119.4 1,067.8
         Oct 1,720 7,911.9 293.3 2,449.5 1,940.5 505.5 4,039.1 370.5 2,912.3 0.5 749.9 118.8 1,011.2
         Nov 1,711 7,954.9 326.6 2,471.8 1,966.7 502.3 4,058.3 369.9 2,929.3 0.5 751.9 118.5 979.7
         Dec 1,711 7,836.2 323.4 2,420.8 1,920.3 499.1 4,030.5 337.7 2,937.4 0.7 749.4 119.9 941.7
Commercial banks 6
2016          Nov 263 3,234.2 215.0 1,047.1 962.6 84.3 1,203.6 197.9 765.0 0.3 236.6 55.9 712.5
         Dec 263 3,170.2 213.1 1,034.6 950.9 83.1 1,186.9 180.3 767.9 0.5 235.7 57.7 677.9
   Big banks 7
2016          Nov 4 1,887.7 82.5 575.1 540.1 34.9 505.9 110.5 279.9 0.1 112.1 49.7 674.4
         Dec 4 1,819.7 78.7 559.8 525.7 34.0 489.9 97.4 279.8 0.2 111.0 51.7 639.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2016          Nov 156 963.6 65.9 240.5 195.4 45.0 620.9 63.8 443.4 0.2 113.2 5.2 31.0
         Dec 156 962.8 58.8 247.9 202.6 44.7 619.6 60.2 445.7 0.2 112.9 5.0 31.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2016          Nov 103 382.9 66.6 231.6 227.1 4.4 76.8 23.6 41.6 − 11.3 0.9 7.0
         Dec 103 387.6 75.6 226.9 222.5 4.4 77.4 22.6 42.5 0.1 11.8 1.0 6.8
Landesbanken
2016          Nov 9 917.4 23.4 268.4 202.3 65.6 503.8 52.1 363.5 0.1 86.9 10.8 111.0
         Dec 9 879.1 20.1 246.8 181.2 65.3 492.8 44.3 363.5 0.1 83.7 10.4 109.0
Savings banks
2016          Nov 408 1,169.7 27.1 190.4 69.7 120.5 922.2 48.3 720.0 0.0 153.5 14.5 15.6
         Dec 408 1,172.9 30.8 188.0 68.2 119.7 923.3 47.2 721.5 0.0 154.3 14.5 16.3
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2016          Nov 976 848.7 15.0 171.0 61.5 108.9 628.6 31.6 495.0 0.0 101.7 15.9 18.2
         Dec 976 850.3 16.7 169.0 59.9 108.8 630.3 31.0 496.3 0.0 102.9 16.0 18.3
Mortgage banks
2016          Nov 15 279.6 0.7 49.4 34.6 14.5 220.1 4.9 176.6 − 38.7 0.2 9.3
         Dec 15 277.5 2.0 46.4 32.1 14.3 219.6 3.1 178.3 − 38.3 0.2 9.3
Building and loan associations
2016          Nov 20 217.8 0.7 59.2 42.4 16.8 153.1 1.3 128.4 . 23.4 0.3 4.5
         Dec 20 218.8 0.9 59.3 42.7 16.5 153.8 1.2 129.2 . 23.4 0.3 4.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
  From July 2016 including DZ BANK AG Deutsche Zentral- Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt am Main (DZ Bank)
2016          Nov 20 1,287.5 44.7 686.4 593.5 91.7 427.0 33.9 280.7 0.0 111.1 20.9 108.6
         Dec 20 1,267.5 39.9 676.7 585.4 91.3 423.7 30.6 280.7 0.0 111.1 20.8 106.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2016          Nov 138 1,097.1 109.5 415.9 373.1 42.6 469.3 68.4 286.7 0.2 111.0 4.4 98.1
         Dec 138 1,088.8 115.0 402.0 359.3 42.1 471.8 66.4 290.5 0.4 112.1 4.5 95.5
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2016          Nov 35 714.2 42.9 184.3 146.0 38.2 392.5 44.8 245.1 0.2 99.8 3.5 91.1
         Dec 35 701.2 39.4 175.1 136.8 37.7 394.5 43.8 248.1 0.3 100.2 3.5 88.7
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institutionas MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,729.0 548.3 1,180.6 3,519.6 1,866.2 299.0 695.6 60.7 597.6 541.7 61.3 1,113.0 486.6 1,137.1 2016          July
1,717.1 535.9 1,181.1 3,530.4 1,875.8 302.4 694.7 65.0 596.8 541.7 60.7 1,116.8 484.9 1,102.6          Aug 1,708.3 498.1 1,210.1 3,517.0 1,872.6 294.3 694.2 52.7 595.4 541.1 60.4 1,119.9 487.8 1,074.1          Sep 
1,717.7 535.7 1,182.0 3,561.0 1,914.2 294.8 697.2 70.9 594.8 541.3 60.0 1,126.4 487.8 1,019.0          Oct 
1,745.0 562.6 1,182.4 3,595.2 1,937.6 305.7 697.8 74.0 594.3 541.3 59.7 1,138.1 488.0 988.7          Nov 1,729.0 504.0 1,225.0 3,532.9 1,898.4 280.5 698.3 41.9 596.5 544.0 59.1 1,131.9 489.7 952.8          Dec 
Commercial banks 6
819.7 387.1 432.6 1,405.5 852.4 181.1 245.2 57.0 101.8 94.1 25.0 167.2 164.6 677.1 2016          Nov 830.2 359.4 470.7 1,358.5 821.9 164.1 245.3 33.6 102.2 94.3 24.9 167.9 166.3 647.2          Dec 
Big banks 7
420.7 183.2 237.4 615.4 350.1 109.7 86.5 56.4 63.1 61.8 5.9 133.5 97.2 620.9 2016          Nov 417.1 159.8 257.3 579.7 328.8 95.3 86.5 33.6 63.2 61.8 6.0 134.3 97.2 591.4          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
184.2 58.7 125.4 638.2 401.6 48.6 131.9 0.6 38.3 32.1 17.8 33.4 59.3 48.5 2016          Nov 190.6 63.5 127.1 629.6 394.2 47.8 131.3 − 38.6 32.2 17.7 33.2 61.1 48.3          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
214.9 145.2 69.7 151.9 100.6 22.7 26.7 − 0.5 0.2 1.3 0.4 8.0 7.8 2016          Nov 222.4 136.1 86.3 149.3 98.9 21.0 27.6 − 0.5 0.2 1.3 0.4 8.0 7.6          Dec 
Landesbanken
258.2 61.5 196.8 291.9 120.3 60.2 97.6 13.5 13.4 10.4 0.5 201.9 55.2 110.1 2016          Nov 238.8 39.2 199.6 278.6 114.9 52.7 97.2 7.7 13.3 10.4 0.5 201.0 55.0 105.7          Dec 
Savings banks
130.2 7.8 122.3 882.6 534.3 14.9 15.3 − 292.7 263.7 25.3 13.9 101.2 41.9 2016          Nov 130.4 8.3 122.1 884.4 536.0 15.0 15.2 − 293.4 264.7 24.9 13.8 101.2 43.1          Dec 
 
Credit cooperatives
 
105.6 2.6 103.0 634.6 393.5 31.9 15.9 − 185.9 172.7 7.3 7.6 68.9 32.0 2016          Nov 104.5 1.7 102.8 637.4 395.4 31.9 15.8 − 187.1 174.2 7.2 7.6 69.0 31.7          Dec 
Mortgage banks
50.2 6.8 43.4 115.5 8.7 8.6 98.2 − 0.1 0.1 . 93.5 9.9 10.5 2016          Nov 51.3 4.4 46.9 113.0 7.6 8.2 97.1 − 0.1 0.1 . 92.5 10.0 10.6          Dec 
Building and loan associations
24.0 4.5 19.5 166.9 1.0 1.1 164.4 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 2.0 10.2 14.7 2016          Nov 24.0 3.7 20.3 169.3 1.0 1.1 166.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 2.0 10.2 13.4          Dec 
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
From July 2016 including DZ Bank
357.1 92.3 264.9 98.0 27.3 7.8 61.3 3.5 − − . 652.0 78.0 102.4 2016          Nov 349.8 87.3 262.5 91.6 21.6 7.5 60.9 0.6 − − . 647.0 78.0 101.0          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
383.9 216.5 167.3 539.9 372.4 57.6 80.1 12.0 21.2 20.7 8.6 22.5 50.7 100.1 2016          Nov 392.5 209.7 182.7 523.8 359.1 54.2 80.7 10.5 21.3 20.7 8.6 21.7 51.8 99.0          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
169.0 71.4 97.6 388.0 271.7 34.9 53.4 12.0 20.7 20.4 7.3 22.1 42.7 92.4 2016          Nov 170.1 73.7 96.4 374.6 260.2 33.2 53.1 10.5 20.8 20.5 7.3 21.3 43.8 91.5          Dec 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2015          July 15.4 116.6 1,429.7 1,091.8 0.0 2.7 335.2 1.6 3,228.7 2,748.4 0.3 2.4 477.6
         Aug 15.2 133.6 1,418.0 1,086.8 0.0 2.1 329.1 1.6 3,230.9 2,751.1 0.3 1.9 477.5
         Sep 15.6 139.8 1,384.6 1,059.7 0.0 2.3 322.7 1.6 3,230.8 2,756.1 0.3 1.7 472.8
         Oct 16.2 140.0 1,421.3 1,100.0 0.0 2.1 319.1 1.6 3,232.0 2,764.6 0.3 1.5 465.6
         Nov 15.7 152.2 1,438.4 1,122.6 0.0 2.6 313.2 1.6 3,249.0 2,775.2 0.3 1.0 472.5
         Dec 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016          Jan 16.2 170.9 1,368.7 1,086.0 0.0 2.0 280.8 1.6 3,238.7 2,771.0 0.4 0.7 466.5
         Feb 15.9 164.3 1,379.8 1,098.3 0.0 1.8 279.7 1.6 3,248.0 2,781.4 0.4 1.5 464.7
         Mar 17.2 166.6 1,358.5 1,076.3 0.0 2.0 280.2 1.6 3,247.2 2,785.9 0.3 1.2 459.7
         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8
         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
         July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
         Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5
         Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
         Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
         Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6
         Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
Changes *
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2015          July + 0.3 + 1.2 + 5.5 + 9.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 3.6 − 0.0 + 28.3 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.1
         Aug − 0.1 + 17.0 − 12.4 − 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.1         Sep + 0.3 + 6.3 − 33.3 − 27.1 − + 0.2 − 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.1 + 36.6 + 40.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.2         Nov − 0.6 + 12.3 + 17.3 + 22.7 − + 0.5 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.9
         Dec + 3.6 + 2.8 − 91.8 − 59.9 − − 0.9 − 31.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5
2016          Jan − 3.1 + 15.9 + 22.2 + 23.4 − + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 6.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.4
         Feb − 0.3 − 6.5 + 11.9 + 13.1 − − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.7
         Mar + 1.3 + 2.3 − 21.3 − 22.1 − + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.0
         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
         July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6
         Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
         Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
         Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.1 889.7 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 25.0 92.4 1,079.0 152.5 926.5 0.0 10.8 3,179.3 1,612.9 910.4 596.4 59.5 29.5 2015          July
− 25.0 92.1 1,072.5 149.0 923.4 0.0 10.8 3,193.8 1,630.7 909.1 595.2 58.8 29.5          Aug − 24.9 92.0 1,076.0 153.1 922.9 0.0 10.8 3,186.8 1,630.7 903.5 594.6 58.1 29.5          Sep 
− 24.7 91.9 1,096.4 150.5 945.8 0.0 10.6 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 594.6 57.5 29.5          Oct 
− 24.5 92.0 1,108.0 158.2 949.7 0.0 10.5 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 594.3 56.8 29.5          Nov − 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3          Dec 
− 20.3 90.0 1,066.1 145.0 921.1 0.0 6.0 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 596.1 54.8 29.3 2016          Jan 
− 20.2 89.8 1,061.7 151.8 909.9 0.0 5.9 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 596.4 54.6 29.3          Feb − 19.9 90.3 1,058.6 147.9 910.7 0.0 5.9 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 594.5 54.4 29.1          Mar 
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6          July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7          Aug − 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6          Sep 
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6          Oct 
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6          Nov − 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.1 889.7 588.5 50.4 28.8          Dec 
Changes *
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.3 − 0.2 − 11.1 − 9.2 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 27.5 + 12.9 + 17.7 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 2015          July
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 7.1 − 3.4 − 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 14.5 + 17.8 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 − 2.6 + 22.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 11.6 + 7.7 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 − 2.0 − 42.4 − 27.1 − 15.2 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 13.9 − 13.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 2016          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.1 + 7.0 − 10.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.2 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 −          Nov − + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2          Dec 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.6 234.8 1.0 756.1 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2015          July 0.3 1,149.0 911.5 625.0 286.5 6.6 230.9 1.1 760.0 433.4 103.3 330.1 5.0 321.6
         Aug 0.3 1,140.9 904.7 619.3 285.3 6.1 230.2 1.1 761.5 435.8 106.9 328.8 5.8 319.9
         Sep 0.3 1,152.8 914.7 627.4 287.4 4.4 233.7 1.1 760.7 434.9 106.6 328.3 6.0 319.8
         Oct 0.3 1,138.7 900.4 617.1 283.4 2.9 235.3 1.1 772.2 446.5 116.4 330.1 6.1 319.6
         Nov 0.3 1,112.9 873.2 598.4 274.8 2.8 237.0 1.1 784.8 450.0 103.7 346.4 6.9 327.9
         Dec 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016          Jan 0.3 1,080.5 844.9 570.2 274.8 1.9 233.6 1.0 766.7 440.2 101.3 338.8 8.9 317.6
         Feb 0.3 1,095.3 854.5 580.2 274.3 3.1 237.8 1.0 765.9 445.3 102.6 342.7 10.2 310.3
         Mar 0.3 1,057.4 816.6 551.7 264.9 3.0 237.8 1.0 754.4 427.1 87.9 339.2 9.1 318.2
         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7
         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
         July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
         Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0
         Sep 0.3 1,046.8 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.4 1.0 751.0 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.3
         Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
         Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3
         Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.6 234.8 1.0 756.1 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
Changes *
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.7 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.6 − 10.6 − 0.0 + 17.6 + 28.9 + 9.9 + 18.9 − 3.0 − 8.3
2015          July + 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 4.9 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.5 − − 9.1 − 4.4 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 2.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.7
         Sep + 0.0 + 14.0 + 12.2 + 10.0 + 2.2 − 1.7 + 3.6 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Oct + 0.0 − 20.2 − 20.2 − 13.9 − 6.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 7.7 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9
         Nov + 0.0 − 38.2 − 39.4 − 25.9 − 13.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 2.7 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 6.8
         Dec − 0.0 − 36.7 − 33.4 − 37.5 + 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 20.7 − 18.9 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 7.2
2016          Jan − 0.0 + 16.1 + 16.8 + 15.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 18.2 + 18.2 + 18.6 − 0.4 + 1.3 − 1.3
         Feb + 0.0 + 14.9 + 9.6 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 1.1 − 7.1
         Mar − 0.0 − 26.3 − 26.5 − 22.8 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 13.6 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 9.3
         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
         July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3
         Sep − 0.0 − 44.3 − 42.2 − 42.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 5.3 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.5
         Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
         Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1
         Dec + 0.0 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 10.5 − 9.1 − 13.5 + 4.4 − 0.5 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
13.6 35.3 690.6 342.8 347.7 266.7 81.0 0.1 244.4 131.9 112.5 62.0 50.5 0.9 2015          July
13.7 35.2 681.5 334.5 347.0 264.5 82.5 0.1 253.6 135.3 118.3 65.9 52.4 0.9          Aug 13.7 35.2 672.0 346.4 325.5 244.3 81.2 0.1 234.5 128.3 106.3 53.2 53.1 0.9          Sep 
13.5 35.2 656.9 362.9 294.0 212.7 81.3 0.1 243.4 134.6 108.8 56.6 52.3 0.8          Oct 
13.6 34.8 649.0 373.8 275.2 190.5 84.6 0.1 243.2 136.3 106.9 55.7 51.2 0.8          Nov 13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7          Dec 
13.2 29.6 637.8 352.2 285.7 201.3 84.3 0.1 237.7 129.1 108.6 60.5 48.2 0.8 2016          Jan 
13.2 29.0 644.4 357.8 286.6 201.8 84.8 0.1 246.4 137.2 109.2 61.8 47.5 0.8          Feb 13.3 28.9 623.4 349.6 273.8 192.0 81.8 0.0 218.8 119.8 99.0 52.9 46.1 0.8          Mar 
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7          July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7          Aug 13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7          Sep 
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7          Oct 
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7          Nov 13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7          Dec 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
+ 0.0 − 1.2 + 16.0 + 10.6 + 5.4 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 2015          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − + 10.5 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 4.3 + 2.2 − 0.0          Aug + 0.1 + 0.0 − 9.5 + 12.0 − 21.5 − 20.1 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 18.9 − 7.0 − 11.9 − 12.6 + 0.7 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 18.2 + 15.2 − 33.4 − 33.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.0 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.2          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 − 14.3 + 8.4 − 22.7 − 25.2 + 2.5 − − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 4.3 − 32.0 − 48.3 + 16.4 + 15.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.6 − 7.9 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.9 + 27.6 + 29.5 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.2 − + 36.9 + 26.4 + 10.6 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 2016          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.0 − 5.4 − 8.6 − 6.7 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 25.6 − 16.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 1.2 + 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0          Nov − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.8 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2015          July 3,228.7 2,748.7 273.0 215.4 214.0 1.3 57.6 56.5 1.1 2,955.7 2,430.2
         Aug 3,230.9 2,751.4 269.4 214.0 212.9 1.1 55.5 54.6 0.9 2,961.4 2,432.5
         Sep 3,230.8 2,756.4 271.8 218.5 217.6 0.9 53.3 52.5 0.8 2,959.0 2,428.4
         Oct 3,232.0 2,764.9 268.0 212.4 211.7 0.7 55.6 54.8 0.8 2,964.0 2,433.8
         Nov 3,249.0 2,775.5 264.2 212.9 212.3 0.6 51.3 50.9 0.4 2,984.8 2,451.1
         Dec 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016          Jan 3,238.7 2,771.4 259.0 208.1 207.7 0.4 50.9 50.5 0.3 2,979.7 2,452.5
         Feb 3,248.0 2,781.8 266.3 214.3 213.6 0.7 52.0 51.2 0.8 2,981.7 2,456.1
         Mar 3,247.2 2,786.3 271.4 218.7 217.9 0.8 52.6 52.2 0.4 2,975.9 2,454.1
         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7
         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.8 217.8 216.8 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.3 2,472.8
         July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
         Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1
         Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
         Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
         Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5
         Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.8 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
Changes *
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2015          July + 28.3 + 3.1 − 6.2 − 8.4 − 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 34.4 + 31.9
         Aug + 2.3 + 2.9 − 3.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 2.6
         Sep − 0.1 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4
         Oct + 1.2 + 8.6 − 3.8 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 5.7
         Nov + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.9 − 0.4 + 17.6 + 14.1
         Dec − 15.1 − 11.0 − 8.6 − 5.1 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 6.5 + 0.3
2016          Jan + 4.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1
         Feb + 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.6 + 6.4 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6
         Mar − 0.8 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 6.0 − 2.2
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7
         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.2
         July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2         Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
         Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
         Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0
         Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,201.5 250.8 1,950.6 228.7 23.0 525.5 276.6 28.5 248.2 248.9 − 2.0 2015          July
2,208.2 251.0 1,957.2 224.4 22.9 528.9 275.7 28.2 247.6 253.1 − 2.0          Aug 
2,208.7 251.2 1,957.4 219.7 22.9 530.6 277.5 29.3 248.2 253.1 − 2.0          Sep 
2,220.0 253.2 1,966.8 213.8 22.7 530.2 278.5 29.3 249.2 251.8 − 2.0          Oct 
2,233.7 256.1 1,977.6 217.4 22.5 533.8 278.6 28.1 250.5 255.1 − 2.0          Nov 2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1          Dec 
2,235.3 257.1 1,978.3 217.2 18.2 527.2 277.8 27.7 250.1 249.4 − 2.1 2016          Jan 
2,240.2 257.4 1,982.8 215.9 18.0 525.6 276.8 27.7 249.1 248.8 − 2.1          Feb 2,240.5 257.3 1,983.2 213.5 17.9 521.8 275.6 27.5 248.1 246.2 − 2.0          Mar 
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May2,256.9 258.7 1,998.2 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8          July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8          Aug 2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8          Sep 
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8          Oct 
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8          Nov 2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8          Dec 
Changes *
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.5 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 9.7 − 0.7 + 10.4 + 22.2 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.9 − − 0.0 2015          July
+ 6.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 − 4.3 − 0.1 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 4.3 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 4.7 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 11.6 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 10.5 + 2.0 + 8.6 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − −          Nov 
− 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 6.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 3.0 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2016          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 1.0 + 3.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6 − − 0.1          Mar 
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May
+ 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.4 − 0.6 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Dec 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2014 2,384.8 1,225.7 1,188.7 984.3 204.4 1,291.6 328.3 122.9 100.1 59.8 123.7 47.8 68.4 124.8
2015          Dec 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016          Mar 2,458.5 1,227.2 1,235.2 987.0 248.2 1,328.6 342.5 133.3 101.9 62.2 126.6 50.1 62.6 131.6
         June 2,473.6 1,235.1 1,248.0 996.2 251.8 1,332.0 345.8 131.5 101.7 62.7 125.4 50.9 59.0 133.7         Sep 2,497.2 1,248.2 1,264.5 1,007.6 256.9 1,341.1 350.5 130.3 103.0 63.2 126.9 51.2 57.4 136.4         Dec 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 56.5 139.6
 Short-term lending
2014 212.1 − 7.6 − 7.6 177.2 3.9 32.5 6.0 11.8 41.2 3.6 5.9 23.2
2015          Dec 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2016          Mar 218.0 − 7.7 − 7.7 185.1 4.1 39.4 4.9 13.0 43.6 4.0 5.3 24.6
         June 216.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 184.7 4.3 37.0 4.7 13.1 42.1 4.2 5.1 27.2
         Sep 213.8 − 7.6 − 7.6 181.6 4.1 34.3 4.6 13.0 42.6 4.1 4.7 28.5
         Dec 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.0 29.3
 Medium-term lending
2014 251.7 − 35.8 − 35.8 178.4 13.4 23.5 5.4 9.9 16.6 4.2 11.4 39.2
2015          Dec 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2016          Mar 257.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 181.8 13.2 23.9 5.1 10.4 16.2 4.5 11.5 41.2
         June 258.7 − 34.7 − 34.7 182.1 13.2 23.7 5.1 10.5 16.6 4.5 11.1 40.4
         Sep 261.0 − 34.8 − 34.8 183.4 13.4 24.3 5.7 10.5 16.5 4.6 11.0 41.1
         Dec 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.3 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
 Long-term lending
2014 1,921.0 1,225.7 1,145.2 984.3 160.9 936.1 310.9 66.9 88.8 38.1 65.8 39.9 51.2 62.3
2015          Dec 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2016          Mar 1,983.2 1,227.2 1,192.7 987.0 205.7 961.7 325.3 70.1 91.9 38.8 66.8 41.7 45.8 65.8
         June 1,998.2 1,235.1 1,205.5 996.2 209.3 965.3 328.3 70.7 91.9 39.1 66.8 42.1 42.8 66.0         Sep 2,022.5 1,248.2 1,222.1 1,007.6 214.5 976.1 332.9 71.7 92.7 39.7 67.8 42.4 41.6 66.9         Dec 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.9 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.8 42.5 41.4 68.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2015          Q4 + 13.7 + 9.0 + 11.4 + 9.0 + 2.4 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.2
2016          Q1 + 18.5 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 14.1 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0
         Q2 + 17.4 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 3.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 3.3         Q3 + 24.5 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 10.9 + 5.1 + 10.2 + 4.2 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.6 + 2.7         Q4 + 14.4 + 9.2 + 12.4 + 8.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.2
 Short-term lending
2015          Q4 − 7.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.2
2016          Q1 + 10.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 11.4 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Q2 − 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.6         Q3 − 2.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3         Q4 − 7.7 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.9
 Medium-term lending
2015          Q4 + 3.8 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6
2016          Q1 + 1.4 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 3.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6         Q4 + 2.4 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7
 Long-term lending
2015          Q4 + 17.0 + 9.0 + 11.7 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 8.6 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 1.8
2016          Q1 + 6.5 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.6
         Q2 + 15.1 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 0.4         Q3 + 24.2 + 12.4 + 16.2 + 10.9 + 5.3 + 10.7 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.8         Q4 + 19.6 + 9.2 + 13.3 + 8.4 + 4.9 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.6
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
644.1 188.1 33.9 173.8 389.8 47.9 1,078.6 856.6 222.0 150.0 10.7 14.5 3.8 2014
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5 2015          Dec 
660.2 194.8 34.4 177.4 397.2 47.1 1,115.9 889.2 226.6 156.8 10.3 14.1 3.4 2016          Mar 
667.2 198.4 34.6 178.1 399.4 46.9 1,127.6 898.7 228.9 159.6 9.8 14.0 3.5          June672.7 201.4 34.8 180.8 401.1 46.8 1,142.0 910.5 231.5 162.3 9.8 14.2 3.5          Sep 680.5 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6          Dec 
Short-term lending
52.9 8.5 6.1 11.8 26.6 6.2 34.2 3.7 30.5 1.9 10.7 0.7 0.0 2014
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0 2015          Dec 
50.3 8.1 6.5 10.5 25.6 6.2 32.4 3.7 28.7 1.8 10.3 0.5 0.0 2016          Mar 
51.2 8.6 6.1 10.7 25.5 5.9 31.6 3.6 28.1 1.8 9.8 0.5 0.0          June49.9 8.5 5.9 11.1 24.7 5.7 31.6 3.4 28.2 1.7 9.8 0.5 0.0          Sep 48.4 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
68.2 9.4 7.0 19.8 32.0 3.5 72.8 22.4 50.4 45.2 − 0.5 0.0 2014
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0 2015          Dec 
69.1 10.1 7.2 19.4 32.7 3.5 74.9 21.5 53.3 48.1 − 0.6 0.0 2016          Mar 
70.1 10.6 7.3 19.0 33.0 3.6 76.0 21.4 54.6 49.3 − 0.6 0.0          June
69.7 10.7 7.3 18.9 33.0 3.7 77.1 21.4 55.7 50.3 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
Long-term lending
523.0 170.2 20.9 142.2 331.2 38.2 971.6 830.5 141.1 102.8 − 13.4 3.7 2014
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5 2015          Dec 
540.8 176.7 20.7 147.6 338.9 37.4 1,008.6 864.0 144.6 106.9 − 13.0 3.4 2016          Mar 
545.8 179.2 21.2 148.5 340.9 37.4 1,019.9 873.7 146.2 108.6 − 13.0 3.4          June
553.1 182.1 21.6 150.8 343.4 37.4 1,033.3 885.7 147.6 110.2 − 13.1 3.5          Sep 
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 2015          Q4+ 6.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 7.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 11.8 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 6.4 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 14.1 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 7.6 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 8.1 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 2015          Q4
+ 2.1 − 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 −          Q2− 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.5 − − − 0.0 2015          Q4
+ 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 5.0 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 8.6 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.1 2015          Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 5.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 11.4 + 9.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 7.4 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
+ 6.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016 3,326.7 1,798.1 889.7 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2016          Jan 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 236.2 657.1 39.0 618.1 596.1 54.8 29.3 20.1 0.5
         Feb 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 232.0 655.9 39.5 616.4 596.4 54.6 29.3 19.9 0.8
         Mar 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 236.4 658.5 41.4 617.1 594.5 54.4 29.1 19.8 1.6
         Apr 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 235.9 657.7 42.2 615.5 592.7 54.0 29.0 19.7 1.7
         May 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 237.7 658.3 41.9 616.5 591.2 53.7 29.0 19.6 1.5
         June 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 235.9 658.2 42.8 615.4 590.0 53.1 28.7 19.5 1.5
         July 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 238.0 658.8 44.5 614.3 589.1 52.7 28.6 19.3 1.0
         Aug 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 234.7 658.3 45.0 613.3 588.4 52.2 28.7 19.0 0.7
         Sep 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 239.5 657.2 45.5 611.7 587.2 51.8 28.6 18.8 1.3
         Oct 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 229.9 658.8 45.8 613.1 586.6 51.3 28.6 18.7 1.1
         Nov 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 233.6 658.8 46.5 612.4 586.2 50.9 28.6 18.6 0.8
         Dec 3,326.7 1,798.1 889.7 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2016          Jan + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 7.2 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.4         Mar − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.8
         Apr + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         July + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Aug + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3         Sep + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7
         Oct + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 9.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.3
         Dec − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2016          Jan 193.0 56.6 129.2 83.9 45.3 10.6 34.7 3.7 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.1
         Feb 194.5 61.4 125.9 80.4 45.6 10.6 34.9 3.6 3.6 27.9 2.7 0.5
         Mar 198.3 60.5 130.5 84.1 46.4 10.9 35.5 3.6 3.7 27.7 2.7 1.2
         Apr 196.0 60.8 127.7 79.9 47.8 11.0 36.9 3.7 3.7 27.6 2.6 1.3
         May 204.3 63.5 133.0 84.4 48.6 11.2 37.4 3.8 4.0 27.6 2.6 1.1
         June 204.0 62.1 134.0 84.6 49.4 11.6 37.8 3.9 4.0 27.3 2.6 0.2
         July 203.8 60.1 135.8 84.5 51.3 13.3 38.0 3.9 4.1 27.2 2.6 0.2
         Aug 206.1 62.4 135.6 83.6 52.1 13.7 38.4 4.0 4.1 27.3 2.6 0.0
         Sep 202.6 59.6 134.8 82.4 52.4 14.1 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 0.2
         Oct 199.1 58.8 132.1 78.9 53.2 14.9 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 −
         Nov 207.0 61.7 137.0 82.6 54.4 16.2 38.3 3.9 4.4 27.2 2.6 −
         Dec 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2016          Jan − 4.5 − 1.0 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4         Feb + 3.0 + 4.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4         Mar + 3.8 − 0.9 + 4.6 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.8
         Apr − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 4.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         June − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.9
         July − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Oct − 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 7.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Dec − 7.2 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,126.9 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2016          Jan 3,040.8 1,633.0 764.1 152.3 611.8 28.4 583.5 592.4 51.3 1.4 17.4 0.4
         Feb 3,041.7 1,636.1 761.9 151.6 610.3 28.8 581.5 592.7 51.0 1.4 17.2 0.3         Mar 3,032.9 1,626.9 764.4 152.2 612.2 30.5 581.6 590.9 50.7 1.4 17.2 0.3
         Apr 3,053.8 1,648.8 765.8 156.0 609.8 31.2 578.6 589.0 50.3 1.4 17.1 0.3
         May 3,058.5 1,658.3 763.1 153.3 609.7 30.7 579.0 587.4 49.7 1.4 17.0 0.4         June 3,055.9 1,660.5 760.1 151.3 608.8 31.2 577.6 586.2 49.1 1.4 16.9 1.2
         July 3,071.8 1,677.0 761.1 153.6 607.5 31.2 576.3 585.2 48.6 1.4 16.7 0.8
         Aug 3,076.0 1,686.1 757.4 151.1 606.3 31.4 574.9 584.4 48.1 1.4 16.4 0.6         Sep 3,081.1 1,688.4 761.8 157.0 604.8 31.4 573.3 583.2 47.6 1.4 16.1 1.2
         Oct 3,095.6 1,709.2 756.7 151.1 605.6 30.9 574.8 582.7 47.0 1.4 16.0 1.1
         Nov 3,121.9 1,737.6 755.5 151.1 604.4 30.3 574.1 582.3 46.5 1.5 15.9 0.8         Dec 3,126.9 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.2
2016 + 101.6 + 124.2 − 8.8 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.9
2016          Jan + 13.6 + 16.8 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4
         Feb + 1.8 + 3.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 8.8 − 9.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Apr + 20.9 + 21.8 + 1.4 + 3.8 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         May + 4.8 + 9.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         June − 2.2 + 2.3 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         July + 15.9 + 16.4 + 1.0 + 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.3 + 9.1 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2         Sep + 5.4 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 5.9 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 14.5 + 20.8 − 5.1 − 6.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 26.4 + 28.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec + 5.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2016          Jan 1,037.6 512.8 504.2 97.4 406.9 15.3 391.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         Feb 1,033.9 510.7 502.8 97.4 405.3 15.7 389.6 7.2 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Mar 1,029.9 504.8 504.6 98.0 406.7 17.2 389.5 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         Apr 1,032.3 506.7 505.1 101.3 403.8 17.5 386.4 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         May 1,035.5 513.4 501.5 98.2 403.3 17.0 386.3 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         June 1,027.4 508.9 498.0 95.7 402.2 17.6 384.7 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 1.2
         July 1,027.0 506.7 499.6 98.2 401.4 17.5 384.0 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.6 0.8
         Aug 1,030.7 512.7 497.2 96.9 400.2 17.7 382.5 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.3 0.6
         Sep 1,035.0 512.9 501.4 103.0 398.4 17.8 380.7 7.3 13.4 1.3 13.1 1.2
         Oct 1,040.1 523.5 496.0 96.5 399.5 17.2 382.2 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.1 1.1
         Nov 1,043.0 527.1 495.6 96.6 399.0 17.0 382.0 6.9 13.3 1.3 13.0 0.8
         Dec 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.2
2016 + 4.6 + 15.8 − 11.2 − 1.1 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.9
2016          Jan + 7.9 + 10.0 − 2.2 − 2.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Feb − 2.9 − 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0         Mar − 4.1 − 5.9 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 3.3 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0         June − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Aug + 3.8 + 6.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         Sep + 4.7 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 6.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 5.0 + 10.6 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 3.0 + 3.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec − 10.6 − 8.9 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 3.2 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
householdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2016          July 2,044.8 1,170.3 1,135.8 198.4 791.4 146.0 34.5 261.5 247.9 25.7 180.7 41.5
         Aug 2,045.3 1,173.3 1,138.1 201.5 790.3 146.4 35.2 260.2 246.7 24.7 180.7 41.4
         Sep 2,046.0 1,175.5 1,140.3 198.3 795.2 146.8 35.2 260.4 246.8 24.8 180.8 41.1
         Oct 2,055.5 1,185.7 1,150.8 202.8 800.4 147.6 34.9 260.7 247.0 24.9 181.0 41.0
         Nov 2,078.9 1,210.5 1,175.6 203.9 821.4 150.3 34.9 259.9 246.7 24.8 180.7 41.2
         Dec 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
Changes*
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2016          July + 16.1 + 18.4 + 18.8 + 7.1 + 10.4 + 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3
         Aug + 0.5 + 3.1 + 2.3 + 3.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.7 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Sep + 0.7 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 3.2 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2
         Oct + 9.5 + 10.2 + 10.5 + 4.4 + 5.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Nov + 23.4 + 24.8 + 24.8 + 1.7 + 20.9 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Dec + 15.6 + 11.5 + 11.2 + 2.0 + 7.2 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2016          July 203.8 8.1 3.6 1.8 2.6 0.1 13.8 53.9 15.1 20.4 17.5 0.8 13.1
         Aug 206.1 7.9 3.6 1.6 2.6 0.1 13.8 51.9 14.4 19.2 17.4 0.9 13.1
         Sep 202.6 8.1 3.7 1.8 2.5 0.1 13.8 53.0 14.8 19.8 17.5 0.9 13.0
         Oct 199.1 7.6 3.6 1.4 2.5 0.1 13.8 49.9 14.4 17.1 17.4 1.0 13.0
         Nov 207.0 8.2 4.5 1.3 2.3 0.1 13.8 46.8 13.2 14.9 17.5 1.1 13.0
         Dec 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2016          July − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep − 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Oct − 3.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Nov + 7.8 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − − 3.3 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 7.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 3.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
13.6 55.4 206.1 13.7 192.3 577.8 568.9 9.0 35.2 0.1 3.1 − 2016          July
13.5 54.2 206.0 13.7 192.4 577.0 568.0 9.0 34.7 0.1 3.1 −          Aug 13.6 54.0 206.3 13.7 192.6 575.9 567.0 8.9 34.2 0.1 3.0 −          Sep 
13.7 54.5 206.1 13.6 192.5 575.4 566.7 8.8 33.7 0.1 2.9 −          Oct 
13.2 54.5 205.4 13.3 192.1 575.4 566.8 8.5 33.2 0.1 2.9 −          Nov 13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 −          Dec 
Changes*
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2016          July
− 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug 
+ 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Sep 
+ 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 2014
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
48.3 25.4 8.0 9.4 5.5 0.4 93.5 16.0 54.2 21.9 1.5 − 2016          July
54.2 30.3 8.7 9.6 5.6 0.4 92.0 14.1 54.0 22.4 1.5 −          Aug 51.3 27.5 8.5 9.8 5.6 0.4 90.2 13.6 52.4 22.6 1.6 −          Sep 
49.3 25.8 8.2 9.8 5.5 0.4 92.3 15.1 52.1 23.5 1.6 −          Oct 
53.1 29.0 8.7 9.9 5.6 0.4 98.9 15.0 57.7 24.8 1.5 −          Nov 56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 −          Dec 
Changes*
+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016
− 2.5 − 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 2016          July
+ 5.9 + 4.9 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 1.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          Aug 
− 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 −          Sep 
− 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 −          Oct 
+ 3.9 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 6.6 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          Dec 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2016          Aug 596.8 588.4 534.6 365.4 53.8 40.0 8.4 7.2 0.1 60.7 52.2 37.3 8.6
         Sep 595.4 587.2 534.1 363.6 53.1 39.2 8.3 7.1 0.1 60.4 51.8 37.0 8.5
         Oct 594.8 586.6 534.3 362.7 52.3 38.5 8.2 7.0 0.2 60.0 51.3 36.5 8.6
         Nov 594.3 586.2 534.4 361.4 51.8 38.0 8.1 6.9 0.2 59.7 50.9 36.1 8.8
         Dec 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 1.6 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
Changes*
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2016          Aug − 0.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1
         Sep − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Oct − 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Nov − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.2
         Dec + 2.2 + 2.3 + 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2016          Aug 1,083.2 173.3 29.7 393.3 94.4 115.7 4.1 33.7 6.3 933.7 0.4 0.2 33.6 0.5
         Sep 1,086.5 169.5 32.5 398.2 100.1 125.2 5.0 35.5 5.9 925.7 0.3 0.2 33.4 0.5
         Oct 1,093.1 171.2 29.7 404.1 97.2 121.0 5.0 36.6 6.0 935.5 0.2 0.2 33.3 0.5
         Nov 1,104.5 178.2 28.0 407.8 91.3 113.7 5.0 37.7 6.3 953.2 0.4 0.2 33.5 0.5
         Dec 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
Changes*
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2016          Aug + 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 −
         Sep + 3.3 − 3.7 + 2.8 + 4.9 + 5.7 + 9.5 + 0.8 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 8.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct + 6.6 + 1.3 − 2.8 + 5.9 − 2.9 − 4.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Nov + 11.4 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 3.7 − 5.8 − 7.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 17.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 −         Dec − 6.4 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2016          Oct 20 215.5 41.5 0.0 16.9 14.2 97.2 18.1 22.9 2.3 19.2 161.0 5.6 2.6 10.2 7.0
         Nov 20 217.8 43.1 0.0 16.8 14.0 97.5 18.2 23.4 2.5 21.6 161.4 5.6 2.0 10.2 7.3         Dec 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 8.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Oct 12 149.2 25.9 − 8.4 10.6 75.5 15.4 9.8 1.5 16.7 105.6 5.2 2.6 6.6 4.4         Nov 12 151.2 27.4 − 8.2 10.5 75.6 15.5 10.2 1.7 19.0 105.8 5.3 2.0 6.6 4.7         Dec 12 151.9 27.8 − 7.9 10.3 76.5 15.4 10.3 1.7 18.9 107.3 5.3 2.0 6.6 5.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Oct 8 66.3 15.6 0.0 8.5 3.6 21.8 2.7 13.1 0.8 2.5 55.4 0.4 − 3.6 2.6         Nov 8 66.6 15.7 0.0 8.6 3.5 21.9 2.7 13.2 0.8 2.6 55.6 0.3 − 3.6 2.5         Dec 8 67.0 15.8 0.0 8.7 3.5 22.0 2.7 13.1 0.8 2.5 56.5 0.3 − 3.6 3.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 ... 0.2
2016          Oct 2.0 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.3 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.5 15.9 8.2 0.6 0.0
         Nov 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.0 2.0 3.2 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.5 16.3 8.1 0.6 0.0
         Dec 2.3 1.9 0.6 3.8 1.9 3.4 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.8 16.3 8.0 0.7 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Oct 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.7 2.6 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.2 11.4 5.1 0.5 0.0
         Nov 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.4 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.2 11.8 5.0 0.4 0.0         Dec 1.5 1.3 0.3 2.8 1.3 2.6 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.4 11.8 5.0 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2016          Oct 0.8 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.1 0.2 0.0         Nov 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.1 0.2 0.0         Dec 0.9 0.6 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.5 3.1 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2013 56 209 1,726.4 435.6 421.9 141.6 280.3 13.7 519.6 411.3 11.0 400.3 108.3 771.1 485.6
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016          Feb 49 192 2,022.6 555.3 538.2 173.5 364.7 17.2 658.4 538.2 14.3 523.9 120.2 808.8 607.9
         Mar 49 192 1,943.8 558.9 543.2 172.4 370.8 15.7 642.2 529.2 14.6 514.6 113.1 742.6 557.5
         Apr 49 192 1,933.2 545.0 529.1 177.2 351.8 15.9 659.8 545.1 14.7 530.4 114.7 728.4 539.0
         May 48 187 1,930.1 563.9 548.9 176.4 372.5 15.0 642.5 529.8 13.6 516.3 112.7 723.7 519.2
         June 49 188 2,036.5 569.2 553.5 182.3 371.2 15.6 674.8 556.9 14.1 542.8 117.9 792.5 593.8
         July 50 187 2,060.2 587.5 572.6 183.1 389.6 14.9 668.3 551.7 13.6 538.1 116.5 804.5 590.3
         Aug 50 187 1,959.7 569.3 553.9 187.9 366.0 15.4 643.3 528.5 13.9 514.6 114.7 747.1 544.6
         Sep 50 187 1,916.6 595.9 581.3 200.4 380.9 14.6 629.3 524.9 14.3 510.6 104.4 691.4 511.1
         Oct 50 186 1,942.2 626.9 613.0 212.4 400.6 13.9 599.9 496.1 13.3 482.8 103.7 715.4 497.2
         Nov 50 185 1,928.8 592.4 578.4 205.9 372.5 14.0 622.8 516.4 14.1 502.3 106.4 713.7 495.0
Changes *
2014 − − 4 + 119.6 + 74.4 + 72.2 + 59.6 + 12.6 + 2.2 + 38.0 + 31.4 + 3.0 + 28.4 + 6.6 + 7.5 + 66.4
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2016          Mar − − − 75.2 + 14.9 + 16.0 − 1.0 + 17.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 62.5 − 39.6
         Apr − − − 10.9 − 14.2 − 14.4 + 4.8 − 19.2 + 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.4 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 1.4 − 14.5 − 18.8
         May − 1 − 5 − 4.7 + 13.3 + 14.4 − 0.9 + 15.3 − 1.1 − 25.5 − 22.3 − 1.2 − 21.1 − 3.2 − 6.4 − 24.9
         June + 1 + 1 + 105.9 + 4.4 + 3.8 + 5.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 + 33.6 + 27.7 + 0.5 + 27.2 + 5.9 + 68.4 + 75.4
         July + 1 − 1 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 19.4 + 0.7 + 18.7 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 + 12.2 − 2.6
         Aug − − − 100.4 − 17.6 − 18.2 + 4.9 − 23.0 + 0.5 − 24.1 − 22.5 + 0.3 − 22.7 − 1.7 − 57.2 − 45.2
         Sep − − − 42.9 + 27.4 + 28.1 + 12.5 + 15.6 − 0.7 − 12.8 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 3.1 − 10.1 − 55.6 − 32.4
         Oct − − 1 + 24.9 + 26.9 + 27.7 + 11.9 + 15.8 − 0.8 − 32.2 − 31.4 − 0.9 − 30.5 − 0.8 + 23.3 − 16.4
         Nov − − 1 − 15.5 − 44.0 − 43.9 − 6.5 − 37.4 − 0.2 + 12.5 + 11.3 + 0.7 + 10.6 + 1.1 − 3.8 − 9.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2013 33 75 425.2 187.9 158.7 91.4 67.3 29.2 185.4 148.3 26.1 122.3 37.1 52.0 −
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016          Feb 24 58 359.4 120.7 108.5 50.7 57.9 12.2 174.1 141.8 22.3 119.6 32.3 64.6 −
         Mar 24 58 352.2 113.6 102.1 47.9 54.2 11.5 173.4 140.6 22.6 118.1 32.8 65.2 −
         Apr 24 58 349.7 116.3 104.9 48.9 56.0 11.4 169.8 137.4 23.0 114.4 32.4 63.7 −
         May 24 57 350.4 115.3 103.9 49.0 54.9 11.4 170.6 138.2 22.9 115.3 32.4 64.5 −
         June 24 57 356.9 117.7 107.5 52.9 54.6 10.2 170.5 138.0 22.9 115.1 32.5 68.7 −
         July 19 56 355.3 116.3 106.2 51.8 54.5 10.1 170.3 137.4 23.7 113.7 32.9 68.7 −
         Aug 19 55 352.7 112.4 102.3 48.0 54.3 10.0 167.7 135.4 23.0 112.3 32.3 72.6 −
         Sep 19 53 320.9 84.2 74.1 20.9 53.2 10.0 168.0 135.7 23.2 112.6 32.3 68.7 −
         Oct 19 53 316.6 81.4 71.3 20.5 50.8 10.1 157.9 126.3 22.9 103.4 31.5 77.3 −
         Nov 19 52 323.1 83.1 73.2 19.9 53.3 10.0 154.6 123.1 23.1 100.0 31.5 85.4 −
Changes *
2014 − 5 − 12 − 46.7 − 39.9 − 26.3 − 8.0 − 18.2 − 13.6 − 17.0 − 11.4 − 4.4 − 7.0 − 5.6 + 10.1 −
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2016          Mar − − − 3.7 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 −
         Apr − − − 2.5 + 2.7 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.3 + 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.4 − 1.5 −
         May − − 1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 −
         June − − + 6.7 + 2.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 −
         July − 5 − 1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Aug − − 1 − 2.3 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 3.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 4.0 −
         Sep − − 2 − 31.5 − 28.0 − 28.0 − 27.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 3.9 −
         Oct − − − 5.6 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 10.6 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 0.8 + 8.6 −
         Nov − − 1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 4.2 − 4.2 + 0.2 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 8.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2017
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
890.9 596.4 327.0 269.4 294.5 24.2 19.1 5.1 270.3 125.4 41.2 668.9 484.1 2013
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 2015
1,105.0 734.8 368.7 366.1 370.3 22.1 17.4 4.7 348.2 127.7 49.7 740.1 605.7 2016          Feb 
1,083.8 714.8 344.5 370.3 369.0 23.6 19.5 4.1 345.4 121.3 49.4 689.3 559.2          Mar 
1,108.9 719.0 348.0 371.0 389.9 21.5 17.4 4.1 368.5 117.7 49.4 657.2 541.5          Apr 
1,130.1 746.9 358.9 388.0 383.2 20.7 17.2 3.6 362.5 111.0 49.7 639.4 523.0          May1,154.9 762.2 386.5 375.6 392.8 21.3 17.8 3.5 371.5 104.9 49.8 726.9 596.8          June
1,163.1 772.6 388.8 383.8 390.5 21.3 17.5 3.8 369.2 108.5 49.8 738.9 593.8          July
1,128.2 760.8 382.8 378.1 367.4 21.6 17.7 3.8 345.8 114.7 49.8 667.0 548.8          Aug 1,117.2 763.1 380.6 382.5 354.1 21.5 17.7 3.8 332.6 113.7 49.7 636.1 513.9          Sep 
1,186.7 833.2 422.0 411.2 353.4 21.6 17.8 3.8 331.9 108.9 49.6 597.0 491.1          Oct 
1,165.0 791.8 410.5 381.3 373.2 19.1 15.5 3.6 354.1 104.2 50.3 609.4 495.3          Nov 
Changes *
+ 101.5 +112.9 + 89.2 + 23.6 − 11.4 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 7.7 + 3.0 + 4.0 + 11.1 + 73.4 2014− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015
− 9.5 − 8.6 − 24.2 + 15.5 − 0.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 50.9 − 34.9 2016          Mar 
+ 24.6 + 3.7 + 3.5 + 0.2 + 20.9 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 23.0 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 18.0          Apr 
+ 15.1 + 22.0 + 10.9 + 11.1 − 6.9 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 8.3 + 0.3 − 17.9 − 23.8          May+ 24.0 + 14.3 + 27.6 − 13.2 + 9.6 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 6.5 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 74.4          June
+ 9.0 + 11.2 + 2.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.0 + 12.0 − 2.1          July
− 34.3 − 11.2 − 6.0 − 5.2 − 23.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 23.4 + 6.4 + 0.1 − 71.9 − 44.4          Aug − 10.3 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 5.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 30.9 − 33.9          Sep 
+ 65.3 + 66.1 + 41.4 + 24.7 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 39.1 − 25.5          Oct 
− 31.1 − 50.5 − 11.5 − 39.0 + 19.4 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 21.9 − 6.8 + 0.7 + 12.3 − 2.6          Nov 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
334.2 201.1 113.4 87.7 133.0 18.5 16.4 2.0 114.6 21.3 30.0 39.8 − 2013
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015
282.1 157.1 99.1 58.0 125.0 13.2 10.5 2.8 111.8 12.9 24.3 40.1 − 2016          Feb 
275.0 160.5 100.5 59.9 114.5 13.4 10.5 2.9 101.1 13.3 24.2 39.6 −          Mar 
274.5 161.1 102.8 58.3 113.4 13.8 10.9 2.9 99.6 13.5 24.2 37.5 −          Apr 
275.9 164.2 103.6 60.6 111.8 12.7 9.9 2.8 99.1 13.3 24.3 36.8 −          May
284.5 163.7 101.1 62.6 120.8 12.1 9.3 2.7 108.7 12.3 24.0 36.1 −          June
282.4 162.9 98.9 64.1 119.4 11.5 8.7 2.7 108.0 12.5 24.4 36.0 −          July
281.4 167.7 99.9 67.8 113.7 11.0 6.3 4.8 102.7 12.4 24.4 34.5 −          Aug 
248.4 136.3 72.9 63.3 112.2 11.2 6.4 4.7 101.0 12.5 23.8 36.2 −          Sep 
243.7 140.6 76.3 64.3 103.1 10.8 6.3 4.5 92.3 12.7 23.9 36.3 −          Oct 
250.1 139.7 77.1 62.6 110.4 10.2 5.2 4.9 100.3 12.6 23.8 36.6 −          Nov 
Changes *
− 45.5 − 32.4 − 12.3 − 20.1 − 13.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 − 14.9 − 3.0 − 4.0 + 5.8 − 2014
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015
− 4.2 + 4.8 + 1.4 + 3.4 − 9.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 9.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2016          Mar 
− 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.1 −          Apr 
− 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 −          May
+ 8.8 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 + 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 9.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 −          June
− 2.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.0 + 3.8 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.0 − 5.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 −          Aug 
− 32.7 − 31.3 − 27.0 − 4.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.6 −          Sep 
− 5.8 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 −          Oct 
+ 4.4 − 2.1 + 0.8 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 −          Nov 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2017
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016          Oct 11,783.5 117.8 117.4 823.9 706.5 0.0
         Nov . . . . . .
         Dec 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017          Jan  p 12,080.0 120.8 120.4 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016          Oct 3,293,872 28.0 32,939 32,773 270,048 237,275 0
         Nov . . . . . . .
         Dec 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017          Jan  p 3,412,496 28.2 34,125 33,960 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in 1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,170
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016          Oct 6,078 5,447 2,665 10,869 5,924 233 1,558
         Nov . . . . . . .
         Dec 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017          Jan 6,400 5,562 2,953 10,950 6,033 226 1,835
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in 1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016          Oct 2,177,643 3,232 420,700 586,867 105,447
         Nov . . . . .
         Dec 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017          Jan 2,235,242 1,601 462,201 584,788 128,661
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2017
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2017 Jan                11 32,319 32,319 0.00−−−7
         Jan                18 32,330 32,330 0.00−−−7
         Jan                25 33,994 33,994 0.00−−−7
         Feb                  1 31,645 31,645 0.00−−−7
         Feb                  8 29,599 29,599 0.00−−−7
         Feb                15 28,007 28,007 0.00−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2016 Oct                27 5,427 5,427 2 0 . 0 0−−− 9 1
         Dec                  1 3,270 3,270 2 ... − − − 84
         Dec                21 62,161 62,161 0.00−−− 1,456
         Dec                22 2,671 2,671 2 ... − − − 98
2017 Jan                26 3,351 3,351 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2016          July − 0.33 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.29 − 0.19 − 0.12 − 0.06
         Aug − 0.34 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.30 − 0.19 − 0.12 − 0.05
         Sep − 0.34 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.30 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.06
         Oct − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.21 − 0.13 − 0.07
         Nov − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.21 − 0.13 − 0.07
         Dec − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.08
2017          Jan − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.15 − 0.09
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Dec 0.46 77,515 1.66 221,625 0.22 79,591 2.04 17,364
2016          Jan 0.45 76,746 1.64 221,432 0.22 79,489 2.00 17,335
         Feb 0.44 75,932 1.62 221,154 0.21 80,142 2.00 17,271
         Mar 0.44 76,809 1.61 221,229 0.20 82,706 1.95 17,573
         Apr 0.44 77,166 1.59 220,954 0.19 83,708 1.92 17,490
         May 0.43 77,295 1.58 220,985 0.19 80,922 1.86 18,025
         June 0.42 77,303 1.56 220,707 0.16 78,910 1.80 18,063
         July 0.41 77,112 1.55 219,660 0.14 80,553 1.76 18,143
         Aug 0.41 75,607 1.53 219,332 0.14 79,332 1.72 18,124
         Sep 0.40 75,235 1.52 219,354 0.12 83,015 1.65 18,371
         Oct 0.40 75,245 1.51 218,836 0.13 80,349 1.60 18,507
         Nov 0.39 74,620 1.49 218,016 0.10 82,888 1.56 19,037
         Dec 0.38 74,227 1.48 220,030 0.10 81,510 1.54 19,098
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Dec 2.62 5,029 2.36 27,692 3.33 1,047,658 7.38 54,838 4.39 79,345 4.46 306,514
2016          Jan 2.61 5,011 2.34 27,438 3.30 1,047,865 7.44 52,884 4.35 79,779 4.43 307,381
         Feb 2.60 5,022 2.36 27,364 3.27 1,049,663 7.45 53,249 4.31 80,351 4.41 307,866
         Mar 2.63 5,014 2.34 27,371 3.24 1,052,498 7.49 54,287 4.29 80,695 4.38 307,355
         Apr 2.56 4,928 2.31 27,215 3.21 1,057,019 7.33 52,229 4.27 81,376 4.35 308,474
         May 2.57 4,959 2.29 27,187 3.19 1,059,863 7.36 52,678 4.24 81,793 4.33 309,250
         June 2.57 4,863 2.28 27,272 3.16 1,064,491 7.39 53,521 4.22 82,252 4.31 309,025
         July 2.50 4,836 2.25 27,233 3.13 1,069,851 7.26 51,406 4.20 82,844 4.29 310,390
         Aug 2.50 4,772 2.23 27,198 3.10 1,074,183 7.27 51,516 4.17 83,206 4.27 310,914
         Sep 2.49 4,645 2.22 27,195 3.07 1,079,270 7.29 52,985 4.15 83,297 4.24 310,507
         Oct 2.49 4,711 2.19 27,068 3.04 1,083,120 7.26 52,115 4.12 83,574 4.21 310,941
         Nov 2.42 4,538 2.13 27,004 3.02 1,087,318 7.17 51,035 4.09 83,826 4.19 311,454
         Dec 2.42 4,380 2.11 26,777 2.99 1,090,316 7.18 51,460 4.07 83,809 4.16 310,026
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Dec 2.77 125,750 2.29 129,455 2.74 593,021
2016          Jan 2.68 130,505 2.26 129,655 2.72 595,850
         Feb 2.67 134,107 2.23 130,842 2.70 598,794
         Mar 2.65 137,421 2.20 130,530 2.67 597,332
         Apr 2.66 136,364 2.18 131,883 2.64 601,069
         May 2.60 136,538 2.15 132,698 2.62 605,918
         June 2.62 135,941 2.13 133,455 2.60 604,497
         July 2.59 133,112 2.09 133,334 2.57 608,349
         Aug 2.60 129,449 2.08 134,293 2.55 613,121
         Sep 2.58 132,381 2.06 134,447 2.52 612,812
         Oct 2.53 132,273 2.04 134,868 2.50 615,105
         Nov 2.54 131,980 2.02 136,298 2.48 620,104
         Dec 2.57 125,989 2.01 136,477 2.45 623,818
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics / MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Dec 
0.13 1,111,065 0.28 6,140 0.50 1,161 0.97 1,379 0.39 533,865 0.45 61,900
2016          Jan 0.12 1,117,856 0.35 7,184 0.62 1,024 1.00 1,360 0.37 534,775 0.43 60,627
         Feb 0.12 1,123,332 0.34 6,226 0.71 914 1.03 1,493 0.36 536,409 0.40 59,334
         Mar 0.11 1,120,146 0.34 6,804 0.82 1,137 0.93 1,721 0.34 535,575 0.39 58,239
         Apr 0.10 1,140,220 0.35 5,852 0.69 994 0.94 1,130 0.32 534,792 0.38 57,125
         May 0.10 1,142,947 0.34 5,430 0.69 747 0.89 901 0.31 534,122 0.37 56,154
         June 0.08 1,149,604 0.27 6,027 0.73 759 0.83 935 0.30 533,649 0.36 55,415
         July 0.08 1,168,427 0.27 5,846 0.57 856 0.80 903 0.28 533,501 0.35 54,560
         Aug 0.08 1,171,644 0.33 5,081 0.61 1,148 0.86 961 0.27 533,503 0.34 53,749
         Sep 0.08 1,173,762 0.32 5,240 0.50 671 0.77 885 0.26 532,980 0.33 53,031
         Oct 0.07 1,184,012 0.30 6,402 0.44 716 0.75 933 0.25 533,209 0.32 52,223
         Nov 0.07 1,208,967 0.30 5,075 0.58 523 0.77 907 0.24 533,406 0.32 51,649
         Dec 0.07 1,220,403 0.23 5,583 0.51 621 0.68 967 0.24 536,031 0.32 51,299
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Dec 
0.04 375,456 0.07 14,914 0.36 1,338 0.57 872
2016          Jan 0.03 370,533 0.10 9,780 0.32 1,283 0.42 489
         Feb 0.03 369,125 0.08 10,334 0.48 890 0.50 244
         Mar 0.05 369,344 − 0.03 14,907 0.20 931 1.34 1,057
         Apr 0.05 377,546 − 0.01 10,820 0.13 851 0.40 439
         May 0.01 380,942 − 0.02 9,700 0.18 694 0.52 1,123
         June 0.01 376,365 − 0.02 10,619 0.16 689 0.46 858
         July 0.01 378,718 − 0.02 9,596 0.14 569 0.25 476
         Aug 0.01 388,519 − 0.06 9,727 0.19 451 0.39 286
         Sep 0.01 389,701 − 0.08 15,158 0.14 598 0.30 792
         Oct 0.00 399,216 − 0.03 10,736 0.14 577 0.36 521
         Nov − 0.00 400,064 − 0.11 13,017 0.24 951 0.39 1,490
         Dec − 0.00 401,485 − 0.12 15,160 0.22 1,251 0.36 538
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2015          Dec 
2.05 8,344 2.03 2,796 1.81 4,005 2.75 1,136 2.11 3,203 2.06 2,469 2.80 886 2.06 2,163
2016          Jan 1.96 7,252 2.01 2,816 1.68 3,753 2.63 1,054 2.11 2,445 2.04 2,153 2.70 823 2.03 1,617
         Feb 2.05 6,669 2.10 2,300 1.87 3,388 2.64 904 2.08 2,377 2.15 2,032 2.76 690 2.05 1,528         Mar 2.02 7,255 1.87 2,578 1.77 3,549 2.70 996 2.09 2,710 1.96 2,167 2.81 756 2.03 1,796
         Apr 2.03 6,381 1.89 2,492 1.81 3,375 2.68 981 2.09 2,025 2.02 2,079 2.87 757 2.01 1,420
         May 2.00 5,898 1.92 1,926 1.77 2,921 2.71 876 2.03 2,101 2.01 1,859 2.97 647 1.97 1,372         June 2.02 6,820 1.93 2,359 1.84 3,200 2.58 1,134 1.98 2,486 2.09 1,953 2.67 898 1.89 1,769
         July 1.89 6,818 1.73 2,543 1.69 3,394 2.66 936 1.89 2,488 1.88 2,323 2.82 724 1.85 1,614
         Aug 2.02 5,949 1.95 1,989 1.94 2,699 2.80 793 1.85 2,457 1.99 1,789 2.96 589 1.89 1,569         Sep 1.89 6,462 1.76 2,153 1.76 3,266 2.69 807 1.81 2,389 1.88 2,013 2.89 610 1.78 1,638
         Oct 1.89 6,445 1.72 2,522 1.70 3,408 2.63 928 1.87 2,109 1.86 2,096 2.78 728 1.82 1,403
         Nov 1.92 6,305 1.89 2,070 1.79 3,051 2.71 837 1.81 2,417 2.00 1,920 2.78 647 1.76 1,572         Dec 1.93 7,774 1.89 2,343 1.86 3,262 2.61 1,085 1.79 3,427 1.98 2,257 2.71 881 1.76 2,255
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Dec 6.03 5.97 6,067 7.30 934 5.67 316 4.78 2,867 7.19 2,884
2016          Jan 6.44 6.37 7,338 7.52 1,426 5.59 309 4.99 2,938 7.41 4,091
         Feb 6.25 6.20 7,862 7.44 1,444 5.55 322 4.94 3,260 7.22 4,280
         Mar 6.06 6.04 8,415 7.33 1,833 5.49 341 4.79 3,577 7.07 4,497
         Apr 6.21 6.19 8,734 7.33 1,814 5.89 310 4.88 3,548 7.16 4,876
         May 6.22 6.20 8,244 7.47 1,715 5.89 306 4.90 3,329 7.16 4,609
         June 6.20 6.18 8,940 7.47 1,864 5.73 314 4.87 3,616 7.15 5,010
         July 6.20 6.18 8,468 7.50 1,764 5.97 298 4.77 3,405 7.20 4,765
         Aug 6.09 6.06 8,301 7.36 1,643 5.89 328 4.70 3,402 7.09 4,571
         Sep 5.94 5.92 7,802 7.11 1,560 6.04 296 4.56 3,257 6.95 4,249
         Oct 5.95 5.93 7,579 7.10 1,482 6.04 300 4.52 3,127 6.99 4,152
         Nov 5.85 5.83 7,595 7.12 1,674 6.05 316 4.51 3,312 6.91 3,967
         Dec 5.69 5.67 6,552 7.06 1,399 6.09 320 4.40 3,026 6.83 3,206
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Dec . 3.39 219 . . 2.72 22 3.89 128 2.66 69
2016          Jan . 3.32 191 . . 2.50 21 3.72 111 2.85 59
         Feb . 3.51 220 . . 2.85 33 3.84 135 3.08 52
         Mar . 3.29 260 . . 2.58 25 3.71 158 2.65 77
         Apr . 3.49 206 . . 2.75 13 3.80 145 2.77 48
         May . 3.56 202 . . 2.69 18 3.95 135 2.79 49
         June . 3.62 213 . . 2.95 17 3.96 141 2.94 55
         July . 3.53 193 . . 2.85 18 3.82 135 2.86 40
         Aug . 3.52 216 . . 3.00 16 3.83 149 2.80 51
         Sep . 3.56 201 . . 2.86 17 3.87 134 2.97 50
         Oct . 3.51 189 . . 2.63 17 3.91 129 2.65 43
         Nov . 3.55 198 . . 2.48 15 3.93 140 2.66 43
         Dec . 3.38 207 . . 2.72 18 3.80 136 2.53 53
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Dec 1.98 1.95 19,521 2.02 4,769 2.16 2,713 1.88 2,045 1.83 7,385 2.01 7,378
2016          Jan 2.00 1.97 18,507 2.05 5,833 2.22 2,413 1.87 2,054 1.84 6,800 2.05 7,240
         Feb 1.97 1.96 18,778 2.16 4,870 2.45 2,584 1.86 1,994 1.79 6,837 1.97 7,363
         Mar 1.85 1.82 22,396 1.94 4,799 2.10 2,618 1.82 2,256 1.70 8,246 1.86 9,276
         Apr 1.93 1.88 17,859 1.94 4,981 2.16 2,206 1.82 1,820 1.67 6,054 1.97 7,779
         May 1.86 1.79 17,968 2.03 3,654 2.19 2,133 1.83 1,698 1.62 6,635 1.83 7,502
         June 1.82 1.76 21,409 1.94 4,079 2.04 2,567 1.85 1,931 1.60 7,424 1.79 9,487
         July 1.78 1.73 20,287 1.83 4,970 2.01 2,464 1.79 1,866 1.59 7,230 1.75 8,727
         Aug 1.74 1.68 19,903 1.86 4,075 2.18 2,185 1.76 1,745 1.49 7,197 1.69 8,776
         Sep 1.70 1.64 18,636 1.79 3,854 2.01 2,062 1.75 1,658 1.48 6,555 1.66 8,361
         Oct 1.68 1.62 17,913 1.72 4,542 1.99 2,093 1.62 1,584 1.45 6,317 1.66 7,919
         Nov 1.67 1.62 20,223 1.72 4,687 1.88 2,611 1.66 1,614 1.43 7,008 1.68 8,990
         Dec 1.72 1.66 21,400 1.80 4,757 1.98 2,347 1.67 1,800 1.49 8,054 1.73 9,199
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Dec . 1.86 8,294 . . 2.06 969 1.63 915 1.77 3,272 1.95 3,138
2016          Jan . 1.92 8,349 . . 2.30 916 1.62 1,003 1.80 3,276 2.04 3,154
         Feb . 1.89 7,875 . . 2.47 987 1.62 875 1.73 3,048 1.95 2,965
         Mar . 1.74 9,786 . . 2.01 1,002 1.63 1,075 1.63 3,807 1.81 3,902
         Apr . 1.89 7,980 . . 2.17 848 1.53 843 1.62 2,827 2.14 3,462
         May . 1.71 7,343 . . 2.08 783 1.53 752 1.54 2,804 1.81 3,004
         June . 1.67 9,111 . . 1.96 956 1.55 849 1.53 3,475 1.75 3,831
         July . 1.65 8,675 . . 1.86 927 1.51 833 1.53 3,387 1.75 3,528
         Aug . 1.58 8,476 . . 1.97 770 1.46 770 1.41 3,410 1.67 3,526
         Sep . 1.55 7,930 . . 1.98 728 1.46 708 1.39 3,109 1.61 3,385
         Oct . 1.55 7,854 . . 1.89 764 1.43 768 1.39 3,023 1.65 3,299
         Nov . 1.51 9,115 . . 1.54 1,225 1.48 763 1.36 3,407 1.65 3,720
         Dec . 1.57 9,705 . . 1.85 863 1.55 878 1.41 3,968 1.66 3,996
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2015          Dec 
8.69 41,921 8.80 34,544 15.31 3,938 3.94 61,493 3.96 61,270
2016          Jan 8.83 40,469 8.78 33,630 15.36 4,043 3.82 65,219 3.84 65,010
         Feb 8.82 41,049 8.81 34,005 15.36 4,071 3.79 67,167 3.80 66,930
         Mar 8.81 42,187 8.80 35,211 15.42 3,982 3.84 68,638 3.85 68,394
         Apr 8.70 40,129 8.67 33,142 15.24 4,067 3.83 66,708 3.85 66,461
         May 8.72 40,781 8.75 33,466 15.21 4,135 3.70 67,212 3.71 66,974
         June 8.75 41,709 8.77 34,494 15.23 4,093 3.74 67,687 3.75 67,430
         July 8.61 39,874 8.62 32,504 15.22 4,152 3.66 65,412 3.67 65,180
         Aug 8.61 40,210 8.63 32,811 15.22 4,137 3.73 63,560 3.74 63,322
         Sep 8.62 41,559 8.66 33,900 15.13 4,269 3.70 66,057 3.71 65,773
         Oct 8.59 40,657 8.60 32,988 15.13 4,328 3.67 64,202 3.68 63,931
         Nov 8.50 39,342 8.51 31,782 15.13 4,222 3.61 64,064 3.63 63,786
         Dec 8.50 40,103 8.54 32,351 15.06 4,286 3.69 61,610 3.71 61,355
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2015          Dec 1.68 71,770 1.68 21,964 2.63 8,367 2.90 1,688 1.98 1,765 1.42 46,829 1.79 3,286 1.82 9,835
2016          Jan 1.60 56,798 1.62 19,979 2.58 7,835 2.87 1,331 2.02 1,328 1.26 38,673 2.16 2,309 1.90 5,322
         Feb 1.54 52,765 1.61 15,300 2.71 7,805 2.78 1,310 1.93 1,160 1.20 34,426 1.42 2,142 1.67 5,922         Mar 1.64 62,713 1.70 19,300 2.67 8,680 2.73 1,524 1.88 1,394 1.35 41,099 1.76 2,294 1.68 7,722
         Apr 1.55 57,589 1.60 19,803 2.60 8,290 2.74 1,645 1.82 1,410 1.23 38,162 1.56 1,933 1.68 6,149
         May 1.47 53,170 1.55 15,321 2.59 7,987 2.73 1,363 1.85 1,338 1.11 34,259 1.55 1,651 1.64 6,572         June 1.52 66,550 1.68 19,903 2.61 8,992 2.79 1,600 1.76 1,526 1.23 43,829 1.57 2,249 1.55 8,354
         July 1.46 62,584 1.55 21,116 2.44 8,339 2.67 1,484 1.72 1,554 1.16 41,120 1.88 2,329 1.53 7,758
         Aug 1.43 54,015 1.58 14,307 2.44 7,384 2.62 1,340 1.68 1,416 1.14 33,033 1.48 2,112 1.40 8,730         Sep 1.51 62,170 1.66 19,929 2.54 8,312 2.63 1,431 1.70 1,312 1.24 41,393 1.67 1,986 1.54 7,736
         Oct 1.43 59,422 1.50 20,936 2.44 8,219 2.63 1,417 1.65 1,258 1.16 40,159 1.69 1,960 1.44 6,409
         Nov 1.45 58,860 1.52 15,959 2.48 8,095 2.64 1,497 1.69 1,361 1.16 36,792 1.32 2,628 1.49 8,487         Dec 1.53 78,984 1.63 22,509 2.50 8,638 2.57 1,829 1.77 1,881 1.27 48,314 1.64 3,444 1.62 14,878
of which: collateralised loans 12
2015          Dec 1.61 13,483 . . 1.98 636 2.57 150 1.76 539 1.47 7,249 1.84 1,438 1.67 3,471
2016          Jan 1.65 9,419 . . 2.01 674 2.55 125 1.89 463 1.33 6,286 3.51 656 1.93 1,215
         Feb 1.60 8,658 . . 2.07 554 2.29 149 1.84 382 1.45 4,958 1.69 627 1.71 1,988         Mar 1.62 10,561 . . 1.94 611 2.60 154 1.73 406 1.50 5,407 1.79 1,089 1.66 2,894
         Apr 1.59 9,251 . . 1.95 660 2.39 153 1.67 438 1.49 5,471 1.92 530 1.57 1,999
         May 1.58 5,951 . . 2.03 479 2.60 134 1.65 406 1.47 2,864 1.57 364 1.55 1,704         June 1.58 10,056 . . 1.91 601 2.51 159 1.64 468 1.56 4,885 1.72 1,003 1.46 2,940
         July 1.53 10,322 . . 1.87 681 2.38 161 1.53 544 1.35 5,526 1.95 929 1.61 2,481
         Aug 1.54 7,519 . . 2.01 523 2.54 119 1.51 410 1.40 3,645 1.71 452 1.57 2,370         Sep 1.59 9,002 . . 1.93 550 2.49 104 1.46 379 1.53 5,125 2.18 614 1.45 2,230
         Oct 1.49 8,746 . . 1.85 652 2.40 149 1.48 401 1.40 5,352 1.90 560 1.44 1,632
         Nov 1.49 8,480 . . 2.00 494 2.41 159 1.57 401 1.29 4,031 2.04 610 1.50 2,785         Dec 1.55 16,083 . . 1.91 662 2.46 176 1.57 569 1.39 8,076 1.96 1,310 1.62 5,290
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2006 1,771.5 1,709.2 524.1 149.9 244.8 261.5 385.6 74.5 68.7 62.3
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.8
2009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.4
2012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.1
2013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.5
2014 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2014          Q4 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015          Q1 2,539.4 2,461.4 517.4 414.0 305.1 242.1 843.7 70.6 68.4 78.1
         Q2 2,489.5 2,410.8 509.4 396.7 304.8 238.9 819.2 72.6 69.2 78.6
         Q3 2,507.3 2,427.5 498.0 412.5 308.0 241.6 823.8 74.7 68.9 79.8
         Q4 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016          Q1 2,598.2 2,514.1 486.8 456.3 310.8 248.3 863.1 78.9 70.0 84.1
         Q2 2,637.2 2,552.5 478.6 480.8 312.6 248.5 882.7 78.7 70.6 84.7
         Q3 2,686.9 2,602.5 470.9 482.4 315.5 261.0 922.4 78.8 71.5 84.4
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 1,444.6 410.4 127.6 224.7 254.2 292.7 73.1 62.0 44.6
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2014          Q4 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015          Q1 1,967.9 1,918.2 365.3 352.8 275.7 224.9 583.1 65.6 50.8 49.7
         Q2 1,925.8 1,875.9 357.5 337.9 275.3 221.6 564.6 67.5 51.5 49.9
         Q3 1,938.2 1,887.7 347.5 350.0 278.1 224.0 567.7 69.5 51.0 50.5
         Q4 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016          Q1 2,007.2 1,954.1 336.2 386.6 280.0 230.0 596.3 73.4 51.6 53.1
         Q2 2,034.0 1,980.7 328.6 408.0 281.7 229.6 607.7 73.1 51.9 53.2
         Q3 2,074.6 2,022.2 318.9 410.1 284.5 242.0 640.8 73.2 52.7 52.3
Pension funds 4
2006 282.3 264.6 113.8 22.4 20.1 7.3 92.8 1.5 6.7 17.7
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2014          Q4 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015          Q1 571.5 543.2 152.1 61.2 29.4 17.3 260.6 5.0 17.6 28.3
         Q2 563.7 534.9 151.8 58.8 29.6 17.3 254.7 5.1 17.7 28.8
         Q3 569.2 539.9 150.6 62.5 29.9 17.7 256.0 5.3 17.9 29.3
         Q4 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016          Q1 591.1 560.0 150.6 69.7 30.7 18.3 266.8 5.5 18.4 31.0
         Q2 603.2 571.7 150.0 72.8 30.9 18.8 275.0 5.5 18.6 31.5
         Q3 612.3 580.2 152.0 72.4 31.0 18.9 281.6 5.6 18.7 32.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2016 Q2 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2006 1,771.5 8.4 91.6 210.0 1,318.8 1,049.1 269.6 81.3 61.5
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.92008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.82012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.82013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.52014 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2014          Q4 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015          Q1 2,539.4 19.0 90.4 223.1 1,942.6 1,635.6 307.0 73.0 191.4
         Q2 2,489.5 17.9 91.9 206.2 1,958.3 1,649.6 308.7 72.5 142.7
         Q3 2,507.3 17.5 94.3 208.4 1,976.5 1,665.6 311.0 72.2 138.4
         Q4 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016          Q1 2,598.2 17.7 97.8 231.7 2,027.1 1,707.3 319.9 73.2 150.6
         Q2 2,637.2 17.6 97.9 201.1 2,041.1 1,722.3 318.8 73.3 206.2
         Q3 2,686.9 19.0 98.5 208.0 2,067.5 1,749.5 318.0 73.8 220.1
Insurance corporations
2006 1,489.2 8.4 89.8 202.0 1,061.3 792.0 269.2 79.1 48.6
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2014          Q4 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015          Q1 1,967.9 19.0 85.6 212.5 1,443.0 1,136.4 306.6 71.2 136.6
         Q2 1,925.8 17.9 87.2 196.4 1,453.2 1,145.0 308.3 70.7 100.3
         Q3 1,938.2 17.5 89.5 198.5 1,464.5 1,154.0 310.5 70.5 97.6
         Q4 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016          Q1 2,007.2 17.7 92.8 220.6 1,499.3 1,179.8 319.4 71.4 105.4
         Q2 2,034.0 17.6 92.9 191.3 1,506.7 1,188.4 318.3 71.5 154.0
         Q3 2,074.6 19.0 93.4 197.8 1,528.4 1,210.8 317.5 72.0 164.0
Pension funds 5
2006 282.3 − 1.8 8.0 257.5 257.1 0.4 2.1 12.9
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2014          Q4 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015          Q1 571.5 − 4.7 10.5 499.7 499.2 0.5 1.8 54.8
         Q2 563.7 − 4.8 9.8 505.1 504.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
         Q3 569.2 − 4.8 9.9 512.0 511.6 0.5 1.7 40.7
         Q4 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016          Q1 591.1 − 5.0 11.2 527.9 527.4 0.5 1.7 45.3
         Q2 603.2 − 5.0 9.8 534.4 533.9 0.5 1.8 52.3
         Q3 612.3 − 5.1 10.2 539.1 538.6 0.5 1.8 56.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2015 are partially estimated. Figures from 2016 Q2 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2017
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 12,603 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 89,013 18,583 − 25,778 − 12,708 57,069 − 31,185
2014 63,381 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,341 51,779 − 12,124 − 11,951 75,854 11,601
2015 32,891 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,902 123,662 − 66,330 121,164 68,828 − 90,773
2016 73,780 27,069 19,177 17,905 − 10,012 46,710 171,966 − 58,012 187,500 42,478 − 98,187
2016          Feb 31,114 19,483 14,851 1,224 3,407 11,631 20,916 2,002 12,911 6,003 10,198
         Mar 26,539 12,729 1,330 4,510 6,889 13,810 26,890 1,261 13,401 12,228 − 351
         Apr 12,556 − 3,469 7,238 1,970 − 12,677 16,025 34,517 − 5,143 15,821 23,839 − 21,961
         May 32,838 29,686 8,729 3,993 16,964 3,152 15,400 − 6,052 18,093 3,359 17,438
         June − 5,007 − 7,553 − 2,177 − 4,636 − 740 2,545 15,220 − 8,528 16,907 6,841 − 20,227
         July − 30,730 − 26,603 − 16,263 1,055 − 11,394 − 4,127 − 1,577 − 9,959 18,064 − 9,682 − 29,152
         Aug 19,614 18,041 7,011 − 942 11,972 1,573 12,251 − 10,241 13,001 9,491 7,362
         Sep 17,786 12,468 6,106 3,712 2,650 5,319 23,933 − 4,025 17,786 10,172 − 6,147
         Oct − 9,049 − 6,357 640 3,347 − 10,344 − 2,692 10,705 − 7,635 17,287 1,053 − 19,754         Nov − 193 2,417 − 5,172 − 377 7,966 − 2,611 6,331 − 2,469 18,652 − 9,852 − 6,524         Dec − 30,541 − 21,892 − 10,590 1,125 − 12,426 − 8,649 557 − 9,459 13,554 − 3,538 − 31,098
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 21,553 10,106 11,447 18,344 11,991 6,353 3,209
2014 47,506 18,778 28,728 39,661 17,203 22,458 7,845
2015 38,855 7,668 31,187 24,017 − 5,421 29,438 14,838
2016 34,700 4,409 30,291 33,649 − 5,143 38,792 1,051
2016          Feb − 611 66 − 677 1,539 − 5,401 6,940 − 2,150
         Mar 8,290 59 8,231 5,935 1,861 4,074 2,355
         Apr − 949 39 − 988 472 − 639 1,111 − 1,421
         May 5,585 288 5,297 6,964 2,838 4,126 − 1,379
         June 1,068 335 733 3,576 − 330 3,906 − 2,508
         July 2,930 464 2,466 2,672 − 2,128 4,800 258
         Aug 4,811 1,063 3,748 3,180 2,256 924 1,631
         Sep 5,554 229 5,325 6,207 503 5,704 − 653
         Oct 1,989 204 1,785 − 1,461 − 221 − 1,240 3,450
         Nov 3,922 681 3,241 3,828 728 3,100 94
         Dec 3,405 861 2,544 370 1,291 − 921 3,035
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700 −
2016 5 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110 −
2016          May 109,656 67,125 3,518 355 48,486 14,766 7,177 35,353 −
         June 98,036 56,397 1,402 1,345 35,416 18,235 3,694 37,944 −
         July 5 106,809 64,060 3,695 231 47,806 12,328 5,516 37,234 −
         Aug 84,466 47,957 3,758 952 35,486 7,762 2,439 34,070 −
         Sep 110,645 60,863 720 143 46,130 13,870 9,464 40,318 −
         Oct 93,470 58,255 1,559 785 42,270 13,642 7,593 27,621 −
         Nov 72,858 40,706 2,017 211 29,840 8,639 2,842 29,309 −         Dec 56,403 32,710 340 48 23,727 8,595 9,060 14,634 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  6 
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 4002006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742 −
2016 
5 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144 −
2016          May 36,255 17,367 2,711 55 8,707 5,895 4,908 13,980 −
         June 34,458 16,553 1,291 711 6,590 7,962 2,098 15,808 −
         July 5 34,008 14,977 2,759 231 9,154 2,833 3,897 15,134 −
         Aug 24,960 11,808 2,630 502 4,541 4,134 931 12,221 −         Sep 35,483 16,330 708 118 7,420 8,084 7,291 11,862 −
         Oct 32,702 14,677 1,559 785 4,690 7,644 6,327 11,698 −
         Nov 23,848 11,083 2,004 211 5,122 3,746 1,368 11,397 −         Dec 19,429 7,699 137 48 3,777 3,737 6,592 5,138 −
Net sales  7 
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,9632006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174 − 1,441
2016 
5 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020 − 1,256
2016          May 28,473 9,196 − 1,402 − 660 9,052 2,206 3,294 15,983 − 590
         June − 3,182 − 4,261 − 2,543 − 3,575 1,322 534 − 4,057 5,135 −
         July 5 − 22,944 − 15,024 858 − 1,014 − 14,406 − 463 884 − 8,803 − 59
         Aug 19,464 5,831 3,209 − 34 4,897 − 2,241 − 342 13,975 −         Sep 13,990 4,456 − 421 − 1,385 4,802 1,461 3,807 5,727 −
         Oct − 4,225 425 286 − 1,680 105 1,714 4,024 − 8,675 − 15
         Nov 4,577 − 6,635 1,095 − 1,855 − 3,251 − 2,625 175 11,037 − 214         Dec − 26,763 − 10,987 − 1,766 − 428 − 5,419 − 3,374 1,714 − 17,490 −
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. e. 6Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 7Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal redemptions. 
Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2017
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,373
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,623
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,015
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201 2 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 2 645,491 250,774 2 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 2 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 2 548,109 2 220,456 2 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,422
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
2016 2 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358 5,100
2016          June 3,084,013 1,186,899 129,514 69,097 596,349 391,940 265,527 1,631,587 5,389
         July 2 3,061,069 1,171,875 130,372 68,083 632,445 340,975 266,411 1,622,783 5,330
         Aug 3,080,533 1,177,707 133,581 68,049 637,342 338,734 266,068 1,636,758 5,330
         Sep 3,094,523 1,182,162 133,160 66,664 642,143 340,195 269,875 1,642,486 5,330
         Oct 3,090,298 1,182,587 133,446 64,984 642,249 341,909 273,900 1,633,811 5,314
         Nov 3,094,875 1,175,952 134,541 63,129 638,998 339,284 274,075 1,644,848 5,100
         Dec 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358 5,100
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2016 
1,000,814 451,253 38,690 23,917 271,125 117,524 49,215 500,347 1,656    less than 2
688,769 289,978 39,985 16,551 160,116 73,327 52,001 346,790 289 2 to less than 4
428,004 171,097 22,144 9,482 89,044 50,427 36,513 220,396 266 4 to less than 6
303,250 90,277 17,064 5,447 44,978 22,788 21,977 190,998 1,340 6 to less than 8
233,649 75,797 10,024 5,219 35,912 24,641 16,186 141,666 502 8 to less than 10
126,761 30,207 4,254 1,302 12,308 12,344 16,378 80,175 80 10 to less than 15
51,927 16,951 162 765 12,048 3,976 4,920 30,056 − 15 to less than 20
234,933 39,406 453 20 8,050 30,883 78,598 116,929 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Excluding maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe custody. 2Sectoral residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
reclassification of debt securities. 3Calculated from month under review until final
  
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
 * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution (market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2016          June 175,694 85 213 67 228 − − 30 − 305 − 87 1,432,091
         July 176,196 502 425 148 5 − − 83 49 − 40 1,527,172
         Aug 176,572 376 1,061 35 19 − − 495 − 121 − 124 1,566,154
         Sep 176,583 11 49 2 0 − − 22 59 − 76 1,574,835
         Oct 176,733 150 196 0 45 − − 36 − 11 − 44 1,586,968
         Nov 176,793 60 120 2−−− − 5 − 5 6 1,571,446
         Dec 176,355 − 439 747 8−−0 − 1,164 − 29 1,676,397
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) are included as well as enter-
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- prises listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2016          Aug − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 1.6 144.30 115.34 491.68 10,592.69
         Sep − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 1.6 144.47 115.53 490.14 10,511.02
         Oct 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.7 1.7 142.59 113.12 494.25 10,665.01
         Nov 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.4 1.0 2.0 142.37 112.33 490.37 10,640.30         Dec 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 2.0 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017          Jan 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 2.0 141.33 110.45 530.99 11,535.31
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,511 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,743 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,407 117,675 771 100 116,904 32,305 6,069
2014 139,011 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 41,302 144,168 819 − 1,745 143,349 43,046 − 5,154
2015 181,632 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,495 176,116 7,362 494 168,754 35,001 5,5152016 155,733 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,365 163,123 2,877 − 3,172 160,246 39,537 − 7,388
2016          June 11,123 10,640 1,664 42 565 755 8,976 483 11,561 557 − 87 11,004 570 − 439
         July 9,383 7,899 1,862 − 195 1,706 280 6,038 1,484 10,904 1,208 186 9,696 1,298 − 1,521
         Aug 8,572 5,151 1,038 − 125 843 109 4,113 3,421 9,140 − 922 − 1,679 10,062 5,100 − 567         Sep 12,075 8,123 900 39 28 631 7,224 3,952 12,285 648 132 11,637 3,820 − 210
         Oct 18,103 11,557 1,765 − 103 1,049 528 9,791 6,546 17,987 − 213 − 518 18,200 7,064 116
         Nov 11,128 11,845 2,820 67 2,053 346 9,025 − 717 12,122 − 616 − 780 12,738 63 − 994         Dec 20,445 16,366 1,388 − 37 1,016 253 14,977 4,080 20,016 − 614 − 756 20,630 4,836 429
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 4.45 − 7.75 37.62 3.60 28.00 16.99 − 1.30 8.59 16.96
Debt securities 0.65 − 1.26 − 0.93 0.56 0.51 − 0.52 0.87 − 3.32 0.17
short-term debt securities 1.56 1.62 − 0.77 0.93 − 1.42 0.78 0.98 − 0.70 − 0.02
long-term debt securities − 0.91 − 2.88 − 0.15 − 0.37 1.93 − 1.29 − 0.10 − 2.62 0.19
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.27 − 1.88 0.73 0.24 0.94 − 0.38 0.51 − 2.54 − 0.04
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01
Financial corporations − 2.14 − 1.26 1.93 − 0.27 0.87 0.58 0.31 − 1.80 − 0.53
General government 0.07 − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.08 0.39 − 0.44 − 0.46 − 0.62 0.47
Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.91 0.62 − 1.66 0.32 − 0.42 − 0.14 0.37 − 0.78 0.21
Loans 9.29 14.41 30.53 5.87 1.37 0.20 6.50 − 5.34 4.69
short-term loans 27.76 36.06 25.14 1.64 1.13 1.97 3.21 − 0.60 − 3.17
long-term loans − 18.47 − 21.66 5.39 4.23 0.25 − 1.77 3.29 − 4.74 7.87
Memo item
to domestic sectors 2.20 10.40 12.09 − 1.12 0.52 − 5.20 0.78 − 4.39 1.65
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.43 0.06 4.34 − 0.56 3.28 − 8.38 3.24
Financial corporations − 1.81 10.65 9.68 − 1.17 − 3.81 − 4.64 − 2.50 3.99 − 1.60
General government 0.10 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.01 − 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 7.09 4.01 18.44 6.99 0.85 5.41 5.72 − 0.95 3.05
Equity and investment fund shares 39.87 9.93 47.49 8.00 14.77 20.99 10.03 3.04 15.47
Equity 32.22 20.31 31.15 5.18 10.89 19.49 9.58 3.79 11.38
Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.70 − 1.62 − 10.41 1.41 1.98 2.88 − 6.00 − 0.77 6.72
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83
Financial corporations − 0.95 3.78 − 2.37 0.34 − 0.14 0.02 0.17 0.17 − 0.11
Listed shares of the rest of the world 3.37 − 4.85 12.38 − 0.15 − 4.46 3.00 0.66 − 0.60 1.37
Other equity 1 20.16 26.77 29.18 3.92 13.37 13.61 14.92 5.16 3.29
Investment fund shares 7.65 − 10.38 16.35 2.82 3.87 1.50 0.45 − 0.75 4.08
Money market fund shares − 0.15 0.23 0.21 0.17 − 0.06 0.35 − 0.30 − 0.10 − 0.03
Non-MMF investment fund shares 7.80 − 10.61 16.13 2.65 3.93 1.15 0.75 − 0.65 4.11
Insurance technical reserves 3.02 1.05 2.97 0.86 0.88 0.64 2.40 2.61 2.68
Financial derivatives 6.49 − 1.26 0.54 − 2.41 0.87 − 1.47 − 1.96 0.94 − 4.58
Other accounts receivable 173.71 − 95.11 52.19 48.50 11.47 21.77 9.03 3.04 − 17.33
Total 237.47 − 80.01 170.41 64.98 57.86 58.60 25.57 9.56 18.07
External financing
Debt securities 12.78 1.26 7.78 4.91 0.46 − 1.17 10.40 4.60 2.88
short-term securities − 1.12 − 11.63 1.96 − 0.04 1.01 − 0.27 2.04 0.18 − 0.57
long-term securities 13.90 12.89 5.82 4.95 − 0.55 − 0.89 8.36 4.43 3.45
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 5.10 4.27 1.76 2.73 − 0.72 − 1.19 4.97 1.27 1.51
Non-financial corporations 0.81 − 0.05 − 0.79 0.59 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01
Financial corporations 2.85 4.12 2.07 1.85 − 0.44 − 0.60 3.59 1.96 1.48
General government − 0.05 0.00 0.02 − 0.00 0.01 0.01 − 0.00 0.00 0.01
Households 1.50 0.20 0.46 0.29 0.03 − 0.07 0.73 − 0.57 0.01
Debt securities of the rest of the world 7.67 − 3.01 6.02 2.19 1.18 0.03 5.43 3.33 1.37
Loans 26.84 − 13.42 42.52 16.70 − 1.39 − 1.26 34.89 5.38 22.11
short-term loans 24.45 1.81 24.57 14.91 − 2.82 4.01 18.51 − 3.38 4.29
long-term loans 2.40 − 15.23 17.94 1.79 1.43 − 5.27 16.38 8.77 17.82
Memo item
from domestic sectors − 4.95 4.59 17.91 6.29 0.00 − 10.19 23.36 − 10.13 14.93
Non-financial corporations 3.91 − 0.31 2.43 0.06 4.34 − 0.56 3.28 − 8.38 3.24
Financial corporations 12.46 16.45 22.70 7.26 − 1.53 1.39 13.89 − 2.37 14.37
General government − 21.31 − 11.55 − 7.23 − 1.03 − 2.81 − 11.02 6.20 0.62 − 2.68
from the rest of the world 31.74 − 18.01 24.60 10.41 − 1.39 8.93 11.53 15.51 7.18
Equity 12.04 27.88 15.04 5.40 5.89 3.69 3.25 2.13 2.42
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 4.47 − 0.34 7.36 − 3.65 0.73 11.39 − 2.68 3.28 4.34
Non-financial corporations 9.65 − 5.39 − 8.04 1.07 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83
Financial corporations − 5.02 2.22 11.75 − 5.34 − 6.36 5.09 − 1.14 3.22 − 2.25
General government − 0.88 0.03 0.11 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.03 0.03 0.02
Households − 8.21 2.80 3.55 0.61 4.95 3.43 4.61 0.98 − 0.26
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 7.80 9.09 − 1.34 5.36 1.97 − 10.04 2.72 − 2.87 − 4.11
Other equity 1 8.70 19.13 9.02 3.70 3.20 2.34 3.21 1.71 2.19
Insurance technical reserves 6.34 6.41 5.06 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 3.72 1.93 − 12.97 − 16.16 − 3.46 − 4.25 5.65 − 5.74 1.48
Other accounts payable 19.83 − 10.06 58.33 18.93 0.49 10.01 8.40 1.27 − 8.10
Total 81.54 13.98 115.75 31.05 3.26 8.29 63.85 8.91 22.05
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 411.3 405.8 462.6 396.3 431.0 462.6 454.1 464.8 500.9
Debt securities 45.0 49.6 47.8 48.4 48.4 47.8 48.8 45.7 46.0
short-term debt securities 5.1 6.8 6.0 6.7 5.2 6.0 7.0 6.3 6.3
long-term debt securities 39.9 42.9 41.7 41.7 43.2 41.7 41.7 39.3 39.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 24.6 22.9 23.3 23.0 23.8 23.3 23.8 21.4 21.4
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3
Financial corporations 13.8 12.7 14.5 13.2 14.0 14.5 14.8 13.0 12.5
General government 6.1 5.7 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.2 4.8 4.2 4.6
Debt securities of the rest of the world 20.5 26.7 24.4 25.4 24.7 24.4 24.9 24.3 24.5
Loans 446.5 465.6 496.0 498.0 497.3 496.0 500.1 495.1 497.3
short-term loans 340.0 375.8 399.8 399.5 399.7 399.8 401.8 401.6 396.8
long-term loans 106.5 89.8 96.2 98.4 97.7 96.2 98.4 93.5 100.5
Memo item
to domestic sectors 304.7 315.1 327.2 331.9 332.4 327.2 328.0 323.6 325.2
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.7 214.9 219.2 218.7 221.9 213.6 216.8
Financial corporations 82.1 92.8 102.4 110.9 107.1 102.4 100.0 104.0 102.4
General government 6.0 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1
to the rest of the world 141.8 150.5 168.8 166.1 165.0 168.8 172.1 171.5 172.0
Equity and investment fund shares 1,658.3 1,726.5 1,905.6 1,888.8 1,781.0 1,905.6 1,839.6 1,808.3 1,853.7
Equity 1,520.2 1,591.0 1,753.6 1,738.8 1,631.2 1,753.6 1,688.5 1,656.6 1,695.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 275.4 262.2 273.0 274.6 239.0 273.0 248.1 239.4 265.1
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3
Financial corporations 5.7 10.0 6.3 7.2 5.9 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.8
Listed shares of the rest of the world 54.2 50.0 62.5 63.5 58.7 62.5 62.8 62.1 64.5
Other equity 1 1,190.6 1,278.8 1,418.2 1,400.7 1,333.5 1,418.2 1,377.6 1,355.1 1,365.9
Investment fund shares 138.1 135.5 151.9 150.0 149.8 151.9 151.1 151.7 158.2
Money market fund shares 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.1 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.1 1.0
Non-MMF investment fund shares 137.0 134.4 150.6 149.0 148.8 150.6 150.1 150.6 157.2
Insurance technical reserves 46.1 47.3 50.0 48.6 49.3 50.0 52.6 55.2 57.8
Financial derivatives 16.8 22.7 24.0 23.0 24.6 24.0 23.3 25.5 22.3Other accounts receivable 891.1 857.8 927.7 926.7 921.7 927.7 921.3 921.5 914.0
Total 3,515.1 3,575.4 3,913.6 3,829.8 3,753.4 3,913.6 3,839.8 3,816.0 3,891.9
Liabilities
Debt securities 138.9 150.9 156.8 157.2 158.1 156.8 173.1 179.0 183.0
short-term securities 13.4 1.8 3.0 2.3 3.3 3.0 5.1 5.3 4.7
long-term securities 125.4 149.1 153.7 154.9 154.8 153.7 168.0 173.7 178.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 51.1 60.2 58.7 62.7 60.7 58.7 65.9 68.2 71.2
Non-financial corporations 4.7 4.6 3.6 4.5 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3
Financial corporations 30.8 39.8 40.0 42.8 41.3 40.0 46.0 49.1 50.9
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.6 15.8 15.0 15.3 15.2 15.0 15.6 14.9 15.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world 87.8 90.7 98.1 94.5 97.4 98.1 107.2 110.8 111.8
Loans 1,411.2 1,383.6 1,427.3 1,433.1 1,431.3 1,427.3 1,459.4 1,462.6 1,480.8
short-term loans 494.2 496.0 521.0 522.3 518.2 521.0 537.7 534.0 539.0
long-term loans 917.0 887.6 906.3 910.8 913.1 906.3 921.7 928.5 941.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,091.5 1,078.1 1,092.6 1,106.2 1,107.0 1,092.6 1,116.1 1,101.9 1,116.9
Non-financial corporations 216.5 216.2 218.7 214.9 219.2 218.7 221.9 213.6 216.8
Financial corporations 809.3 805.6 825.4 829.5 828.1 825.4 836.0 829.3 842.3
General government 65.6 56.3 48.6 61.8 59.8 48.6 58.2 59.1 57.8
from the rest of the world 319.8 305.5 334.6 326.9 324.3 334.6 343.3 360.7 363.9
Equity 2,436.6 2,542.2 2,670.9 2,715.7 2,484.8 2,670.9 2,567.4 2,487.3 2,662.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors 571.9 570.8 626.4 625.1 551.6 626.4 585.2 569.6 616.9
Non-financial corporations 269.8 252.2 266.6 267.4 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3
Financial corporations 120.3 134.7 150.1 159.4 130.8 150.1 140.3 139.2 147.8
General government 35.2 35.2 43.4 39.5 41.1 43.4 41.5 40.4 40.8
Households 146.6 148.7 166.2 158.8 146.5 166.2 161.5 156.3 168.9
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 670.8 719.1 756.3 789.6 693.2 756.3 724.7 684.7 782.2
Other equity 1 1,194.0 1,252.3 1,288.3 1,301.0 1,240.0 1,288.3 1,257.5 1,233.0 1,263.4
Insurance technical reserves 243.9 250.3 255.4 252.8 254.1 255.4 256.6 257.9 259.2
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 37.3 54.0 42.0 46.6 44.7 42.0 49.8 46.7 50.7
Other accounts payable 962.4 988.9 1,057.3 1,024.0 1,026.3 1,057.3 1,042.2 1,046.1 1,044.5
Total 5,230.3 5,369.9 5,609.6 5,629.4 5,399.3 5,609.6 5,548.5 5,479.6 5,680.6
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 63.87 85.82 96.61 30.79 11.86 38.99 8.69 25.30 19.88
Currency 8.08 15.64 25.45 6.84 6.39 7.75 2.99 1.04 2.25
Deposits 55.79 70.18 71.16 23.96 5.48 31.24 5.70 24.26 17.63
Transferable deposits 89.41 73.84 100.96 34.43 15.01 32.22 7.24 28.09 23.41
Time deposits − 9.78 8.74 − 9.22 − 3.12 − 4.21 0.44 0.83 2.16 − 1.73
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 23.85 − 12.41 − 20.58 − 7.35 − 5.32 − 1.43 − 2.37 − 5.99 − 4.05
Debt securities − 17.81 − 18.00 − 17.40 − 5.09 − 1.87 − 3.07 − 1.76 − 4.10 − 3.16
short-term debt securities − 0.36 − 0.67 0.75 0.31 0.28 − 0.13 0.10 − 0.62 0.10
long-term debt securities − 17.45 − 17.33 − 18.16 − 5.40 − 2.14 − 2.95 − 1.86 − 3.48 − 3.26
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 14.86 − 15.08 − 9.34 − 2.98 − 0.16 − 1.45 1.08 − 1.57 − 1.74
Non-financial corporations 1.24 0.02 0.39 0.23 0.02 − 0.07 0.67 − 0.59 0.03
Financial corporations − 12.46 − 12.52 − 6.80 − 2.40 0.44 − 0.78 0.74 − 0.36 − 1.29
General government − 3.64 − 2.58 − 2.93 − 0.81 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 0.33 − 0.63 − 0.48
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.94 − 2.93 − 8.06 − 2.11 − 1.71 − 1.62 − 2.84 − 2.53 − 1.42
Equity and investment fund shares 9.63 36.87 46.39 10.53 16.85 14.48 15.67 11.57 10.20
Equity − 0.41 12.17 15.03 2.87 11.73 6.69 10.26 5.22 3.35
Listed Shares of domestic sectors − 5.63 4.61 4.06 1.13 6.67 2.79 6.59 2.69 0.25
Non-financial corporations − 5.29 2.69 3.77 0.49 6.03 2.76 4.52 0.69 − 0.30
Financial corporations − 0.35 1.93 0.28 0.64 0.64 0.03 2.07 2.00 0.55
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 2.99 3.70 6.75 0.80 3.00 2.30 1.65 1.21 2.08
Other equity 1 2.24 3.86 4.22 0.95 2.07 1.60 2.02 1.32 1.02
Investment fund shares 10.04 24.70 31.36 7.66 5.12 7.79 5.41 6.35 6.86
Money market fund shares − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.02 − 0.10 − 0.30 − 0.30 − 0.15 0.10
Non-MMF investment fund shares 10.34 25.04 31.93 7.68 5.22 8.09 5.71 6.50 6.76
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 26.02 24.47 20.08 4.89 4.78 5.12 5.83 5.86 5.88
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 31.69 30.40 31.36 6.89 6.19 7.14 17.63 6.35 7.70
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 19.39 35.34 31.30 6.71 5.81 6.96 5.28 6.58 5.71
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 14.16 − 33.07 − 24.36 − 9.93 − 1.80 − 25.38 9.40 − 4.06 − 3.86
Total 146.96 161.82 183.97 44.79 41.83 44.23 60.74 47.51 42.36
  External financing
Loans 11.96 20.59 39.12 11.39 14.88 9.40 6.01 15.84 16.00
short-term loans − 3.31 − 1.98 − 3.17 − 1.26 − 1.51 − 1.40 − 0.42 − 0.91 − 0.93
long-term loans 15.27 22.57 42.29 12.64 16.39 10.80 6.43 16.76 16.94
Memo item
Mortage loans 18.89 24.87 36.56 9.85 14.08 10.46 4.29 12.16 14.32
Consumer loans − 0.30 1.21 5.44 2.15 1.40 0.32 2.11 3.93 2.86
Entrepreneurial loans − 6.64 − 5.49 − 2.88 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 1.38 − 0.38 − 0.24 − 1.17
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 12.60 18.87 39.35 11.60 15.09 9.38 5.24 13.81 15.74
Loans from other financial institutions − 0.60 1.72 − 0.23 − 0.22 − 0.22 0.02 0.77 2.04 0.27
Loans from general government and restof the world − 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.01 0.78 − 1.26 − 0.30 − 0.37 − 0.37 0.15 0.03 0.10
Total 11.94 21.37 37.87 11.09 14.51 9.04 6.15 15.88 16.11
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,910.8 1,998.1 2,094.8 2,043.8 2,055.7 2,094.8 2,103.5 2,128.8 2,148.9
Currency 112.0 127.7 153.1 139.0 145.4 153.1 156.1 157.2 159.4
Deposits 1,798.8 1,870.4 1,941.6 1,904.8 1,910.3 1,941.6 1,947.4 1,971.6 1,989.5
Transferable deposits 907.8 981.4 1,082.4 1,035.1 1,050.1 1,082.4 1,089.8 1,117.9 1,141.5
Time deposits 245.9 256.4 246.8 250.9 246.4 246.8 248.3 250.4 248.7
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 645.1 632.7 612.4 618.9 613.8 612.4 609.3 603.4 599.3
Debt securities 179.0 162.2 139.8 149.2 144.0 139.8 137.1 133.5 130.6
short-term debt securities 2.7 2.1 2.9 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.3 2.4
long-term debt securities 176.3 160.1 136.9 146.5 141.0 136.9 134.2 131.2 128.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 116.9 102.4 89.4 94.3 92.2 89.4 89.6 87.8 87.1
Non-financial corporations 14.2 14.1 13.4 13.7 13.5 13.4 13.9 13.1 14.1
Financial corporations 90.7 78.7 69.5 72.9 71.5 69.5 69.4 69.0 67.8
General government 12.0 9.6 6.5 7.8 7.1 6.5 6.3 5.7 5.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world 62.0 59.8 50.3 54.9 51.8 50.3 47.6 45.7 43.5
Equity and investment fund shares 885.9 951.4 1,040.7 1,018.4 982.1 1,040.7 1,024.3 1,028.5 1,068.1
Equity 487.6 508.9 555.9 537.0 518.3 555.9 544.9 540.7 562.9
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 167.4 169.7 188.9 179.6 168.4 188.9 181.8 174.6 187.9
Non-financial corporations 140.4 142.1 158.7 151.1 140.2 158.7 154.1 148.6 160.6
Financial corporations 26.9 27.6 30.3 28.5 28.2 30.3 27.6 26.0 27.3
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 55.8 64.0 74.8 71.7 67.9 74.8 73.1 76.8 80.7
Other equity 1 264.4 275.3 292.2 285.7 282.0 292.2 290.1 289.2 294.3
Investment fund shares 398.3 442.5 484.8 481.3 463.8 484.8 479.3 487.8 505.1
Money market fund shares 4.4 4.0 3.4 3.8 3.7 3.4 3.1 3.0 3.0Non-MMF investment fund shares 393.8 438.5 481.4 477.5 460.1 481.4 476.3 484.7 502.1
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 291.3 307.3 324.4 315.8 320.0 324.4 330.2 336.1 342.0
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 847.3 885.6 919.5 905.1 911.8 919.5 937.1 943.3 951.0
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 708.3 752.1 786.4 764.0 770.6 786.4 791.7 798.3 804.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 36.7 35.8 34.1 35.2 34.8 34.1 33.8 33.5 33.0
Total 4,859.4 5,092.6 5,339.7 5,231.6 5,219.0 5,339.7 5,357.7 5,402.0 5,477.5
  Liabilities
Loans 1,549.6 1,570.5 1,607.6 1,583.9 1,598.4 1,607.6 1,614.0 1,629.8 1,646.0
short-term loans 66.4 64.6 60.9 64.1 62.6 60.9 60.5 59.6 58.6
long-term loans 1,483.2 1,505.9 1,546.7 1,519.8 1,535.8 1,546.7 1,553.5 1,570.2 1,587.3
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,092.9 1,118.0 1,154.7 1,130.2 1,144.0 1,154.7 1,159.1 1,171.3 1,185.6
Consumer loans 188.7 188.9 191.9 191.2 192.2 191.9 194.0 197.8 200.9
Entrepreneurial loans 268.0 263.6 260.9 262.5 262.1 260.9 260.9 260.7 259.5
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,458.4 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,491.0 1,505.7 1,514.9 1,520.5 1,534.3 1,550.2
Loans from other financial institutions 91.2 92.9 92.7 92.9 92.7 92.7 93.5 95.5 95.8
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.6 16.4 14.8 16.4 16.3 14.8 15.6 15.6 15.9
Total 1,565.2 1,586.9 1,622.4 1,600.3 1,614.7 1,622.4 1,629.6 1,645.4 1,661.9
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 5.4 − 8.1 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.6 + 8.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 p + 20.9 + 10.0 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 pe + 19.2 + 10.4 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 6.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
2014          H1  p + 11.1 + 1.4 − 0.5 + 3.8 + 6.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.5
         H2  p − 2.6 + 7.2 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 3.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2
2015          H1  p + 14.4 + 2.4 + 3.7 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         H2  p + 6.6 + 7.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
2016          H1  pe + 18.3 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 6.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2010 2,088.7 1,334.0 629.7 143.0 1.3 81.0 51.7 24.4 5.5 0.1
2011 2,128.1 1,344.0 657.0 143.4 1.3 78.7 49.7 24.3 5.3 0.0
2012 2,204.5 1,387.7 685.4 148.0 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.8 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,189.2 1,390.3 663.9 151.1 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
2014 p 2,188.7 1,396.3 656.7 152.2 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,157.9 1,372.5 652.6 152.3 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,194.6 1,397.6 665.2 152.6 1.4 74.5 47.4 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2 p 2,160.6 1,380.4 644.8 152.4 1.4 72.6 46.4 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q3 p 2,162.3 1,374.6 652.3 153.2 1.5 72.0 45.8 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q4 p 2,157.9 1,372.5 652.6 152.3 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016          Q1 p 2,165.7 1,382.3 645.5 154.7 1.2 70.9 45.2 21.1 5.1 0.0
         Q2 p 2,168.5 1,390.8 641.9 154.2 1.1 70.2 45.0 20.8 5.0 0.0
         Q3 p 2,161.3 1,380.7 642.1 154.9 1.0 69.4 44.3 20.6 5.0 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2016 half-year figures are not directly compar-
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection able with the annual figures. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output
with the publication of the 2016 annual figures, no revised figures were released for of the four preceding quarters. 
  
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts
*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 118.0 59.4 63.9 139.9 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 p 1,258.4 650.6 465.0 142.8 1,263.7 666.5 217.9 133.1 60.7 56.0 129.4 − 5.4 1,119.9
2014 p 1,306.8 674.0 482.0 150.7 1,298.2 692.5 224.1 134.3 60.9 52.0 134.3 + 8.6 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.8 706.3 500.8 147.8 1,333.9 723.4 228.6 139.5 64.3 47.3 130.8 + 20.9 1,212.5
2016 pe 1,407.9 734.6 523.0 150.2 1,388.7 757.8 236.1 150.8 68.5 43.2 132.2 + 19.2 1,263.0
as a percentage of GDP
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 4.6 2.3 2.5 5.4 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 p 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.2 39.6
2014 p 44.7 23.1 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.7 7.7 4.6 2.1 1.8 4.6 + 0.3 39.7
2015 p 44.7 23.3 16.5 4.9 44.0 23.9 7.5 4.6 2.1 1.6 4.3 + 0.7 40.0
2016 pe 44.9 23.4 16.7 4.8 44.3 24.2 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.4 4.2 + 0.6 40.3
Percentage growth rates
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 23.9 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 p + 3.1 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 − 1.3 − 11.2 + 14.8 . + 3.3
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 3.8 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.8 + 3.9 − 1.9 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 3.9 + 5.4 − 9.1 − 2.6 . + 4.5
2016 pe + 3.9 + 4.0 + 4.4 + 1.7 + 4.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 8.1 + 6.7 − 8.6 + 1.1 . + 4.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and                                                            
social contributions plus customs duties. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.4 551.1 + 3.2 1,245.1 1,236.8 + 8.4
2015 p 832.4 673.3 10.4 802.8 243.6 302.2 49.7 46.4 12.5 + 29.7 574.2 572.5 + 1.7 1,303.2 1,271.9 + 31.3
2014          Q1 p 188.2 153.6 2.0 193.9 56.7 77.9 20.0 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 296.0 305.0 − 9.0
         Q2 p 193.1 157.4 2.2 188.1 56.9 71.8 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 5.0 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.5 299.0 + 5.6
         Q3 p 192.2 157.5 3.4 193.5 57.1 71.2 17.7 11.3 4.0 − 1.4 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 303.1 305.5 − 2.4
         Q4 p 219.0 174.9 3.5 211.8 65.4 73.5 9.5 16.5 3.1 + 7.2 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 341.6 327.6 + 14.0
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2 p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3 p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4 p 221.5 178.1 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016          Q1 p 204.8 169.9 1.4 205.7 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 320.9 325.4 − 4.5
         Q2 p 217.5 176.6 2.4 194.8 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 339.2 314.9 + 24.3
         Q3 p 204.1 169.3 2.9 207.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 325.3 330.4 − 5.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.2 326.4 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 50.0 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.8 52.0 + 2.8
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.4 − 0.5
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.0 61.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4 p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016          Q1 p 81.1 83.6 − 2.5 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2 p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3 p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. For the follow-cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 ... 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 ... ... 27,836
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633
         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558
         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016          Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512
         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584
         Q4 ... 164,382 83,920 72,608 7,855 ... ... 7,253
2015          Dec . 77,035 42,681 31,375 2,980 . . 2,279
2016          Dec . 81,084 40,392 38,055 2,637 . . 2,945
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,310 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907
         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453
         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016          Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054
         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824
         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2015          Dec 82,965 45,131 22,986 13,318 6,013 2,814 18,429 14,057 4,371 1,660 15,434 1,893 418 5,929
2016          Dec 87,377 49,346 23,923 14,815 7,482 3,126 18,481 13,896 4,585 1,746 15,365 2,004 434 6,292
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2016: 49.4:48.3:2.2. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2016: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Period Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits land and ance lottery business property
tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2010 39,838 11,713 13,492 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 5,290 4,404 1,412 1,039 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,6742012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 ... ... ...
2015          Q1 4,704 3,783 2,223 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 2,760 1,668 426 353 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 4,278 3,683 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 2,561 1,617 433 227 16,368 12,383 3,636         Q3 10,159 3,714 3,981 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 3,021 1,335 401 272 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 4,155 5,034 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 2,906 1,670 452 236 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016          Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 ... ... ...
2015          Dec 8,453 2,504 2,241 562 604 600 207 264 978 680 147 88 . . .2016          Dec 8,385 2,736 1,922 609 600 623 199 292 1,171 590 151 92 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,3792012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 
p 285,827 202,274 82,616 288,291 246,438 17,381 − 2,464 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016          Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −
         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −
         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016          Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance forsures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2010 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827
         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042
         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043
         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016          Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123
         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144
         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37
         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472
         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236
         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016          Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259
         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits 3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,088,726 4,440 691,572 208,244 131,939 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,128,123 4,440 642,358 208,075 120,745 1,152,505
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,204,507 4,440 646,022 200,458 139,984 1,213,603
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,189,153 4,440 636,617 190,956 144,524 1,212,616
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 p 2,188,671 4,440 623,661 190,364 130,527 1,239,679
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 p 2,157,880 77,220 610,429 186,682 146,173 1,137,375
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 p 2,178,434 4,440 633,639 190,651 129,784 1,219,920
         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 p 2,184,835 4,440 631,114 189,890 129,978 1,229,413
         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 p 2,185,986 4,440 632,943 189,142 126,665 1,232,797
         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 p 2,188,671 4,440 623,661 190,364 130,527 1,239,679
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 p 2,194,643 12,335 630,965 189,258 135,350 1,226,734
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 p 2,160,596 34,310 617,084 187,360 137,228 1,184,615
         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 p 2,162,331 54,990 620,916 188,234 138,627 1,159,565
         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 p 2,157,880 77,220 610,429 186,682 146,173 1,137,375
2016          Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 p 2,165,669 100,051 611,809 183,192 143,490 1,127,127
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 p 2,168,530 133,297 598,394 181,394 159,274 1,096,171
         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 p 2,161,260 163,636 593,919 179,376 156,735 1,067,594
         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund 
for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,903 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,606 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,254 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,806 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013 1,816,017 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,429 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,809,286 41,870 417,260 259,344 4,130 688,047 1,314 282,383 21 110,476 4,440 2
         Q2 1,821,829 39,049 419,662 253,524 3,773 703,513 1,262 285,729 16 110,859 4,440 2
         Q3 1,818,450 34,149 427,125 265,789 3,068 691,607 1,219 280,889 16 110,147 4,440 2
         Q4 1,817,015 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 276,723 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,821,890 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,509 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 1,807,271 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,661 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 1,811,599 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 270,467 42 110,741 4,440 2
         Q4 1,804,625 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 263,303 59 112,972 4,440 2
2016          Q1 p 1,813,920 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 278,432 59 109,023 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,812,052 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 276,974 59 107,769 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,803,768 31,237 433,493 245,945 922 717,357 1,021 262,098 59 107,194 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014          Q1 1,128,954 41,608 107,914 259,344 4,130 687,001 1,314 14,551 − 8,651 4,440 2
         Q2 1,138,455 37,951 105,639 253,524 3,773 702,467 1,262 20,781 − 8,616 4,440 2
         Q3 1,130,420 33,293 104,763 265,789 3,068 690,561 1,219 18,745 − 8,541 4,440 2
         Q4 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016          Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
         Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2
         Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2
         Q4 1,102,410 23,609 95,727 236,136 737 722,124 1,010 11,761 − 6,866 4,440 2
State government
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,870 1,975 283,601 .... 154,844 62 97,387 . 1
2012 540,836 950 299,750 .... 138,698 52 101,386 . 1
2013 545,814 125 313,412 .... 133,899 35 98,343 . 1
2014          Q1 540,134 261 309,346 .... 132,020 10 98,495 . 1
         Q2 542,656 1,098 314,024 .... 128,616 5 98,913 . 1
         Q3 546,756 856 322,362 .... 125,257 5 98,276 . 1
         Q4 544,419 0 326,188 .... 119,529 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 547,487 1,821 323,055 .... 123,943 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 538,594 2,040 320,492 .... 117,935 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 544,260 2,056 326,447 .... 117,506 5 98,245 . 1
         Q4 543,311 895 333,429 .... 109,985 5 98,996 . 1
2016          Q1 p 542,063 1,278 328,858 .... 116,542 5 95,379 . 1
         Q2 p 536,186 1,173 328,397 .... 111,953 6 94,657 . 1
         Q3 p 541,067 611 331,441 .... 114,798 6 94,212 . 1
Local government9
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014          Q1 140,198 . − . . 1,046 . 135,811 11 3,330 . .
         Q2 140,719 . − . . 1,046 . 136,332 11 3,330 . .
         Q3 141,274 . − . . 1,046 . 136,888 11 3,330 . .
         Q4 142,468 . − . . 1,297 . 136,686 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 147,362 . − . . 1,597 . 141,278 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 147,039 . − . . 1,847 . 140,705 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 147,669 . − . . 1,997 . 141,185 37 4,450 . .
         Q4 147,573 . − . . 2,047 . 139,493 54 5,980 . .
2016          Q1 p 147,466 . − . . 2,076 . 139,356 54 5,980 . .
         Q2 p 147,271 . − . . 2,453 . 138,785 54 5,980 . .
         Q3 p 147,993 . − . . 2,454 . 139,506 54 5,980 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and itsnon-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2015   2016
  2014   2015   2016   2014   2015   2016   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 110.0 111.8 113.6 5.0 1.6 1.6 0.8 1.9 1.7 1.9 1.0 4.1 0.7Construction 101.6 101.4 104.3 1.4 − 0.2 2.8 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 2.4 1.3 5.2 2.4Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 106.6 108.6 111.0 0.4 1.9 2.3 2.2 1.8 1.6 1.9 1.3 4.3 2.0Information and communication 125.9 129.1 132.9 4.8 2.5 3.0 1.7 2.8 2.5 3.0 2.9 3.9 2.9Financial and insuranceactivities 105.8 106.5 109.2 − 4.8 0.7 2.5 − 0.6 2.2 1.6 − 0.4 2.2 1.3 2.5Real estate activities 101.8 102.6 103.4 − 1.5 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.9 1.2 0.7 1.1 0.6Business services 
1 106.6 109.0 111.2 2.4 2.3 2.0 1.6 2.6 2.1 3.0 1.7 3.7 1.8
Public services, education and
health 103.1 105.2 107.0 0.7 2.0 1.7 2.1 2.3 2.1 1.6 1.3 1.8 1.6Other services 97.3 97.6 98.8 − 0.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 0.2 2.2 1.4
Gross value added 106.3 107.9 109.9 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.2 3.2 1.5Gross domestic product 
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.1 1.5
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 104.4 106.5 108.6 0.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 1.7 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.7 1.5
Government consumption 104.5 107.4 111.9 1.2 2.7 4.2 2.2 2.8 2.6 3.4 4.2 4.3 4.5
Machinery and equipment 106.8 110.7 112.6 5.5 3.7 1.7 1.5 1.8 4.4 6.4 3.9 4.5 − 0.6Premises 109.5 109.8 113.3 1.9 0.3 3.1 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.1 3.1 2.5 4.8 2.0Other investment 
4 111.4 113.5 116.5 4.0 1.9 2.6 2.0 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 2.7
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1
Domestic demand 104.5 106.2 108.5 1.4 1.6 2.2 1.2 0.7 2.0 2.5 2.4 3.1 2.0Net exports 
6 . . . 0.3 0.2 − 0.1 0.1 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.7 0.3 − 0.3
Exports 118.0 124.1 127.3 4.1 5.2 2.5 5.5 6.7 4.9 3.6 1.3 4.6 1.2Imports 114.8 121.0 125.1 4.0 5.5 3.4 6.0 4.9 6.0 5.0 3.3 4.9 2.2
Gross domestic product 
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.1 1.5
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,594.4 1,636.0 1,677.9 1.8 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.5 3.1 2.1
Government consumption 561.1 583.7 617.5 3.5 4.0 5.8 3.3 4.1 3.8 4.9 6.1 6.0 6.1Machinery and equipment 191.5 200.2 205.3 6.1 4.6 2.6 2.4 2.6 5.3 7.4 5.0 5.4 0.1Premises 288.7 295.0 309.6 4.2 2.2 4.9 − 0.0 1.9 1.9 4.9 4.1 6.7 4.0Other investment 
4 105.0 108.6 112.9 5.5 3.5 3.9 3.7 3.2 3.3 3.7 3.8 4.0 4.0
Changes in inventories 5 − 7.4 − 20.2 − 31.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,733.2 2,803.3 2,891.9 2.8 2.6 3.2 2.0 1.8 2.9 3.6 3.2 3.9 2.9Net exports 190.7 229.5 241.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,334.8 1,418.8 1,440.0 3.9 6.3 1.5 6.2 8.6 6.2 4.2 0.7 2.7 − 0.1Imports 1,144.1 1,189.3 1,198.0 2.5 3.9 0.7 3.7 4.5 4.7 2.8 0.2 0.7 − 0.5
Gross domestic product 
2 2,923.9 3,032.8 3,133.9 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.2 3.8 3.7 4.2 3.2 4.6 2.9
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 105.6 106.2 106.9 1.0 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.5Gross domestic product 106.6 108.7 110.2 1.8 2.0 1.4 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.1 1.7 1.4 1.4Terms of trade 99.5 102.0 103.6 1.3 2.6 1.6 3.0 2.1 2.5 2.6 2.4 2.3 1.4
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,485.5 1,539.9 1,594.6 3.9 3.7 3.6 3.2 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.2 3.4 3.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 694.1 723.4 746.1 2.4 4.2 3.1 4.0 3.6 4.1 5.3 1.8 9.8 1.1
National income 2,179.5 2,263.2 2,340.7 3.4 3.8 3.4 3.4 3.8 3.9 4.3 3.3 5.3 2.6
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,988.9 3,098.8 3,199.9 3.3 3.7 3.3 3.3 3.4 3.7 4.2 3.4 4.7 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2016. Initial annual ing households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer software and enter-
results for 2016: figures computed in January 2017. 1Professional, scientific, techni- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net increase
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2013 106.4 105.6 96.4 107.8 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.8 114.8
2014 107.9 108.4 92.7 109.8 106.3 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.5 106.0 97.5 110.3 106.2 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.5 114.8 119.3
2016 x,p 109.5 107.1 95.9 111.7 107.3 119.3 105.8 102.8 112.9 111.4 115.0 121.8
 
2015          Q4 111.3 117.9 100.7 111.7 103.3 122.6 105.4 104.4 109.7 111.3 122.5 116.5
2016          Q1 106.8 86.4 101.9 110.3 107.6 116.6 106.7 100.7 112.9 108.9 109.1 124.9
         Q2 108.9 108.0 89.1 111.6 108.3 119.0 104.4 101.1 114.4 109.3 113.0 124.2
         Q3 109.9 114.8 91.8 111.5 108.2 117.9 103.2 103.8 112.6 113.8 114.1 119.5
         Q4 x,p 112.5 119.1 100.8 113.1 104.9 123.7 108.8 105.8 111.7 113.5 123.9 118.5
 
2015          Dec 104.2 114.2 101.7 103.1 90.2 117.7 93.4 97.7 94.3 105.5 130.1 89.7
2016          Jan 100.3 71.5 106.5 103.6 103.2 105.7 100.1 99.6 107.6 102.2 96.1 114.8
         Feb 104.1 84.7 96.9 107.9 105.1 114.9 105.4 96.1 110.0 106.6 106.3 125.4
         Mar 115.9 103.1 102.4 119.5 114.6 129.1 114.5 106.4 121.2 117.9 125.0 134.5
         Apr 108.3 104.8 91.3 110.9 108.0 118.0 105.1 99.8 114.1 107.4 110.1 127.9
         May 106.4 106.7 89.8 108.5 107.2 113.1 97.9 101.0 112.2 105.6 107.8 116.0
         June 112.1 112.5 86.1 115.4 109.6 125.8 110.1 102.4 116.9 114.9 121.0 128.6
         July 2 110.3 117.6 91.7 111.7 109.4 118.0 100.0 102.5 113.9 112.5 112.2 122.0
         Aug 2 104.4 110.5 90.6 105.3 104.1 108.2 94.6 102.3 107.1 108.4 107.0 104.7
         Sep 115.0 116.2 93.1 117.6 111.2 127.6 115.0 106.7 116.9 120.5 123.0 131.9
         Oct x 115.7 120.0 99.5 117.2 112.3 124.6 114.2 109.9 118.4 117.3 115.6 132.7
         Nov x 118.4 122.6 100.9 120.1 111.9 131.4 114.2 111.2 121.6 120.4 127.4 131.4
         Dec x,p 103.5 114.7 102.1 102.1 90.5 115.2 97.9 96.2 95.1 102.7 128.8 91.3
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.2 + 1.9
2014 + 1.4 + 2.7 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 4.1
2015 + 0.6 − 2.2 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 x,p + 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 2.1
 
2015          Q4 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.6 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.2 − 2.0
2016          Q1 + 1.5 + 2.8 − 2.6 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.8
         Q2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 2.5 + 3.2
         Q3 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.7
         Q4 x,p + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.2 + 1.7
 
2015          Dec − 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 + 2.7 − 4.4 − 7.0
2016          Jan + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 4.8 + 5.1 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 6.3
         Feb + 1.8 + 7.9 − 4.2 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 0.1
         Mar + 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 0.2
         Apr + 0.8 − 0.9 − 4.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.9 + 5.9
         May − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 3.3
         June + 1.0 + 1.0 − 3.6 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 3.2 + 7.3 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.2 − 1.9 + 7.0
         July 2 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 2.9 − 2.2 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 3.4 − 3.7
         Aug 2 + 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.6 + 4.2 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 8.0
         Sep + 1.5 + 1.0 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 2.3
         Oct x + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 4.2 − 0.4 + 1.8
         Nov x + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 3.8 + 4.0 + 5.0 + 1.5
         Dec x,p − 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 4.8 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 1.0 + 1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.3 − 0.9 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.6 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2016 p 116.0 + 1.0 102.3 − 0.7 125.8 + 2.1 116.3 + 1.7 112.7 + 5.6 117.6 + 0.6
2015          Dec 110.6 − 1.9 90.3 − 2.5 125.5 − 2.6 106.3 + 8.8 98.7 + 6.2 109.0 + 9.7
2016          Jan 114.1 + 0.2 102.8 − 5.2 120.3 + 2.0 126.6 + 11.6 116.1 + 10.6 130.3 + 12.0
         Feb 112.4 + 0.1 100.6 − 1.8 120.0 + 1.4 119.2 − 0.7 104.1 + 2.8 124.4 − 1.8         Mar 127.3 + 1.4 108.8 − 3.9 141.1 + 4.3 123.1 + 4.9 118.0 + 3.6 124.9 + 5.2
         Apr 113.8 − 1.9 105.0 + 1.1 120.4 − 4.0 111.6 + 0.8 117.1 + 12.8 109.6 − 3.1
         May 112.2 − 1.3 101.1 − 3.3 120.1 − 0.3 111.9 + 0.9 100.3 − 1.5 115.9 + 1.6         June 118.6 − 3.9 102.5 − 3.9 130.7 − 4.2 113.9 − 0.3 110.8 + 2.6 114.9 − 1.4
         July 114.9 − 1.5 103.0 − 1.9 123.1 − 1.0 117.1 − 1.3 109.9 + 1.9 119.6 − 2.4
         Aug 104.2 + 1.5 93.9 + 0.5 110.3 + 1.8 112.6 + 2.6 102.5 + 3.0 116.0 + 2.4         Sep 114.6 + 2.3 101.6 + 1.6 123.7 + 3.0 116.0 + 1.6 118.9 + 2.1 115.0 + 1.3
         Oct 120.8 + 6.2 106.4 + 3.4 131.2 + 8.8 119.6 − 0.5 130.3 + 13.5 115.8 − 5.2
         Nov 119.5 + 2.5 109.0 + 3.5 127.0 + 1.7 119.4 + 3.5 120.3 + 9.8 119.2 + 1.5         Dec 
p 120.1 + 8.6 93.3 + 3.3 141.1 + 12.4 104.9 − 1.3 103.6 + 5.0 105.3 − 3.4
From the domestic market
2012 104.0 − 5.2 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.2 − 4.2 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.4 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.2 102.9 + 1.0 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.9 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015
107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.8 106.3 + 4.0
2016 p 107.7 + 0.3 97.2 − 1.8 118.8 + 2.1 104.8 − 0.4 105.6 + 3.4 104.5 − 1.7
2015          Dec 97.9 + 0.7 84.1 − 4.2 112.8 + 4.4 90.8 + 2.7 83.6 − 1.4 93.4 + 4.1
2016          Jan 105.6 − 2.3 98.3 − 5.7 112.6 + 0.3 107.1 + 0.8 105.2 + 3.4 107.8 − 0.1
         Feb 105.6 + 0.6 95.0 − 2.4 115.5 + 3.3 110.1 − 0.7 99.4 + 0.5 113.9 − 1.1         Mar 117.2 − 4.2 102.9 − 5.1 132.3 − 4.2 113.1 + 2.0 114.7 + 5.7 112.6 + 0.7
         Apr 108.7 + 0.6 102.2 + 1.7 116.4 − 0.8 101.8 + 2.7 105.1 + 5.3 100.6 + 1.8
         May 105.1 − 0.7 95.6 − 5.4 114.5 + 2.9 105.5 + 4.7 94.6 + 2.6 109.4 + 5.4         June 108.5 + 1.2 96.7 − 4.0 121.7 + 6.3 100.6 − 1.4 101.2 + 1.2 100.4 − 2.2
         July 106.5 − 5.2 98.9 − 2.6 114.5 − 7.3 104.6 − 5.5 102.3 − 2.2 105.4 − 6.6
         Aug 99.8 + 0.9 91.4 − 1.8 107.7 + 4.1 103.4 − 3.0 102.7 + 3.0 103.6 − 5.0         Sep 104.8 − 0.6 94.0 − 2.3 115.6 + 1.1 105.1 − 2.5 115.5 + 0.4 101.4 − 3.7
         Oct 112.1 + 4.0 101.8 + 3.0 123.2 + 5.5 107.6 − 0.6 121.1 + 7.2 102.8 − 3.7
         Nov 111.7 + 1.2 103.3 + 1.3 120.8 + 1.3 107.9 − 0.4 117.7 + 8.6 104.5 − 3.4         Dec 
p 106.8 + 9.1 85.7 + 1.9 130.5 + 15.7 90.9 + 0.1 87.9 + 5.1 91.9 − 1.6
From abroad
2012 109.3 − 0.6 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.8 104.8 − 0.4 118.5 + 6.2 110.7 + 2.8 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.1 118.0 + 6.6 102.1 + 1.3 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.8 + 0.4 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.4 126.0 + 2.0
2016 p 122.9 + 1.8 108.5 + 0.6 130.0 + 2.0 126.1 + 3.3 118.8 + 7.3 128.7 + 2.1
2015          Dec 121.0 − 3.4 97.7 − 0.6 133.3 − 6.0 119.6 + 13.2 111.8 + 11.8 122.3 + 13.7
2016          Jan 121.0 + 1.9 108.2 − 4.6 125.0 + 3.0 143.3 + 19.9 125.6 + 16.5 149.4 + 21.0
         Feb 118.0 − 0.3 107.1 − 1.1 122.7 + 0.2 126.9 − 0.8 108.2 + 4.7 133.3 − 2.3         Mar 135.5 + 5.8 115.8 − 2.6 146.5 + 9.7 131.6 + 7.0 120.9 + 1.9 135.3 + 8.7
         Apr 118.0 − 3.7 108.3 + 0.4 122.9 − 5.8 119.9 − 0.6 127.6 + 18.9 117.3 − 6.3
         May 118.0 − 1.8 107.5 − 1.0 123.6 − 2.1 117.3 − 1.9 105.2 − 4.5 121.5 − 1.1         June 126.9 − 7.1 109.4 − 3.9 136.2 − 9.3 125.2 + 0.2 119.2 + 3.7 127.2 − 0.9
         July 121.8 + 1.5 107.8 − 1.3 128.4 + 2.7 127.7 + 1.7 116.6 + 5.5 131.6 + 0.6
         Aug 107.8 + 1.9 96.9 + 3.3 111.9 + 0.4 120.4 + 7.1 102.4 + 3.1 126.6 + 8.3         Sep 122.6 + 4.5 110.6 + 5.8 128.7 + 4.1 125.4 + 4.8 121.9 + 3.7 126.6 + 5.1
         Oct 127.9 + 7.8 111.9 + 3.9 136.1 + 10.7 129.8 − 0.5 138.4 + 19.0 126.9 − 6.1
         Nov 125.8 + 3.4 115.6 + 5.9 130.8 + 1.9 129.2 + 6.3 122.6 + 10.7 131.6 + 5.1         Dec 
p 130.9 + 8.2 102.3 + 4.7 147.7 + 10.8 116.8 − 2.3 117.3 + 4.9 116.6 − 4.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2011 107.1 + 7.5 112.1 + 12.4 120.5 + 21.0 113.6 + 13.8 91.5 − 8.1 102.0 + 2.5 112.7 + 13.2 95.9 − 3.7
2012 114.7 + 7.1 121.4 + 8.3 132.4 + 9.9 124.2 + 9.3 91.8 + 0.3 107.9 + 5.8 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.5 + 4.2 140.6 + 6.2 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
 
2015          Nov 118.8 + 19.6 137.1 + 21.3 152.4 + 17.1 144.6 + 24.0 84.9 + 24.3 100.5 + 17.3 140.4 + 28.9 83.2 + 7.8
         Dec 123.3 + 21.0 135.0 + 10.6 166.7 + 8.0 125.4 + 8.9 101.2 + 27.6 111.6 + 36.4 114.8 + 4.6 114.6 + 57.2
2016          Jan 108.5 + 13.9 117.7 + 15.5 147.4 + 20.5 106.6 + 6.1 92.0 + 40.0 99.3 + 11.8 111.5 + 7.0 89.7 + 19.0
         Feb 120.7 + 15.1 126.0 + 11.0 157.8 + 15.4 115.4 + 9.2 94.7 + 4.2 115.4 + 19.8 109.5 + 5.7 117.2 + 25.5         Mar 164.7 + 15.5 168.4 + 12.3 227.3 + 19.9 146.7 + 9.9 117.0 − 2.9 161.0 + 19.0 150.0 + 9.6 154.6 + 19.2
         Apr 151.0 + 18.9 155.3 + 16.7 195.8 + 14.2 142.3 + 20.0 114.0 + 13.0 146.7 + 21.3 140.3 + 18.8 143.8 + 21.7
         May 157.4 + 18.5 176.1 + 27.4 209.6 + 24.8 173.7 + 32.6 117.6 + 16.1 138.7 + 9.0 156.0 + 19.4 137.9 + 14.1         June 165.1 + 19.9 181.0 + 24.4 223.4 + 27.7 174.6 + 25.5 116.8 + 9.5 149.1 + 14.7 161.3 + 20.3 145.5 + 15.0
         July 152.7 + 15.7 163.7 + 17.4 194.8 + 5.6 158.6 + 31.8 117.4 + 9.5 141.8 + 13.8 144.2 + 19.5 144.5 + 18.1
         Aug 138.9 + 12.1 148.6 + 14.2 184.2 + 16.9 141.5 + 14.9 99.6 + 2.9 129.1 + 9.8 132.3 + 10.9 127.4 + 10.8         Sep 144.4 + 7.5 161.5 + 6.7 225.5 + 11.5 133.1 − 0.5 120.2 + 16.6 127.4 + 8.6 129.6 + 1.0 127.0 + 12.3
         Oct 145.4 + 23.5 157.1 + 22.7 194.3 + 22.7 148.2 + 27.3 110.4 + 7.4 133.8 + 24.6 145.0 + 20.3 126.3 + 28.1
         Nov 127.0 + 6.9 139.7 + 1.9 189.4 + 24.3 121.7 − 15.8 95.1 + 12.0 114.4 + 13.8 124.3 − 11.5 104.8 + 26.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles *
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
Retail trade
of which: by enterprises main product range  1 
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Wholesale
Textiles, Information materials, and medical and retail trade
clothing and household goods, cosmetic and repair of
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet motor vehicles and
Total tobacco 2 leather goods equipment furniture articles motorcycles
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.9 − 0.2 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.7 + 0.4 105.8 − 1.2
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.4 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.7 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.4 + 2.7 104.5 − 1.2
2014 108.2 + 1.9 102.7 + 1.4 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.8 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 107.1 + 2.5
2015 3 110.9 + 2.5 105.3 + 2.5 114.8 + 2.9 105.2 + 0.3 95.6 + 1.1 104.7 + 2.7 116.6 + 5.3 115.2 + 7.6
2016 112.9 + 1.8 106.7 + 1.3 117.0 + 1.9 106.0 + 0.8 95.3 − 0.3 106.0 + 1.2 121.1 + 3.9 ... ...
 
2015          Dec  3 131.3 + 3.3 125.6 + 3.1 133.9 + 3.6 124.3 + 0.6 148.3 + 1.2 113.4 + 5.6 130.8 + 4.1 106.1 + 4.2
2016          Jan 103.6 + 2.5 99.5 + 1.9 108.1 + 3.4 92.1 + 4.0 98.6 − 2.3 92.9 + 2.7 116.1 + 3.8 105.4 + 10.0
         Feb 99.8 + 2.1 95.4 + 2.0 105.5 + 3.3 80.6 − 0.9 85.8 + 0.4 94.0 + 3.6 113.4 + 4.6 110.3 + 8.9
         Mar 113.5 + 0.9 107.4 + 0.8 117.2 + 1.3 98.1 − 7.4 91.2 + 1.6 112.5 + 0.4 123.8 + 4.2 134.2 + 4.7
         Apr 112.8 + 0.9 106.1 + 0.9 117.0 + 0.1 113.2 + 3.9 81.8 + 0.4 111.3 + 2.0 118.7 + 2.5 130.1 + 6.0
         May 113.0 + 1.5 106.2 + 1.3 118.6 + 0.9 109.5 + 1.8 79.4 − 1.9 109.3 + 1.1 118.2 + 4.8 125.2 + 4.2         June 110.2 + 1.8 104.2 + 1.8 116.2 + 1.8 103.8 − 1.5 85.2 + 4.3 103.4 + 1.2 117.2 + 3.3 128.1 + 5.9
         July 113.4 + 1.8 107.7 + 1.5 119.1 + 2.9 108.5 + 0.6 89.7 − 1.1 106.3 + 2.9 124.2 + 3.8 122.1 + 3.2
         Aug 109.2 + 1.6 103.7 + 1.4 115.6 + 0.3 97.8 + 2.0 84.4 − 1.7 101.2 + 2.2 118.0 + 5.7 114.1 + 8.2         Sep 108.9 + 0.6 102.6 + 0.1 112.2 + 2.0 101.8 − 9.3 88.0 − 5.4 101.2 − 0.9 119.6 + 5.1 124.4 + 8.9
         Oct 118.0 + 3.4 110.7 + 2.7 118.7 + 2.8 129.4 + 7.7 100.1 + 2.2 112.4 + 1.5 124.2 + 4.0 132.3 + 6.4
         Nov 118.0 + 2.1 110.8 + 1.2 118.7 + 2.0 110.2 + 5.9 108.9 − 1.4 112.4 − 1.9 125.9 + 2.7 131.4 + 5.9         Dec 134.0 + 2.1 126.1 + 0.4 136.8 + 2.2 127.1 + 2.3 150.8 + 1.7 115.4 + 1.8 133.6 + 2.1 ... ...
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added stores. 2Including stalls and markets. 3Figures from January 2015 are provisional, in
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent mon ths owing to estimates
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1In for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2012 42,062 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 42,327 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 42,662 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,057 + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 88 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 8 43,476 8 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,691 822 6.1 655
2013          Q4 42,644 + 0.5 30,118 + 1.2 8,878 20,234 774 5,028 92 61 2,827 891 6.6 455
2014          Q1 42,214 + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,760 20,103 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,626 + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,829 20,255 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487         Q3 42,849 + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 800 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512         Q4 42,958 + 0.7 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 42,512 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,985 + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560         Q3 43,272 + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595         Q4 43,457 + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 77 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016          Q1
r 43,061 r + 1.3 31,064 + 2.3 8,927 21,120 793 4,786 166 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 r 43,491 r + 1.2 31,326 + 2.1 8,983 21,279 820 4,824 59 47 2,674 782 9 6.1 653
         Q3 r 43,625 r + 0.8 10 31,437 10 + 1.6 10 9,013 10 21,321 10 857 10 4,822 ... 10 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 8 43,724 8 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,547 766 5.8 677
2013          Sep 42,635 + 0.6 30,165 + 1.4 8,906 20,228 786 5,003 70 56 2,849 904 6.6 473
         Oct 42,731 + 0.6 30,181 + 1.2 8,900 20,255 785 5,011 83 70 2,801 870 6.5 466         Nov 42,710 + 0.5 30,149 + 1.1 8,889 20,252 779 5,048 80 67 2,806 881 6.5 458         Dec 42,490 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,783 20,161 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 440
2014          Jan 42,164 + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,739 20,060 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,183 + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,750 20,088 729 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,296 + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,797 20,162 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,486 + 0.9 30,060 + 1.7 8,826 20,244 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,643 + 0.8 30,125 + 1.6 8,836 20,292 751 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481         June 42,748 + 0.8 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,780 + 0.8 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,804 + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 42,964 + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,053 + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,010 + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,810 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan 42,443 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,464 + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,630 + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,820 + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 43,002 + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557         June 43,134 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,177 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,232 + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep 43,408 + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct 43,492 + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov 43,526 + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec 43,353 + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 105 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016          Jan 
r 42,980 r + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 169 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,023 r + 1.3 31,055 + 2.3 8,921 21,116 793 4,771 177 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,181 r + 1.3 31,195 + 2.2 8,951 21,205 804 4,783 152 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,330 r + 1.2 31,299 + 2.1 8,980 21,267 809 4,808 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,518 r + 1.2 31,395 + 2.2 8,997 21,324 826 4,839 57 45 2,664 774 9 6.0 655
         June r 43,626 r + 1.1 31,374 + 2.0 8,991 21,289 846 4,864 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July r 43,556 r + 0.9 31,258 + 1.7 8,974 21,188 852 4,861 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug r 43,578 r + 0.8 10 31,482 10 + 1.6 10 9,025 10 21,349 10 863 10 4,794 ... 10 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep r 43,741 r + 0.8 10 31,767 10 + 1.4 10 9,090 10 21,560 10 867 10 4,762 ... 10 36 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct r 43,797 r + 0.7 10 31,757 10 + 1.2 10 9,071 10 21,574 10 868 10 4,761 ... 10 36 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov r 43,790 r + 0.6 10 31,716 10 + 1.1 10 9,049 10 21,562 10 872 10 4,789 ... 10 38 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec 8 43,586 8 + 0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,777 11 1,010 6.3 647
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and mated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2014 and 2015, the estimated values
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.3 % for employees sub-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: ject to social contributions, by a maximum of 1.4 % for persons solely in jobs
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 31.2 % for cyclically
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given induced short-time work. 11From January 2017, persons receiving additional
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Securityabroad. 8Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 9From May Code (SGB III). 
2016 calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Unadjusted figures esti-

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 5 
prices of
Services industrial
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer- sold on of which
energy struction the prices price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food 1 Energy 2 Total rents 3 concept) index market 4 Exports Imports Energy 6 products 4 goods materials  7 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2012 8 97.5 8 94.2 98.1 107.8 95.9 96.1 8 104.1 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 9 107.0 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
 
2015          Mar 100.2 99.8 100.2 101.8 99.9 99.7 107.0 104.4 105.1 105.3 102.6 109.0 107.1
         Apr 100.1 100.4 100.4 102.3 99.2 99.8 107.0 104.5 106.0 105.6 103.2 115.5 105.6
         May 100.2 100.4 100.2 103.3 99.4 99.9 107.1 111.1 104.5 104.8 105.4 103.0 116.8 104.7
         June 100.1 100.1 99.8 102.8 99.5 100.0 107.0 104.4 105.3 105.3 102.5 113.3 103.4
         July 100.3 99.8 99.1 102.3 100.8 100.1 107.2 104.4 104.5 105.4 101.8 106.0 101.6
         Aug 100.3 99.7 99.6 100.2 101.0 100.1 107.2 111.5 103.9 102.1 104.9 100.3 91.5 96.0
         Sep 100.1 100.0 100.7 98.4 100.1 100.2 107.0 103.5 9 107.4 104.6 99.6 90.8 94.1
         Oct 100.1 100.4 101.2 97.6 100.0 100.3 107.0 103.1 108.9 104.4 99.3 91.6 93.4
         Nov 100.1 100.5 101.0 97.7 100.1 100.4 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.6 104.5 99.1 89.6 92.7
         Dec 100.1 100.2 100.4 95.0 101.2 100.4 107.0 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016          Jan 99.1 100.4 99.7 92.7 99.9 100.6 106.1 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 99.5 100.8 99.9 91.8 100.6 100.7 106.5 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6
         Mar 100.3 101.2 101.0 92.7 101.5 100.8 107.3 101.2 106.6 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 99.8 101.6 101.5 93.6 99.7 100.9 106.9 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 100.2 101.3 101.4 95.0 100.5 101.0 107.2 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2
         June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6
         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.2 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5
         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017          Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.1 102.2 108.1 ... ... ... ... 108.9 115.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 8 + 2.1 8 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 8 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 9 − 3.7 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
 
2015          Mar + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 12.7 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 27.3 − 2.9
         Apr + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 − 5.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 12.5 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 21.6 − 6.4
         May + 0.6 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 4.9 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 11.8 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 21.5 − 5.8
         June + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 10.5 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 25.0 − 4.6
         July + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 6.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 8.3 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 26.5 − 5.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 8.4 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 35.5 − 10.4
         Sep − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.9 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 2.1 9 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 37.2 − 10.4
         Oct + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 8.7 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 32.5 − 11.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 29.3 − 13.1
         Dec + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.7 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016          Jan + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 8.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 1.0 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0
         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017          Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 1.9 ... ... ... ... + 68.8 + 31.4
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on value-added tax. 5For the euro area, in euro. 6Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw gas. 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 8From Janu-
Materials: HWWI. 1Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 2Electricity, gas and ary 2012, increase in tobacco tax. 9From September 2015 onwards, provisional figu-
other fuels well as transport fuels and lubricants. 3Net rents. 4Excluding res. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2008
1,008.1 4.0 670.8 3.4 356.2 0.4 1,027.0 2.3 1,582.6 2.6 165.9 4.9 10.5
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.5 3.0 778.4 2.9 389.1 0.4 1,167.5 2.0 1,719.8 1.4 154.1 − 2.2 9.0
2014 1,213.0 3.9 807.1 3.7 400.2 2.8 1,207.3 3.4 1,759.5 2.3 165.1 7.1 9.4
2015 1,260.6 3.9 836.6 3.6 415.5 3.8 1,252.0 3.7 1,811.2 2.9 175.2 6.1 9.7
2015          Q2 308.5 4.1 200.1 3.5 102.4 4.5 302.5 3.8 449.5 2.8 41.9 6.1 9.3
         Q3 311.3 4.0 211.1 3.8 103.9 3.6 315.0 3.7 454.8 3.0 37.1 6.0 8.2
         Q4 348.7 4.2 231.6 4.5 103.5 3.1 335.1 4.0 459.3 3.0 38.4 5.7 8.4
2016          Q1 305.3 4.5 202.2 4.4 107.7 1.8 309.9 3.5 459.0 2.6 59.5 2.8 13.0
         Q2 319.4 3.5 207.4 3.6 105.3 2.8 312.7 3.4 463.7 3.2 43.7 4.3 9.4
         Q3 322.2 3.5 217.6 3.1 108.2 4.2 325.8 3.4 464.1 2.0 37.7 1.5 8.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2016. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.3 2.3 98.2 2.4 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.5 2.7 104.5 2.7 104.8 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.1 2.4 107.1 2.4 107.4 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.02014 110.2 2.9 110.0 2.8 110.2 2.7 110.2 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.7 2.3 112.5 2.2 112.7 2.3 112.8 2.4 114.4 2.7
2016 115.1 2.1 114.9 2.1 115.1 2.1 115.3 2.2 . .
2015          Q3 115.0 2.3 114.7 2.3 115.1 2.2 113.4 2.4 112.6 2.7
         Q4 125.9 2.3 125.6 2.3 126.0 2.3 113.6 2.4 125.1 2.7
2016          Q1 106.4 2.0 106.2 1.9 106.5 2.3 114.1 2.3 110.5 2.9
         Q2 108.0 2.2 107.7 2.2 107.8 1.9 115.0 2.1 114.6 2.1         Q3 117.5 2.1 117.2 2.1 117.6 2.2 115.9 2.2 115.3 2.4         Q4 128.6 2.2 128.3 2.2 128.7 2.2 116.2 2.3 . .
2016          June 108.2 2.7 108.0 2.7 107.6 2.1 115.3 2.1 . .
         July 136.1 2.1 135.8 2.1 136.2 2.2 115.8 2.2 . .
         Aug 108.1 2.2 107.9 2.2 108.2 2.2 115.9 2.1 . .
         Sep 108.2 2.1 108.0 2.1 108.3 2.2 116.1 2.2 . .
         Oct 108.7 2.1 108.5 2.1 108.9 2.2 116.2 2.3 . .
         Nov 166.6 2.1 166.2 2.1 166.7 2.1 116.2 2.3 . .
         Dec 110.5 2.3 110.3 2.3 110.5 2.2 116.2 2.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2016. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-halfyear data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2012 1,867.3 1,153.7 378.3 476.3 232.1 713.6 188.4 174.8 123.2 553.9 1,313.4 699.1 374.2 614.4 178.6 157.0
2013 1,902.2 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.1 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.6 1,332.6 706.0 377.5 626.6 191.0 163.1
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.8
2015 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2014          H2 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.8
2015          H1 2,163.8 1,346.9 453.6 539.8 270.0 816.8 217.9 197.4 127.0 622.4 1,541.4 830.0 440.6 711.4 223.0 173.2
         H2 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2016          H1 2,256.6 1,381.0 462.4 549.8 272.0 875.6 226.7 194.3 140.5 607.4 1,649.2 895.4 464.6 753.8 243.9 173.7
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 61.8 20.3 25.5 12.4 38.2 10.1 9.4 6.6 29.7 70.3 37.4 20.0 32.9 9.6 8.4
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 19.8 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2014          H2 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.52015          H1 100.0 62.3 21.0 25.0 12.5 37.8 10.1 9.1 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.4 20.4 32.9 10.3 8.0
         H2 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2016          H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.1 8.6 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2012 1,503.5 896.3 256.8 374.0 213.6 607.3 171.0 136.2 95.4 436.2 1,067.4 561.8 280.8 505.5 159.7 112.9
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 280.5 512.2 170.2 114.9
2014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.4
2015 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2014          H2 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.42015          H1 1,743.3 1,047.8 293.3 432.1 257.1 695.4 201.0 151.7 103.6 487.1 1,256.2 670.0 336.1 586.2 194.9 127.3
         H2 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2016          H1 1,818.4 1,059.3 296.6 432.5 254.2 759.1 210.1 149.1 112.3 466.0 1,352.3 717.9 351.0 634.4 219.2 128.8
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 59.6 17.1 24.9 14.2 40.4 11.4 9.1 6.4 29.0 71.0 37.4 18.7 33.6 10.6 7.5
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.4 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2014          H2 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.42015          H1 100.0 60.1 16.8 24.8 14.8 39.9 11.5 8.7 5.9 27.9 72.1 38.4 19.3 33.6 11.2 7.3
         H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2016          H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.8 11.6 8.2 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2012 363.7 257.4 121.5 102.4 18.4 106.3 17.4 38.6 27.8 117.7 246.0 137.2 93.4 108.8 18.9 44.1
2013 378.6 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.7 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.4 20.8 48.2
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.4
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2014          H2 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015          H1 420.5 299.1 160.3 107.7 12.9 121.4 17.0 45.7 23.4 135.3 285.2 160.0 104.4 125.2 28.0 45.9
         H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016          H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 70.8 33.4 28.1 5.1 29.2 4.8 10.6 7.6 32.4 67.6 37.7 25.7 29.9 5.2 12.1
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2014          H2 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.62015          H1 100.0 71.1 38.1 25.6 3.1 28.9 4.0 10.9 5.6 32.2 67.8 38.1 24.8 29.8 6.7 10.9
         H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016          H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-sation (EBITDA 
1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2008 1,290.4 6.3 161.9 − 5.9 12.6 − 1.6 5.7 11.6 17.4 79.4 − 16.7 6.2 − 1.7 2.4 6.6 12.1
2009 1,158.6 − 10.7 135.6 − 16.9 11.7 − 0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 − 29.2 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 4.9 9.3
2010 1,321.0 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.5 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.8 12.1
2011 1,414.4 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.4 10.9 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,533.0 6.6 189.3 3.1 12.4 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.0 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.9
2014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,636.2 6.9 196.3 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.6 91.6 − 15.9 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.5 11.3
2011          H2 730.1 6.9 88.3 − 3.6 12.1 − 1.3 5.5 11.4 18.0 40.9 − 15.4 5.6 − 1.5 2.6 7.1 11.8
2012          H1 751.0 8.1 93.3 3.6 12.4 − 0.5 4.7 9.1 16.8 55.7 1.6 7.4 − 0.5 1.0 5.7 11.4
         H2 782.2 5.2 95.9 2.6 12.3 − 0.3 4.7 11.0 17.9 39.9 − 19.2 5.1 − 1.4 1.4 6.8 11.7
2013          H1 762.8 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.5 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.7 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.1 12.1
2014          H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015          H1 815.7 8.7 102.9 5.8 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.1 17.6 59.1 2.1 7.3 − 0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.7 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.5 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016          H1 782.3 − 2.1 111.8 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.4 65.7 2.1 8.4 0.3 1.5 6.4 11.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2008 949.2 7.2 120.0 − 6.4 12.7 − 1.8 5.7 11.4 15.6 60.5 − 17.2 6.4 − 1.9 2.3 6.8 11.6
2009 837.7 − 11.8 94.9 − 20.6 11.3 − 1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 − 32.6 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,283.3 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.2 − 19.7 5.1 − 1.7 1.8 6.5 10.02011          H2 552.5 8.7 60.8 − 9.1 11.0 − 2.2 4.8 10.6 15.6 29.3 − 20.2 5.3 − 2.0 1.6 6.6 10.92012          H1 580.1 9.5 73.3 5.2 12.6 − 0.5 5.7 10.5 14.9 46.8 3.5 8.1 − 0.5 1.9 6.1 10.5
         H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 − 0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2013          H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014          H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015          H1 636.8 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.8 5.7 7.7 − 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 647.1 5.2 63.9 − 13.4 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 10.9 15.5 16.4 − 52.3 2.5 − 3.2 1.7 6.8 10.3
2016          H1 610.8 − 2.9 83.9 1.2 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.3 15.3 50.6 − 7.4 8.3 − 0.4 1.7 6.4 9.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2008 341.1 3.7 41.9 − 4.3 12.3 − 1.0 5.8 12.4 19.2 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.6 6.6 12.7
2009 321.0 − 7.4 40.7 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.4 5.8 45.1 8.9 13.3 0.4 5.6 10.8 19.6 22.6 46.8 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.5 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.4 10.1 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.1 13.82012 359.2 2.8 48.5 − 3.4 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 22.7 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 362.2 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.4 5.1 9.9 21.1 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.5 5.9 12.22014 368.3 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.3 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.12011          H2 177.6 1.0 27.5 13.4 15.5 1.7 7.1 12.2 22.4 11.6 0.7 6.6 − 0.0 4.3 7.5 14.22012          H1 170.9 3.3 20.0 − 2.6 11.7 − 0.7 2.6 8.0 21.0 8.9 − 9.8 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 4.5 13.9
         H2 188.3 2.3 28.5 − 4.0 15.1 − 1.0 5.2 11.2 23.7 5.1 − 73.2 2.7 − 5.2 2.7 7.4 15.3
2013          H1 174.0 − 0.5 21.7 1.4 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.0 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.3 0.3 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.3 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.3 13.4
2014          H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.6 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.6 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.4 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.4 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015          H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.3 12.2 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016          H1 171.5 1.1 27.9 27.9 16.3 3.5 5.2 10.4 23.4 15.0 62.7 8.8 3.3 1.1 6.5 15.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups in agriculture
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, and forestry. 
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2016
Item 2013 2014 2015 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov p
Current account + 215,988 + 241,245 + 316,648 + 59,516 + 88,074 + 93,722 + 33,951 + 32,589 + 40,522 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,913,552 1,963,183 2,109,809 501,736 535,549 519,824 182,198 177,257 189,453
Imports 1,703,376 1,721,836 1,759,171 421,307 428,493 426,700 148,280 150,286 155,805
Balance + 210,173 + 241,345 + 350,640 + 80,430 + 107,057 + 93,124 + 33,918 + 26,972 + 33,648
2 Services
Receipts 646,905 710,777 768,725 178,241 193,502 206,083 70,765 65,434 63,010
Expenditure 576,355 633,319 710,057 168,623 177,908 180,796 60,610 57,629 59,362
Balance + 70,546 + 77,458 + 58,669 + 9,618 + 15,594 + 25,287 + 10,155 + 7,804 + 3,648
3 Primary income
Receipts 610,254 626,709 631,890 137,968 154,203 142,799 49,750 45,982 52,669
Expenditure 530,432 562,506 590,743 124,054 167,043 135,334 48,785 37,005 38,281
Balance + 79,822 + 64,203 + 41,148 + 13,914 − 12,840 + 7,463 + 964 + 8,978 + 14,388
4 Secondary income
Receipts 86,685 91,481 103,531 22,498 27,601 23,314 8,028 7,173 7,245
Expenditure 231,239 233,243 237,338 66,943 49,337 55,467 19,114 18,337 18,407
Balance − 144,555 − 141,764 − 133,807 − 44,445 − 21,737 − 32,152 − 11,086 − 11,164 − 11,162
Capital account + 19,338 + 13,053 − 12,404 − 1,319 + 453 + 768 + 166 + 1,098 + 1,681 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 423,350 + 329,295 + 296,925 + 4,603 + 62,255 + 165,721 + 89,485 − 9,110 + 32,474 C
1 Direct investment + 27,130 + 62,686 + 243,367 + 38,996 − 38,105 + 125,234 + 51,183 + 71,290 + 32,092
By resident units abroad + 512,758 + 161,435 + 820,319 + 113,783 − 13,498 + 37,470 − 12,184 + 95,922 + 52,328
By non-resident units in the euro area + 485,627 + 98,749 + 576,950 + 74,787 + 24,606 − 87,765 − 63,367 + 24,632 + 20,237
2 Portfolio investment − 27,145 + 68,959 + 106,359 + 93,546 + 156,551 + 167,820 + 38,633 − 3,309 − 38,373
By resident units abroad + 271,362 + 460,696 + 404,150 + 134,138 + 122,317 + 138,249 + 30,447 − 12,011 − 22,394
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 167,450 + 141,720 + 22,028 − 18,294 + 2,588 + 19,978 + 7,130 + 13,126 − 8,228
Long-term debt securities + 77,038 + 226,560 + 369,804 + 140,480 + 112,057 + 108,804 + 6,522 + 8,679 − 6,010
Short-term debt securities + 26,876 + 92,414 + 12,318 + 11,951 + 7,672 + 9,467 + 16,795 − 33,816 − 8,156
By non-resident units in the euro area + 298,505 + 391,735 + 297,791 + 40,591 − 34,234 − 29,570 − 8,186 − 8,702 + 15,979
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 203,379 + 282,558 + 267,544 − 14,303 + 75,526 + 34,824 + 20,399 + 791 + 18,122
Long-term debt securities + 62,540 + 127,161 + 78,800 + 30,332 − 159,926 − 65,044 − 50,152 + 9,659 + 3,361
Short-term debt securities + 32,585 − 17,984 − 48,554 + 24,563 + 50,166 + 651 + 21,567 − 19,151 − 5,504
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 31,797 + 45,483 + 85,833 + 27,331 − 44,606 + 26,023 + 4,563 + 8,756 + 2,366
4 Other investment + 386,921 + 147,803 − 149,207 − 156,241 − 13,773 − 161,093 − 11,697 − 81,771 + 34,150
Eurosystem + 57,976 + 55,898 − 13,611 − 7,278 − 19,284 − 35,356 − 23,776 − 5,985 − 11,333
General government − 8,831 + 11,850 + 19,114 + 7,326 + 1,205 − 13 − 1,325 − 8,804 + 164
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 275,227 + 98,549 − 123,572 − 89,483 − 22,737 − 89,686 + 2,291 − 58,630 + 20,080
Enterprises and households + 62,547 − 18,491 − 31,132 − 66,807 + 27,042 − 36,037 + 11,113 − 8,352 + 25,239
5 Reserve assets + 4,647 + 4,361 + 10,569 + 970 + 2,186 + 7,737 + 6,802 − 4,076 + 2,239
Net errors and omissions + 188,025 + 74,997 − 7,321 − 53,593 − 26,274 + 71,231 + 55,368 − 42,797 − 9,729 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,606
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 164,581 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 32,482 + 69,156 − 35,520 + 1,642 + 120,858 + 2,836 − 45,365
2012 + 193,593 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 65,825 − 39,858 − 413 + 144,802 + 1,297 − 48,378
2013 + 190,428 + 211,647 − 4,331 − 43,223 + 65,763 − 43,758 − 591 + 219,079 + 838 + 29,2422014 + 212,880 + 226,499 − 7,739 − 35,353 + 62,387 − 40,653 + 1,138 + 244,444 − 2,564 + 30,4252015 + 252,580 + 259,621 − 4,407 − 31,230 + 63,739 − 39,550 − 159 + 225,551 − 2,213 − 26,8702016 
p + 265,984 + 271,532 − 2,060 − 28,314 + 63,224 − 40,459 + 1,447 + 229,742 + 1,686 − 37,688
2014          Q1 + 48,137 + 52,292 + 168 − 6,298 + 17,061 − 14,918 + 2,142 + 60,275 − 565 + 9,996         Q2 + 44,982 + 54,295 − 2,031 − 7,242 + 4,641 − 6,712 + 519 + 55,959 − 610 + 10,457         Q3 + 54,257 + 60,313 − 2,818 − 15,461 + 17,223 − 7,818 + 367 + 59,285 + 332 + 4,661         Q4 + 65,503 + 59,599 − 3,058 − 6,352 + 23,462 − 11,206 − 1,890 + 68,925 − 1,722 + 5,312
2015          Q1 + 57,887 + 60,084 − 1,680 − 4,714 + 18,340 − 15,822 + 218 + 30,366 − 21 − 27,739
         Q2 + 57,431 + 68,318 − 2,043 − 5,941 + 2,107 − 7,052 + 1,098 + 72,772 − 465 + 14,243         Q3 + 65,022 + 67,108 + 577 − 13,852 + 18,393 − 6,628 + 703 + 64,092 − 1,455 − 1,634         Q4 + 72,240 + 64,112 − 1,260 − 6,722 + 24,898 − 10,048 − 2,178 + 58,322 − 272 − 11,740
2016          Q1 + 64,276 + 64,018 + 333 − 5,707 + 19,425 − 13,460 − 417 + 23,864 + 1,228 − 39,995
         Q2 + 72,108 + 77,103 + 38 − 5,040 + 4,526 − 4,482 + 1,557 + 73,876 + 761 + 212         Q3 + 61,190 + 67,933 − 38 − 12,896 + 16,836 − 10,682 + 448 + 57,651 − 261 − 3,987         Q4 
p + 68,410 + 62,478 − 2,392 − 4,671 + 22,438 − 11,835 − 141 + 74,351 − 43 + 6,083
2014          July + 20,303 + 22,747 − 1,684 − 4,991 + 5,562 − 3,016 − 402 + 13,450 + 431 − 6,451         Aug + 10,707 + 14,254 − 748 − 6,617 + 5,430 − 2,359 + 426 + 13,062 + 166 + 1,930         Sep + 23,247 + 23,312 − 385 − 3,853 + 6,231 − 2,442 + 343 + 32,773 − 265 + 9,182
         Oct + 21,331 + 22,823 − 1,448 − 4,994 + 6,058 − 2,556 − 112 + 15,291 + 203 − 5,928
         Nov + 18,686 + 18,095 − 382 − 2,039 + 6,130 − 3,500 + 152 + 22,905 + 30 + 4,067         Dec + 25,486 + 18,681 − 1,228 + 681 + 11,274 − 5,150 − 1,930 + 30,729 − 1,955 + 7,173
2015          Jan + 14,676 + 15,484 − 1,154 − 1,713 + 5,103 − 4,199 + 20 − 3,642 + 372 − 18,338
         Feb + 16,055 + 19,360 − 948 − 1,625 + 5,826 − 7,505 + 24 + 11,595 + 266 − 4,485         Mar + 27,157 + 25,240 + 422 − 1,376 + 7,411 − 4,117 + 173 + 22,413 − 660 − 4,917
         Apr + 21,110 + 22,116 − 1,240 − 1,432 + 3,303 − 2,877 + 348 + 31,171 − 69 + 9,712
         May + 11,366 + 21,155 − 437 − 2,002 − 5,805 − 1,982 + 557 + 17,540 − 78 + 5,617         June + 24,955 + 25,047 − 367 − 2,507 + 4,609 − 2,194 + 192 + 24,061 − 318 − 1,086
         July + 25,002 + 25,102 − 1,024 − 4,339 + 6,553 − 2,314 + 462 + 20,319 − 1,170 − 5,146
         Aug + 14,231 + 16,658 + 472 − 5,423 + 5,735 − 2,739 + 40 + 19,460 − 180 + 5,189         Sep + 25,788 + 25,348 + 1,129 − 4,090 + 6,106 − 1,575 + 201 + 24,313 − 105 − 1,677
         Oct + 21,741 + 23,867 + 23 − 5,847 + 6,808 − 3,087 − 94 + 16,508 + 154 − 5,140
         Nov + 24,894 + 22,245 − 378 − 1,741 + 6,874 − 2,485 + 163 + 20,149 − 548 − 4,908         Dec + 25,604 + 17,999 − 905 + 866 + 11,216 − 4,476 − 2,248 + 21,665 + 123 − 1,692
2016          Jan + 14,029 + 13,619 − 183 − 2,455 + 5,140 − 2,275 − 89 − 5,464 − 186 − 19,404
         Feb + 20,755 + 22,485 + 673 − 1,143 + 6,932 − 7,518 + 426 + 9,544 + 1,478 − 11,637         Mar + 29,492 + 27,914 − 158 − 2,109 + 7,353 − 3,666 − 754 + 19,784 − 64 − 8,954
         Apr + 27,945 + 27,244 − 188 − 845 + 3,238 − 1,692 + 1,267 + 41,438 + 696 + 12,226
         May + 18,100 + 23,445 + 500 − 1,584 − 3,170 − 591 + 153 + 9,261 + 776 − 8,992         June + 26,063 + 26,415 − 274 − 2,611 + 4,458 − 2,199 + 137 + 23,178 − 711 − 3,022
         July + 19,837 + 20,804 + 508 − 3,868 + 6,337 − 3,435 − 135 + 19,073 + 342 − 629
         Aug + 17,105 + 21,426 − 342 − 5,559 + 5,749 − 4,510 − 114 + 16,116 + 93 − 876         Sep + 24,248 + 25,703 − 204 − 3,469 + 4,750 − 2,737 + 697 + 22,462 − 695 − 2,483
         Oct + 19,403 + 21,103 + 220 − 3,652 + 5,734 − 3,783 − 175 + 28,153 − 145 + 8,925
         Nov + 24,981 + 24,090 − 566 − 948 + 5,838 − 4,000 − 76 + 20,989 + 140 − 3,915         Dec  
p + 24,026 + 17,284 − 2,047 − 72 + 10,865 − 4,052 + 110 + 25,209 − 38 + 1,073
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2017
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2016
Ländergruppe/Land  2013  2014  2015 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  p Jan. / Nov. 
All countries 1 Exports 1,088,025 1,123,746 1,193,555 1,110,114 96,245 105,901 101,561 108,488 97,390
Imports 890,393 910,145 949,245 875,907 76,550 81,877 82,154 85,784 78,688Balance + 197,632 + 213,601 + 244,310 + 234,207 + 19,694 + 24,024 + 19,407 + 22,705 + 18,702
I Exports 743,067 761,914 803,425 758,571 63,830 73,331 69,148 73,658 ... European countries
Imports 625,934 642,738 653,782 604,864 51,097 57,020 56,488 59,536 ...
Balance + 117,133 + 119,176 + 149,643 + 153,707 + 12,733 + 16,311 + 12,661 + 14,122 ...
Exports 618,383 648,446 692,493 653,574 54,154 63,082 59,684 63,243 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 509,738 527,117 543,334 507,922 42,068 48,266 47,089 49,509 ...
Balance + 108,645 + 121,329 + 149,159 + 145,652 + 12,086 + 14,816 + 12,595 + 13,735 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 405,220 413,753 434,075 408,161 32,708 39,354 37,514 39,771 ...
countries Imports 343,487 350,550 356,643 330,829 26,990 31,074 30,588 31,777 ...
Balance + 61,732 + 63,203 + 77,432 + 77,332 + 5,718 + 8,280 + 6,926 + 7,994 ...
of which
Austria Exports 56,217 55,807 58,217 55,233 4,872 5,367 5,118 5,404 ...
Imports 36,734 36,218 37,250 35,608 3,012 3,474 3,268 3,439 ...
Balance + 19,483 + 19,590 + 20,967 + 19,625 + 1,860 + 1,892 + 1,850 + 1,965 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,954 47,345 46,196 43,367 3,655 4,189 3,850 4,107 ...
Luxembourg Imports 41,965 42,548 40,116 37,756 3,283 3,327 3,325 3,606 ...
Balance + 5,989 + 4,797 + 6,079 + 5,610 + 373 + 862 + 525 + 501 ...
France Exports 99,250 100,580 102,762 93,617 7,080 9,021 8,518 9,232 ...
Imports 63,489 66,714 66,819 60,907 4,495 5,392 5,832 5,346 ...
Balance + 35,761 + 33,866 + 35,943 + 32,710 + 2,585 + 3,629 + 2,686 + 3,886 ...
Italy Exports 53,212 54,240 57,987 56,850 3,916 5,519 5,369 5,590 ...
Imports 46,911 48,522 49,038 47,666 3,792 4,444 4,458 4,617 ...
Balance + 6,301 + 5,718 + 8,949 + 9,184 + 124 + 1,075 + 911 + 974 ...
Netherlands Exports 70,975 72,736 79,191 72,580 6,366 7,030 6,753 6,859 ...
Imports 88,698 87,796 87,889 76,364 6,796 7,108 7,028 7,432 ...
Balance − 17,723 − 15,060 − 8,697 − 3,785 − 430 − 78 − 276 − 573 ...
Spain Exports 31,349 34,820 38,715 37,546 2,754 3,538 3,402 3,885 ...
Imports 23,639 24,804 26,442 25,298 1,771 2,381 2,260 2,701 ...
Balance + 7,709 + 10,016 + 12,273 + 12,248 + 983 + 1,157 + 1,142 + 1,183 ...
Other EU member Exports 213,163 234,693 258,417 245,413 21,446 23,728 22,170 23,472 ...
states Imports 166,251 176,567 186,691 177,092 15,078 17,192 16,500 17,732 ...
Balance + 46,912 + 58,126 + 71,727 + 68,320 + 6,367 + 6,536 + 5,669 + 5,741 ...
of which
United Exports 71,280 79,163 89,018 80,051 6,873 7,792 6,549 7,224 ...
Kingdom Imports 39,466 38,545 38,414 32,714 2,694 3,112 2,907 3,336 ...
Balance + 31,815 + 40,618 + 50,604 + 47,337 + 4,179 + 4,680 + 3,642 + 3,888 ...
Exports 124,684 113,468 110,932 104,998 9,676 10,249 9,464 10,414 ... 2 Other European
Imports 116,196 115,621 110,448 96,942 9,029 8,753 9,399 10,027 ... countries
Balance + 8,488 − 2,153 + 484 + 8,055 + 647 + 1,495 + 65 + 387 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,924 46,202 49,070 46,535 4,135 4,607 4,358 4,615 ...
Imports 38,321 39,392 42,089 40,200 3,371 3,726 3,935 4,357 ...
Balance + 8,603 + 6,810 + 6,981 + 6,335 + 764 + 881 + 423 + 258 ...
II Exports 341,213 358,337 387,398 349,180 32,168 32,471 32,156 34,613 ... Non-European
Imports 264,459 267,407 295,461 270,967 25,453 24,787 25,666 26,248 ... countries
Balance + 76,754 + 90,930 + 91,936 + 78,212 + 6,716 + 7,684 + 6,491 + 8,366 ...
Exports 21,803 22,505 23,897 22,886 2,007 2,058 2,044 2,542 ... 1 Africa
Imports 23,108 20,242 18,307 15,003 1,339 1,269 1,598 1,446 ...
Balance − 1,305 + 2,263 + 5,590 + 7,883 + 668 + 789 + 447 + 1,095 ...
Exports 130,427 135,293 156,982 135,769 11,989 12,809 12,024 13,194 ... 2 America
Imports 75,023 74,191 85,582 76,177 7,022 6,937 6,724 7,519 ...
Balance + 55,404 + 61,103 + 71,400 + 59,593 + 4,967 + 5,872 + 5,300 + 5,675 ...
of which
Exports 89,348 95,928 113,733 98,366 8,520 9,179 8,797 9,768 ... United States
Imports 48,582 49,207 60,217 53,175 4,898 4,731 4,630 5,217 ...
Balance + 40,766 + 46,721 + 53,516 + 45,191 + 3,622 + 4,448 + 4,167 + 4,551 ...
Exports 179,038 190,973 196,297 181,058 17,267 16,670 17,177 17,929 ... 3 Asia
Imports 162,960 170,050 188,621 177,033 16,844 16,336 17,137 17,035 ...
Balance + 16,077 + 20,923 + 7,676 + 4,025 + 423 + 333 + 39 + 894 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 32,754 35,462 39,518 32,471 3,348 2,553 2,583 3,238 ...
Imports 8,921 7,865 7,330 6,003 554 627 560 588 ...
Balance + 23,833 + 27,598 + 32,188 + 26,468 + 2,794 + 1,926 + 2,023 + 2,650 ...
Japan Exports 17,076 16,910 16,968 16,788 1,628 1,645 1,607 1,736 ...
Imports 19,492 19,007 20,180 20,179 1,902 1,905 1,844 1,943 ...
Balance − 2,416 − 2,097 − 3,213 − 3,391 − 275 − 260 − 237 − 207 ...
Exports 66,912 74,369 71,284 68,887 6,275 6,590 6,300 7,057 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 74,544 79,828 91,930 85,649 8,170 7,952 8,693 8,461 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 7,633 − 5,459 − 20,646 − 16,762 − 1,895 − 1,362 − 2,393 − 1,405 ...
Exports 45,894 48,476 51,510 47,354 4,530 4,420 5,263 4,336 ... New industrial countries
Imports 36,672 38,782 42,478 39,195 3,613 3,487 3,672 3,702 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,222 + 9,695 + 9,032 + 8,159 + 917 + 933 + 1,591 + 634 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,946 9,566 10,221 9,467 905 935 911 949 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 3,368 2,924 2,951 2,754 247 245 207 247 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,578 + 6,641 + 7,271 + 6,712 + 657 + 690 + 705 + 702 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 3,155 + 61,666 + 1,005
2013 − 43,223 − 12,075 − 37,713 + 8,123 + 3,605 − 758 − 5,912 + 3,078 + 523 + 64,017 + 1,2232014 − 35,353 − 13,254 − 37,653 + 7,817 + 4,274 + 2,600 − 1,785 + 3,035 + 259 + 61,258 + 8712015 − 31,230 − 12,655 − 36,632 + 10,181 + 5,118 + 3,796 − 3,659 + 3,102 + 735 + 63,370 − 3662016 
p − 28,314 − 6,954 − 38,478 + 9,388 + 5,781 + 3,345 − 4,187 + 3,167 + 481 + 62,712 + 31
2015          Q2 − 5,941 − 2,218 − 7,808 + 2,272 + 1,093 + 1,298 − 1,155 + 830 − 31 + 3,256 − 1,118         Q3 − 13,852 − 3,352 − 14,495 + 2,779 + 847 + 292 − 594 + 770 − 445 + 20,042 − 1,204         Q4 − 6,722 − 4,158 − 8,590 + 2,811 + 1,872 + 1,928 − 1,563 + 598 + 411 + 21,474 + 3,013
2016          Q1 − 5,707 − 2,439 − 6,421 + 2,272 + 1,243 + 249 − 1,168 + 840 + 754 + 19,315 − 645
         Q2 − 5,040 − 1,190 − 8,057 + 2,369 + 1,119 + 1,108 − 955 + 855 − 154 + 5,764 − 1,084
         Q3 − 12,896 − 1,401 − 15,654 + 1,901 + 1,552 + 573 − 329 + 849 − 434 + 18,445 − 1,175
         Q4 
p − 4,671 − 1,924 − 8,345 + 2,845 + 1,866 + 1,415 − 1,735 + 623 + 316 + 19,188 + 2,934
2016          Feb − 1,143 − 1,039 − 1,723 + 607 + 774 + 165 − 138 + 290 + 272 + 6,590 + 70
         Mar − 2,109 − 479 − 3,011 + 714 + 285 + 543 − 308 + 274 + 224 + 7,498 − 370
         Apr − 845 − 443 − 1,174 + 809 + 480 − 5 − 666 + 300 − 33 + 3,726 − 455
         May − 1,584 − 277 − 3,302 + 854 + 743 + 197 − 268 + 251 − 90 − 2,736 − 344
         June − 2,611 − 470 − 3,582 + 707 − 104 + 916 − 22 + 305 − 32 + 4,774 − 285
         July − 3,868 − 394 − 4,284 + 725 + 568 − 204 − 411 + 296 − 173 + 6,867 − 357
         Aug − 5,559 − 598 − 6,541 + 588 + 830 + 64 − 248 + 264 − 136 + 6,289 − 405
         Sep − 3,469 − 409 − 4,828 + 588 + 155 + 712 + 331 + 288 − 125 + 5,289 − 413
         Oct − 3,652 − 464 − 5,328 + 631 + 1,073 + 31 − 148 + 199 + 150 + 6,169 − 585
         Nov − 948 − 586 − 1,993 + 1,260 + 691 + 73 − 740 + 210 + 127 + 6,123 − 412
         Dec  p − 72 − 874 − 1,025 + 954 + 102 + 1,312 − 846 + 214 + 38 + 6,896 + 3,931
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2012 − 39,858 − 25,493 − 5,214 + 5,206 − 14,366 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,158
2013 − 43,758 − 29,708 − 5,611 + 6,177 − 14,050 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 591 + 1,076 − 1,6672014 − 40,653 − 28,169 − 6,076 + 8,088 − 12,485 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 1,138 + 2,782 − 1,6432015 − 39,550 − 25,546 − 7,065 + 9,800 − 14,004 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 159 + 2,136 − 2,2952016 
p − 40,459 − 26,505 − 8,252 + 9,839 − 13,954 − 4,435 − 4,418 + 1,447 + 3,266 − 1,819
2015          Q2 − 7,052 − 1,803 − 1,161 + 6,278 − 5,249 − 885 − 881 + 1,098 + 1,143 − 45         Q3 − 6,628 − 3,850 − 1,196 + 1,212 − 2,778 − 885 − 881 + 703 + 870 − 167         Q4 − 10,048 − 6,918 − 2,094 + 981 − 3,130 − 885 − 881 − 2,178 + 134 − 2,312
2016          Q1 − 13,460 − 10,054 − 2,704 + 1,284 − 3,406 − 1,270 − 1,267 − 417 − 676 + 259
         Q2 − 4,482 − 998 − 1,618 + 5,527 − 3,484 − 1,056 − 1,053 + 1,557 + 2,072 − 516
         Q3 − 10,682 − 6,952 − 1,702 + 1,753 − 3,731 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 448 + 1,110 − 662
         Q4 
p − 11,835 − 8,502 − 2,228 + 1,276 − 3,333 − 1,055 − 1,049 − 141 + 760 − 901
2016          Feb − 7,518 − 6,258 − 1,079 + 281 − 1,260 − 441 − 440 + 426 + 188 + 238
         Mar − 3,666 − 2,629 − 444 + 416 − 1,038 − 388 − 387 − 754 − 866 + 112
         Apr − 1,692 − 703 − 509 + 1,217 − 989 − 354 − 353 + 1,267 + 1,411 − 144
         May − 591 + 555 − 408 + 3,020 − 1,147 − 351 − 350 + 153 + 244 − 91
         June − 2,199 − 850 − 701 + 1,290 − 1,348 − 351 − 350 + 137 + 417 − 281
         July − 3,435 − 2,335 − 451 + 378 − 1,100 − 352 − 350 − 135 + 98 − 233
         Aug − 4,510 − 3,013 − 983 + 257 − 1,497 − 350 − 350 − 114 + 157 − 271
         Sep − 2,737 − 1,603 − 268 + 1,118 − 1,133 − 351 − 350 + 697 + 855 − 158
         Oct − 3,783 − 2,857 − 658 + 326 − 926 − 352 − 350 − 175 − 8 − 167
         Nov − 4,000 − 2,939 − 449 + 21 − 1,062 − 353 − 350 − 76 + 253 − 329
         Dec  p − 4,052 − 2,706 − 1,121 + 929 − 1,345 − 351 − 350 + 110 + 515 − 405
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2016
Item 2014 2015 2016 p Q2 Q3 Q4 p Oct Nov Dec p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 299,954 + 253,658 + 400,059 + 162,379 + 50,196 + 32,952 + 47,813 + 33,019 − 47,880
1 Direct investment + 85,658 + 98,017 + 84,775 + 11,281 + 21,261 + 21,484 + 9,422 + 9,206 + 2,857
Equity + 66,413 + 69,542 + 66,695 + 10,478 + 17,012 + 17,002 + 7,013 + 6,242 + 3,746
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 21,373 + 15,866 + 23,945 + 5,100 + 9,721 + 1,790 + 3,325 + 1,243 − 2,778
Debt instruments + 19,246 + 28,475 + 18,080 + 804 + 4,249 + 4,482 + 2,409 + 2,963 − 890
2 Portfolio investment + 149,023 + 124,134 + 100,593 + 34,264 + 19,775 − 659 + 5,483 − 871 − 5,271
Shares 2 + 12,380 + 19,737 + 17,518 + 4,668 + 8,154 + 3,383 + 1,628 + 2,456 − 702
Investment fund shares 3 + 41,302 + 35,495 + 36,365 + 7,875 + 8,857 + 9,909 + 6,546 − 717 + 4,080
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 95,794 + 73,923 + 53,691 + 26,381 + 5,903 − 9,801 − 1,590 − 2,217 − 5,994
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 454 − 5,021 − 6,981 − 4,659 − 3,138 − 4,150 − 1,101 − 393 − 2,655
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 31,769 + 25,796 + 32,153 + 3,940 + 10,024 + 13,264 + 4,421 + 5,622 + 3,221
4. Other investment 7 + 36,069 + 7,923 + 180,853 + 112,132 − 604 − 1,096 + 28,631 + 18,923 − 48,649
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 76,305 − 90,287 + 18,920 + 38,457 − 29,468 − 1,411 + 47,742 − 22,426 − 26,727
Long-term + 21,149 − 2,803 + 45,273 + 8,368 + 7,704 + 27,253 + 6,418 + 12,739 + 8,096
Short-term + 55,156 − 87,484 − 26,353 + 30,089 − 37,172 − 28,664 + 41,324 − 35,164 − 34,823
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 7,517 − 13,097 − 11,442 − 605 − 11,317 − 28,558 − 5,828 − 1,895 − 20,835
Long-term + 2,091 + 12,588 + 910 − 219 + 996 + 906 − 186 + 1,148 − 56
Short-term − 9,608 − 25,685 − 12,352 − 386 − 12,313 − 29,463 − 5,642 − 3,043 − 20,779
General government + 17,161 − 12,057 + 2,884 + 2,400 + 5,124 − 9,701 − 5,524 − 2,867 − 1,310
Long-term − 405 − 7,425 − 3,556 − 832 − 982 − 375 − 501 + 244 − 118
Short-term + 17,566 − 4,632 + 6,440 + 3,232 + 6,106 − 9,326 − 5,023 − 3,111 − 1,192
Bundesbank − 49,880 + 123,364 + 170,491 + 71,881 + 35,056 + 38,574 − 7,760 + 46,110 + 223
5. Reserve assets − 2,564 − 2,213 + 1,686 + 761 − 261 − 43 − 145 + 140 − 38
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 55,510 + 28,106 + 170,317 + 88,503 − 7,455 − 41,400 + 19,660 + 12,030 − 73,090
1 Direct investment + 6,240 + 41,579 + 56,230 + 28,169 + 8,742 − 7,588 − 6,558 + 6,613 − 7,643
Equity + 23,991 + 18,498 + 14,634 + 5,101 + 3,377 − 336 + 973 + 755 − 2,065
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 3,662 + 5,765 + 9,026 + 800 + 3,548 + 1,001 + 1,248 + 1,733 − 1,980
Debt instruments − 17,751 + 23,081 + 41,596 + 23,068 + 5,365 − 7,252 − 7,531 + 5,857 − 5,578
2 Portfolio investment + 11,583 − 75,003 − 106,635 − 32,275 − 29,040 − 51,423 − 16,190 − 7,546 − 27,687
Shares 2) + 5,137 + 10,255 − 1,061 − 5,660 + 1,195 + 6,402 + 3,449 − 28 + 2,982
Investment fund shares 3 − 5,154 + 5,515 − 7,388 − 1,864 − 2,298 − 449 + 116 − 994 + 429
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 14,785 − 97,980 − 91,671 − 32,283 − 23,893 − 29,068 − 12,928 + 7,770 − 23,910
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 3,185 + 7,207 − 6,516 + 7,533 − 4,044 − 28,308 − 6,827 − 14,294 − 7,188
3. Other investment 7 + 37,687 + 61,529 + 220,722 + 92,608 + 12,843 + 17,612 + 42,408 + 12,963 − 37,760
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 32,484 − 41,137 + 86,799 + 68,410 + 884 − 23,708 + 43,368 + 2,455 − 69,531
Long-term − 14,555 − 19,517 + 5,831 − 3,177 + 5,499 + 7,422 + 778 + 1,635 + 5,009
Short-term + 47,039 − 21,621 + 80,968 + 71,587 − 4,615 − 31,130 + 42,590 + 820 − 74,540
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 16,777 + 18,120 + 15,740 − 486 − 23,546 + 353 + 3,596 − 1,890 − 1,352
Long-term − 2,008 + 15,290 + 5,277 − 1,454 + 3,839 + 2,750 + 2,512 + 2,388 − 2,150
Short-term + 18,785 + 2,829 + 10,463 + 968 − 27,385 − 2,397 + 1,084 − 4,278 + 797
General government − 5,610 − 11,235 + 1,870 + 6,643 − 2,770 − 7,646 + 377 + 1,052 − 9,076
Long-term − 931 − 3,654 − 736 + 2,897 − 54 − 1,102 + 59 − 844 − 317
Short-term − 4,680 − 7,582 + 2,606 + 3,746 − 2,716 − 6,544 + 319 + 1,896 − 8,759
Bundesbank − 5,964 + 95,782 + 116,313 + 18,042 + 38,274 + 48,613 − 4,933 + 11,347 + 42,199
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 244,444 + 225,551 + 229,742 + 73,876 + 57,651 + 74,351 + 28,153 + 20,989 + 25,209
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank since the beginning of European monetary union o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,213 37,7352003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,296 12,098
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,1992016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 609,909 380,541
2014          May 680,888 148,949 100,274 13,213 7,912 27,550 479,290 466,862 52,649 406,416 274,472
         June 678,136 153,017 104,600 13,213 7,582 27,622 474,245 461,817 50,874 399,788 278,348
         July 660,521 154,885 105,317 13,497 7,665 28,406 455,977 443,548 49,659 378,120 282,401
         Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 380,001 301,323         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 386,216 310,586
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 396,445 285,345
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 400,850 282,119         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,623 282,181
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 452,230 298,833
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 444,069 300,483         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 435,366 332,490
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,617 325,820
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 437,079 321,421         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 440,233 316,029
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 446,157 317,090
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 443,522 337,764         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 466,216 308,212
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 474,882 311,811
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 491,813 321,506         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 493,509 307,199
2016          Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 485,028 322,943
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 501,590 337,745         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 504,447 332,928
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 505,222 351,045
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 508,576 376,311         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 522,762 399,470
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 525,468 378,577
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 534,120 384,572         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 560,933 396,927
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 556,076 391,642
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 567,692 423,417         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 609,909 380,541
2017          Jan 1,032,334 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 45,216 593,933 438,400
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro-area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the from issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels abroad. 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2013 787,308 282,026 505,282 325,614 179,668 164,454 15,214 939,252 144,884 794,368 632,110 162,258 95,302 66,957
2014 833,644 279,559 554,085 365,230 188,856 174,058 14,798 959,833 154,566 805,267 636,328 168,939 102,126 66,813
2015 866,912 265,170 601,743 409,858 191,885 177,397 14,488 1,003,050 150,054 852,996 672,312 180,684 109,062 71,622
2016 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2016          July 872,867 269,516 603,351 408,811 194,540 179,557 14,984 1,025,343 137,347 887,996 708,327 179,669 105,137 74,532
         Aug 864,498 271,893 592,605 405,951 186,654 171,668 14,986 1,018,942 133,955 884,987 710,397 174,589 99,789 74,800         Sep 870,194 265,904 604,290 406,265 198,025 182,902 15,123 1,029,233 131,609 897,624 715,495 182,129 107,804 74,325
         Oct 868,602 258,934 609,668 411,026 198,641 183,661 14,980 1,026,651 131,181 895,470 711,550 183,921 108,769 75,151
         Nov 873,837 253,417 620,419 418,119 202,301 187,438 14,862 1,029,780 128,304 901,476 716,143 185,334 110,678 74,655         Dec 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
Industrial countries 1
 
2013 697,475 278,723 418,753 296,675 122,077 108,620 13,458 852,420 143,577 708,843 594,623 114,220 79,543 34,676
2014 733,191 274,660 458,531 330,034 128,497 115,398 13,099 869,392 153,412 715,980 595,396 120,583 85,122 35,461
2015 761,648 261,267 500,381 368,033 132,348 119,309 13,038 906,968 145,136 761,832 635,205 126,627 90,716 35,911
2016 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2016          July 767,312 265,844 501,468 368,406 133,062 119,682 13,380 930,002 132,545 797,457 673,228 124,229 87,151 37,078         Aug 760,349 268,276 492,073 365,959 126,114 112,725 13,389 922,549 128,036 794,514 675,080 119,434 82,278 37,155         Sep 765,037 262,134 502,903 366,502 136,401 122,931 13,471 934,092 125,582 808,510 681,410 127,099 90,063 37,036
         Oct 761,601 255,158 506,444 370,239 136,205 122,795 13,410 932,199 126,322 805,877 676,951 128,925 91,367 37,558
         Nov 766,418 249,476 516,942 376,876 140,066 126,728 13,338 935,971 123,939 812,032 682,093 129,939 92,754 37,185         Dec 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
EU member states 1
 
2013 589,286 264,271 325,014 237,949 87,066 76,539 10,527 713,044 129,044 583,999 504,337 79,663 53,340 26,323
2014 617,489 259,516 357,973 266,777 91,196 80,585 10,611 724,674 138,894 585,780 502,054 83,726 56,580 27,147
2015 626,482 243,139 383,344 289,190 94,153 83,665 10,488 743,011 134,564 608,448 524,316 84,132 58,384 25,748
2016 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2016          July 632,816 248,022 384,794 291,338 93,456 82,665 10,791 762,484 122,432 640,052 557,228 82,824 56,116 26,708         Aug 628,502 251,471 377,032 288,412 88,620 77,811 10,809 754,013 118,565 635,448 555,534 79,913 53,039 26,874         Sep 629,382 244,777 384,605 288,917 95,688 84,849 10,840 760,149 114,895 645,254 559,864 85,390 58,731 26,659
         Oct 622,234 236,265 385,969 288,829 97,140 86,414 10,725 757,569 114,658 642,910 555,692 87,219 60,346 26,872
         Nov 623,751 231,000 392,752 293,058 99,694 89,135 10,559 761,533 113,900 647,633 559,853 87,780 61,063 26,717         Dec 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
of which: Euro-area member states 2
 
2013 428,179 197,430 230,749 174,605 56,143 49,968 6,175 603,366 101,722 501,645 448,142 53,502 36,671 16,832
2014 456,469 204,043 252,426 194,207 58,219 51,999 6,220 606,525 107,694 498,831 444,401 54,430 37,498 16,932
2015 465,919 195,751 270,168 208,862 61,305 54,730 6,575 598,884 93,947 504,937 452,298 52,639 37,994 14,644
2016 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2016          July 463,405 194,782 268,623 207,441 61,182 54,455 6,727 621,855 92,779 529,076 476,124 52,952 37,770 15,182         Aug 462,132 196,653 265,478 207,231 58,248 51,495 6,752 619,740 90,989 528,751 477,999 50,751 35,495 15,256         Sep 462,490 189,648 272,842 210,493 62,349 55,565 6,784 623,563 87,086 536,477 482,658 53,820 39,029 14,791
         Oct 455,585 181,180 274,405 210,655 63,750 57,063 6,687 619,908 86,221 533,686 478,599 55,087 40,150 14,938
         Nov 453,290 177,184 276,107 211,157 64,950 58,307 6,642 614,905 80,742 534,163 478,805 55,358 40,642 14,717         Dec 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2013 89,826 3,303 86,523 28,937 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,829 1,307 85,522 37,487 48,035 15,755 32,280
2014 100,400 4,849 95,551 35,193 60,358 58,659 1,699 90,439 1,153 89,285 40,931 48,354 17,003 31,352
2015 104,276 3,094 101,182 41,825 59,358 57,908 1,450 91,912 947 90,964 36,908 54,057 18,346 35,711
2016 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2016          July 104,512 2,855 101,656 40,370 61,286 59,682 1,604 91,998 1,659 90,339 34,900 55,440 17,986 37,453         Aug 102,872 2,566 100,306 39,957 60,348 58,751 1,597 91,505 1,272 90,232 35,118 55,115 17,470 37,645         Sep 103,847 2,676 101,171 39,729 61,443 59,790 1,653 90,013 1,156 88,857 33,885 54,972 17,701 37,272
         Oct 105,662 2,646 103,016 40,753 62,263 60,693 1,570 90,519 1,208 89,311 34,373 54,938 17,362 37,576
         Nov 106,046 2,791 103,255 41,207 62,048 60,524 1,524 90,439 1,252 89,187 33,850 55,337 17,884 37,453         Dec 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are Croatia. 2From January 2011 including Estonia; from January 2014 including Latvia;
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not regarded as
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- industrial countries. From January 2011 including Bonaire, St.Eustatius, Saba and
gures shown in Table XI.7. From December 2012 onwards, the results base on a Curacao and St.Martin (Dutch part); up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. extended survey and a new calculation method. 1From July 2013 including

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2016          Feb 1.5556 1.5317 7.2658 7.4628 127.35 9.5628 9.4105 1.1018 0.77559 1.1093
         Mar 1.4823 1.4697 7.2220 7.4569 125.39 9.4300 9.2848 1.0920 0.78020 1.1100
         Apr 1.4802 1.4559 7.3461 7.4427 124.29 9.3224 9.2027 1.0930 0.79230 1.1339
         May 1.5461 1.4626 7.3864 7.4386 123.21 9.3036 9.2948 1.1059 0.77779 1.1311         June 1.5173 1.4477 7.4023 7.4371 118.45 9.3278 9.3338 1.0894 0.79049 1.1229
         July 1.4694 1.4428 7.3910 7.4390 115.25 9.3690 9.4742 1.0867 0.84106 1.1069
         Aug 1.4690 1.4557 7.4537 7.4408 113.49 9.3030 9.4913 1.0881 0.85521 1.1212         Sep 1.4768 1.4677 7.4819 7.4475 114.22 9.1971 9.5655 1.0919 0.85228 1.1212
         Oct 1.4470 1.4594 7.4198 7.4402 114.47 9.0009 9.7073 1.0887 0.89390 1.1026
         Nov 1.4331 1.4519 7.3883 7.4406 116.93 9.0807 9.8508 1.0758 0.86894 1.0799         Dec 1.4356 1.4070 7.2983 7.4362 122.39 9.0252 9.7095 1.0750 0.84441 1.0543
2017          Jan 1.4252 1.4032 7.3189 7.4355 122.14 8.9990 9.5110 1.0714 0.86100 1.0614
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
February 2017
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro-area euro-area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.9 85.2 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.3 85.1 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.8
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.1 90.5 86.9 91.5 96.4 85.9 90.1 92.9 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.5 95.0 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.5 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.8 106.9 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.6 94.8 97.1 96.5 96.7
2004 104.5 105.0 103.3 104.3 111.5 105.1 95.9 93.2 100.0 95.1 98.5 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.5 101.1 102.3 109.5 102.5 94.7 91.9 99.0 92.9 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.5 100.4 101.2 109.4 101.8 93.5 90.3 98.4 91.2 98.6 96.5 95.8
2007 106.3 106.2 102.3 103.5 112.9 103.8 94.4 89.4 102.4 91.4 100.9 97.9 97.0
2008 109.4 108.3 103.7 106.8 117.1 105.8 94.5 88.0 105.4 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.1
2009 110.8 109.0 104.5 111.5 120.0 106.8 94.7 88.8 104.6 91.0 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.3 96.2 103.5 111.5 97.8 92.2 88.4 98.2 87.2 98.8 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.2 94.1 102.1 112.2 97.2 91.8 88.2 97.6 86.3 98.2 92.8 91.3
2012 97.6 95.0 88.6 95.9 107.0 92.4 90.0 88.2 92.6 83.7 95.9 89.8 88.2
2013 101.2 98.2 91.7 99.0 111.9 95.5 92.4 88.7 98.4 85.7 98.3 91.6 90.3
2014 101.8 97.8 91.9 100.0 114.7 96.0 93.2 89.6 98.9 86.5 98.5 91.8 91.0
2015 92.4 88.4 83.7 p 90.9 106.5 p 87.8 90.8 90.7 90.6 83.1 94.7 86.9 p 86.3
2016 94.8 p 90.1 ... ... 110.4 p 90.0 ... ... ... ... p 95.2 p 87.8 p 87.4
2014          Feb 103.2 99.6 93.6 101.9 116.3 98.2 93.6 89.2 100.7 87.1 99.0 92.6 92.0
         Mar 104.3 100.6 117.5 99.0 99.3 93.1 92.4
         Apr 104.2 100.4 117.0 98.4 99.2 93.0 92.2
         May 103.6 99.5 93.3 101.4 116.1 97.3 93.5 89.5 99.9 87.2 98.8 92.6 91.5
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.5 98.7 92.3 91.2
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 95.9 98.7 92.2 91.0
         Aug 101.5 97.5 91.2 99.5 114.0 95.3 92.9 89.6 98.1 86.2 98.4 91.8 90.7
         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.0 91.0 89.9
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.2 97.6 90.4 89.4
         Nov 99.0 94.9 89.5 97.4 111.9 93.2 92.8 90.0 97.1 85.5 97.7 90.4 89.5
         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.6 90.2 89.8
2015          Jan 95.2 91.1 108.9 90.1 95.7 88.2 87.5
         Feb 93.3 89.5 84.2 p 91.8 107.0 88.7 90.7 90.4 91.0 83.1 95.2 87.5 86.8
         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 85.9 94.3 86.1 85.2
         Apr 89.7 86.1 102.4 84.7 94.0 85.7 84.5
         May 91.6 87.8 82.4 p 89.8 104.7 86.5 90.4 90.6 89.8 82.5 94.6 86.6 85.6
         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 87.5 94.7 86.9 86.1
         July 91.3 87.5 105.1 86.6 94.3 86.3 85.6
         Aug 93.0 88.9 84.1 p 91.2 108.1 88.9 91.0 90.8 91.0 83.4 94.9 87.2 87.0
         Sep 93.8 89.6 109.6 90.1 95.1 87.6 87.7
         Oct 93.6 89.6 109.0 89.6 95.1 87.5 87.4
         Nov 91.1 87.1 84.1 p 90.6 106.0 p 86.8 91.0 91.0 90.8 83.5 94.1 86.3 p 85.9
         Dec 92.5 88.3 108.0 p 88.3 94.3 86.7 p 86.5
2016          Jan 93.6 89.1 109.9 p 89.6 94.5 87.2 p 87.3
         Feb 94.7 90.0 p 85.6 p 91.9 111.3 p 90.8 91.4 91.2 91.5 84.2 94.9 87.6 p 87.7
         Mar 94.1 89.5 110.0 p 89.9 95.0 87.4 p 87.3
         Apr 94.8 90.1 110.6 p 90.2 95.4 87.9 p 87.6
         May 95.1 90.5 p 86.1 p 92.2 111.1 p 90.7 91.5 91.2 91.7 84.5 95.2 88.1 p 87.9
         June 94.7 90.2 110.5 p 90.2 95.0 87.9 p 87.6
         July 94.9 90.4 110.2 p 89.9 95.2 87.9 p 87.3
         Aug 95.2 90.6 p 86.2 p 92.2 110.6 p 90.2 91.7 91.2 92.1 84.6 95.3 87.9 p 87.4
         Sep 95.4 90.6 110.9 p 90.3 95.5 88.0 p 87.6
         Oct 95.5 p 90.8 110.6 p 90.1 95.8 p 88.2 p 87.5
         Nov 95.0 p 90.2 ... ... 110.3 p 89.6 ... ... ... ... 95.2 p 87.7 p 87.1
         Dec 94.2 p 89.6 109.2 p 88.9 p 95.3 p 87.8 p 87.1
2017          Jan 94.4 p 89.8 109.7 p 89.2 p 95.5 p 87.9 p 87.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November not available due to the state of emergency in the national statistical system declared2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more by the government of Argentina on 7 January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina isdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 not included in the calculation of the EER-38 CPI deflated series from February 2016.(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB The policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5Euro-area countries (from 2001 including
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, fromlia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro-area countries and
wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro-area countries and countries
countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2016 see the index attached 
to the January 2017 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2016
– On the weakness of global trade
– German balance of payments in 2015
– Household wealth and finances in Germany: 
results of the 2014 survey
– The role and effects of the Agreement on 
Net Financial Assets (ANFA) in the context of 
implementing monetary policy
April 2016
– Stock market valuations – theoretical basics 
and enhancing the metrics
– The Phillips curve as an instrument for ana -
lysing prices and forecasting inflation in Ger -
manyMay 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017 and 
an outlook for 2018
– The macroeconomic impact of quantitative 
easing in the euro area
– Structure and dynamics of manufacturing 
production depth as reflected in the financial 
statements of German enterprises
July 2016
– Evolution of the Bank Lending Survey 
since the onset of the financial crisis
– Approaches to resolving sovereign debt 
 crises in the euro area
– Bank recovery and resolution – the new 
TLAC and MREL minimum requirements
August 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2016
– Distributional effects of monetary policy
– Globalisation and the transmission of global 
financial shocks to the euro-  ar ea countries 
– implications for (national)  economic policyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
83•

– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2015
October 2016
– Local government finances: Development 
and selected aspects
– Significance and impact of high-  fr equency 
trading in the German capital market
November 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Wage dynamics amid high euro-area un -
employment
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2015
January 2017
– The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the ex-
change rate of the euro
– Recent developments in the indebtedness of 
the private non-  financial sector in selected  
euro-  area countries
February 2017
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich   von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mar ch 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
July 20162, 4
 2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik,  
July 20162, 3
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 010 to 
2015, May 20162
 5 Hochgerechnete Angaben aus Jahres -
abschlüssen deutscher Unternehmen von 
1997 bis 2013, May 20152, 3
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2012 bis 2013 , 
May 20162, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20161, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
46/ 2016  
Time-varying volatility, financial intermediation 
and monetary policy
47/ 2016  
Macroeconomic now- and forecasting based 
on the factor error correction model using 
targeted   mixed frequency indicators
48/ 2016  
On measuring uncertainty and its impact on 
invest  ment: cr oss-country evidence from the 
euro area
49/2016  
The effect of conventional and unconventional 
euro area monetary policy on macroeconomic 
variables
50/2016  
The imperfect-common-knowledge Phillips 
curve: Calvo versus Rotemberg
51/2016  
Fire buys of central bank collateral assets52/2016  
Trade in value added: Do we need new meas-
ures of competitiveness?
01/2017  
Will German banks earn their cost of capital?02/2017  
Cross-border prudential policy spillovers: How 
much? How important? Evidence from the 
international banking research network
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
February 2017  
86•

